                             1196 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Let's Get Lost

BYLINE: By JESSE ASHLOCK

SECTION: Section M2; Column 0; T: Men's Fashion Magazine; T MAGAZINE; Pg. 91

LENGTH: 1922 words


By chasing a gonzo new adventure every summer, the viral filmmaker Casey Neistat
and his son, Owen, embrace the unfamiliar and forge a closer bond.

Far in the distance, a tiny figure stands atop a sand dune rising higher than
many skyscrapers, waving his arms. ''He looks like every lost-in-the-desert
movie ever made,'' says Casey Neistat, snapping away with an enormous Canon
outfitted with a telephoto lens. Neistat, 32, directs and stars in online ad
campaigns for clients like Nike and Mercedes, and in YouTube shorts that get
millions of views. The subject in his viewfinder is his 15-year-old son, Owen,
who in a few days will begin his sophomore year of high school in Connecticut.
Each summer, they embark on a grand adventure together. That's what has brought
them to Sossusvlei, Namibia, an otherworldly place where giant dunes rise over a
wide salt plain dotted with groups of springbok, oryx and ostriches. Having
already climbed the dunes that tourists generally climb, Owen has gone on to the
dune behind them, where there are no footprints. Like his dad, he enjoys going
places he's not supposed to be.

''O.K., that is Owen,'' Casey narrates, shooting video. ''He just made it up to
the apex of that dune.'' Casey pans along the landscape. ''And this is how far
he walked.'' Owen makes it back down, flushed and exuberant, his Nikes full of
sand. ''Well done, boy!'' Casey exclaims. ''That is definitely a
Facebook-profile-picture-worthy photo.''

Silhouetted against the desert sky, the two cut different figures. Casey, a
triathlete, is muscular and tightly coiled, with a showman's face that's all
planes and angles; in another era, he might have been a Borscht Belt
entertainer. Owen, a runner, is taller than his dad and still gangly, with a
natural sweetness about him. But the resemblance is impossible to miss. Casey
says, with obvious satisfaction, that they're often mistaken for brothers, and
sometimes it's easy to forget just who is the parent and who is the kid. Casey
is the one who has braces. (They're gold.) He's also the one in perpetual
motion, while Owen will let you know when he's tired. Casey becomes anxious when
he goes too long without checking Instagram or Twitter or Facebook. Owen uses
his phone mainly to prepare for the school year by listening to textbooks on
tape. And Casey takes all the pictures. He looks for photogenic locations where
he can put his camera on a tripod and set the timer for a father-son selfie.
Still, in many ways, Owen -- who lives with his mom during the week and at
Casey's apartment in Manhattan or at his house in New London, Conn., on the
weekends -- is a typical teenager. He loves Starbucks, American Eagle and the
mall. He gets bored easily. Casey, meanwhile, is fond of pronouncing paternal
nuggets of wisdom (''Let a boy cry -- don't coddle him'') and tales of great
deeds (''I've charmed my way out of Middle Eastern prisons''). The kidlike
qualities in Casey are the same ones that have made him such a successful adult,
despite having dropped out of high school, and then having a child at 17. ''He
was born with an extra battery,'' says Max Joseph, the co-host of MTV's
''Catfish: The TV Show'' and a frequent collaborator. ''It's what you need to
have to be a professional athlete.''

When Casey was growing up in New London, his mother taught him that possessions
were more valuable than travel, because they lasted forever. After a trip to
Paris at 18, his first outside the United States, he concluded that she was
wrong, and decided to dedicate his life to having experiences -- a favorite word
of his. ''He's trying to find the ultimate adventure,'' says the creative
director Andy Spade, who hired Casey and his brother Van to make short films for
the fashion lines he was overseeing, Kate Spade and Jack Spade, and later
co-produced a feature film with Casey. ''He'll end up in the Guinness Book of
World Records for a category that doesn't even exist yet.''

In Owen, Casey has found a willing confrere. ''The only guy I've encountered who
enjoys flying as much as I do?'' he asks. ''This guy.'' When Owen was little,
Casey sometimes scraped together extra money working as a dishwasher to buy
lessons at a flight school. ''Owen would have his lunchbox,'' he says. ''He'd be
eating an apple in the back.'' Their first real trip was a package deal to the
Bahamas when Owen was 4. As Owen got older, the trips -- to Paris, St. Barts,
Central America -- got more elaborate.

Casey's career was taking off. He went to work for the artist Tom Sachs, running
his studio and making short films with Van for Sachs's exhibitions. In 2003 the
duo ventured out on their own as the Neistat Brothers. One of their first
projects was ''iPod's Dirty Secret,'' an Internet short that called out Apple
for its user-unfriendly battery-replacement policy. It garnered national
attention, earning the brothers a reputation as Internet provocateurs, as well
as commercial clients. Spade remembers marveling at Casey's precociousness.
''His son would have the idea to make a monster movie on the beach, and he'd
just make it. ''

That monster movie appears in the first episode of ''The Neistat Brothers,'' a
2010 HBO series that showcased the brothers' homemade, autobiographical style.
It was not a success. The brothers split after it aired and now speak
infrequently. Casey went solo, making more shorts in the Neistat Brothers vein
and taking on increasingly remunerative commercial work. ''Van was my best
friend and partner in crime,'' Casey says. ''When he left, Owen became that.''

Two years ago, the father and son trekked through the Andes for five days to
Machu Picchu. Last year, they rode motorcycles through Vietnam. This year, Casey
says, ''I wanted to show the kid Africa Africa. That thing where you get to do
something for the first time? I try to make all our trips that.''

The Kulala Desert Lodge, a collection of thatched dwellings set in the middle of
a vast plain surrounded by mountains, makes an ideal vantage point. Sweeping
vistas of grassland stretch in every direction, giving way to achingly blue
skies. It's possible to spend hours watching wildlife during the day and the
Milky Way at night.

But Owen isn't impressed. It's the second desert lodge of the trip, and he's not
enthused about going on another game tour and listening to the guide drone on
about how to tell if an oryx is male or female. ''I'd much rather be riding a
motorcycle in the mud,'' he grouses, while Casey checks his email on the lodge
computer. The next day, the two fly in a Cessna to the coastal resort town of
Swakopmund. The rest of their adventure is supposed to consist of activities
like catamaraning and sand-surfing. But the following morning, in the lobby of
the hotel, Casey says, ''Owen had an idea that was kind of interesting, which
was that we rent a car'' to explore the country further, without the pilot or a
driver. No cars are available, however, so Casey and Owen huddle on a sofa with
Casey's laptop for a while, whispering conspiratorially. Finally, Casey looks
up. ''I think it's about to get weird,'' he says, ''and possibly dangerous. I
think we're going to Zambia.'' Owen's face lights up in a grin.

Casey had already visited Zambia in 2012 with Max Joseph, for Nike. According to
Casey, they were supposed to make an Internet ad for the brand's FuelBand
fitness tracker that showed how regular people ''make it count.'' Instead, they
traveled to 13 countries in 10 days -- until their budget ran out -- filming
themselves making it count. They'd seen a picture on the Internet of the Devil's
Pool, a naturally occurring infinity pool at the top of Victoria Falls where you
can swim safely without being swept over the edge. But when they arrived, they
learned they couldn't swim in the Devil's Pool at that time of year. The moment
Casey and Owen's plane lands in Livingstone, Casey begins asking everyone he
meets about the Devil's Pool. On the way from the hotel to Victoria Falls
National Park, the driver informs Casey that the pool can be reached this time
of year, but discourages him from trying. ''Every year, a few bodies go down on
the Zambian side and wash up on the Zimbabwean side,'' he explains.

''Do they need visas for that?'' Casey asks. If the driver gets the joke -- or
finds it unfunny -- he doesn't let on. In Victoria Falls National Park, Casey
runs around consulting maps and asking uniformed personnel where the pool is.
Even in the dry season, the falls stun the senses, forming a mile-wide,
355-foot-high liquid curtain that glides down into a long gorge, with a plume of
spray rising at the western end to welcome the setting sun. One of the best
views for Casey's constant photos is from the Knife Edge Bridge, a
mist-enshrouded span suspended before the falls' eastern side. There, Casey
spots Kenneth, a local guide he had enlisted during his Nike trip. After a hug
and an introduction to Owen, Kenneth assures Casey that he can arrange a visit
to the elusive pool.

The next morning, a tourism official tells Casey that the Devil's Pool can only
be visited by boat, and that trips are sold out. But Casey finds Kenneth near
the gift shops inside the park entrance, and he makes good on his promise.
Vinda, a guide with dreadlocks and bare feet, arrives to lead the way. He starts
by striding past a sign that instructs visitors to go no farther, right into the
shallows of the Zambezi. There is no path: The only way to get to the Devil's
Pool is to wade through the river and scramble over wet rocks. Vinda tells
everyone to form an ''African chain.'' But Owen doesn't want to hold hands, so
everyone makes his own way.

''See, Owen,'' Casey says, so excited he's almost vibrating. ''Persistence and
endurance will make you omnipotent.'' He explains after a minute that he's
paraphrasing the ''Tenacity Prayer,'' popularized by the McDonald's founder Ray
Kroc. Upriver, an elephant trumpets. The Devil's Pool is in sight. But to get to
it, everyone has to swim through open water against a swift current. Vinda leads
the way on a kickboard. The guys clamber onto a rocky outcropping before
jumping, one by one, into the pool. At its front is a slick basalt wall, with an
inch or so of water passing over it to create the infinity-pool effect. Once
Casey and Owen reach it, Casey pulls out his iPhone in a LifeProof case and
turns on the video recorder. ''This is us,'' he says. Then he raises it to show
the abyss behind them. ''Those are the falls.'' An enterprising local balances
on the precipice, shooting photos for tips. Casey poses on the very edge, as if
he were going over, while Vinda and I hold his feet. When Owen's turn comes,
Casey insists that all three of us hold onto his son as he peers over Victoria
Falls.

''This is what I thought of when I heard we were going to Africa,'' Owen
exclaims afterward. For a rare moment, Casey is silent, basking in his son's
pleasure. And then it's time to swim back through the river and climb over the
rocks as quickly as possible, because the flight out of Livingstone is leaving
soon. We arrive at the airport in our wet trunks. After the plane takes off, I
turn around. Casey and Owen are seated a row behind me, both already passed out,
their heads tilted slightly toward each other. Casey has on big studio
headphones and sunglasses, his mouth open wide in sleep. Owen is wearing earbuds
and a serene expression. You really could, right at this moment, mistake them
for brothers.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/wanderlust-lets-get-lost/

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: LEAP INTO THE UNKNOWN: Casey Neistat, jumping after a wildlife
tour in Namibia, will likely end up in the Guinness Book of World Records in a
category that doesn't even exist yet. His son, Owen, is more reserved.
NO COUNTRY FOR OLD MEN: From top: Owen, left, and Casey taking a selfie in a
chartered Cessna
Owen ascending one of the dunes of Sossusvlei, in the Namib Desert
the Neistats on a ridge over Namibia
another selfie of the pair having tea at the Mount Nelson Hotel in Cape Town.
GO THE DISTANCE: Casey's Instagram photo of Nelson Mandela's house in
Johannesburg
a view of Victoria Falls from the Zambia side of the Zambezi River
Casey and Owen with Vinda, their tour guide, in the Devil's Pool on the
precipice of Victoria Falls
 a  father-and-son  selfie on their flight  from London to  Cape Town, before
visiting Namibia. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CASEY NEISTAT)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


