                             1235 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paperback Row

BYLINE: By IHSAN TAYLOR

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 515 words


SON OF A GUN: A Memoir, by Justin St. Germain. (Random House, $16.) In late
2001, St. Germain's mother -- ''a former Army paratrooper, the toughest woman
I've ever known'' -- was shot and killed in Arizona, apparently by her fifth
husband, a wrecked ex-cop. This tale of personal loss and grief drives St.
Germain's searing memoir, but its bigger story concerns the culture of guns,
violence and manhood in the American West.

MIDDLE MEN: Stories, by Jim Gavin. (Simon & Schuster, $15.) The follies and
frustrated longings of modern manhood inform Gavin's dryly funny first
collection. His journeymen characters, living in down-at-the-heels neighborhoods
in Southern California, dream of showbiz careers, basketball scholarships,
transforming love and more, even as they suspect that the mark they'll make on
the world will be small.

THE WAY OF THE KNIFE: The CIA, a Secret Army, and a War at the Ends of the
Earth, by Mark Mazzetti. (Penguin, $17.) Created as a Cold War espionage
service, the C.I.A. is now more than ever ''a killing machine, an organization
consumed with manhunting,'' argues Mazzetti, a reporter for The New York Times.
He documents the C.I.A.'s transformation since Sept. 11 and the bitter fights
within the agency over the use of Predator drones and targeted killings as an
alternative to ''messy wars of occupation.''

GODS AND BEASTS, by Denise Mina. (Back Bay/Little, Brown, $15.) While Detective
Alex Morrow searches for the gunman who killed an elderly bystander during the
robbery of a Glasgow post office, Mina weaves other elements into this piercing
thriller -- a popular politician is caught in a sex scandal, two police officers
are tempted by a stash of drug money -- showing how good people can go bad and
how corruption can poison a city.

PORTRAIT INSIDE MY HEAD: Essays, by Phillip Lopate. (Simon & Schuster, $15.)
Lopate's ''motley collection'' gives full play to a wide range of interests;
there are immensely readable essays on his family, on remaining a baseball fan,
on his sex life, on the tense romance between movies and novels, on old and new
features of New York's urban landscape, and on elusive writers like James Agee
and Leonard Michaels, themselves essayists who blurred the lines between fiction
and nonfiction.

THE INTERESTINGS, by Meg Wolitzer. (Riverhead, $17.) From Nixon to the AIDS
epidemic to 9/11, this engrossing novel spans more than 30 years in the lives of
a group of friends who meet at a summer arts camp in 1974. As their talents,
fortunes and degrees of satisfaction diverge, Wolitzer's heroine, an actress
turned social worker named Jules, asks herself whether the ambitious men and
women in her circle have inaccurately defined success.

THE NOIR FORTIES: The American People From Victory to Cold War, by Richard
Lingeman. (Nation Books, $17.99.) Lingeman, an editor at The Nation and the
author of biographies of Sinclair Lewis and Theodore Dreiser, seamlessly traces
the post-World War II moods of paranoia and insecurity as reflected in the
media, popular culture, political movements, opinion polls and psychological
studies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/books/review/paperback-row.html

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: List

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


