                             1231 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Squirrels Are Reading This Now

BYLINE: By EVE M. KAHN

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; House & Home/Style Desk; Q&A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 816 words


Almost nothing can come between squirrels and the birdseed they gorge on, not
even Led Zeppelin music and mild electrical shocks. For three decades, the humor
writer Bill Adler Jr., 57, has collected tips for keeping the rodents away from
avian meals. He has updated his 1988 volume, ''Outwitting Squirrels: 101 Cunning
Stratagems to Reduce Dramatically the Egregious Misappropriation of Seed From
Your Birdfeeder by Squirrels'' (Chicago Review Press, $16.95), for a new, third
edition. (His other books include advice for coping with cranky toddlers,
ravenous deer, litigious neighbors and incompetent home contractors.) The field
has made some technological advances, he reports, but squirrels still have
little else to do all day but strategize.

He spoke from his home in Washington, D.C., about his scary experiences on
windowsills, professional opportunities ruined by rodents, thoughts on the
arrival of spring and temptations to give in to squirrels' demands. (This
interview was edited and condensed.)

Q. What inspired the first edition, in 1988?

A. I grew up in New York City, so for me squirrels were like the major form of
wildlife. When I moved into an apartment in Washington, D.C., that didn't allow
pets, a friend of mine suggested I put a bird feeder outside. And I thought,
''Why would I want to attract pigeons?'' I'm a New Yorker. That's the only kind
of bird I ever saw. My friend said, ''No, no, no, there'll be cardinals, blue
jays'' -- weird names I'd never heard of. So I put a feeder on my window,
attached it with suction cups, filled it with birdseed, and the next day there
was a squirrel lounging right inside the feeder, eating. I'd bang on the window,
''Get out of here,'' and it would go away and come back, and all day long I
started figuring out ways to get rid of that squirrel. I didn't get any writing
done; my social life went down the tubes: I'd be on the phone with somebody, I'd
see the squirrel and yell, ''Get the blank out of here!'' and the person would
think I was talking to them. So I decided to do the only thing I knew how to do,
which was to write about it. The first 20 publishers turned me down, and the
21st said yes; the editor there fed birds.

How many kinds of squirrel barriers did you go through until something worked?

My apartment began to look like a fortress. I got this stuff called Nixalite,
these spiky spines, scary things; I think they use it in zombie movies, too. I
adhered it to the window and put it around the feeder. This was a somewhat
dangerous activity; I was on the second floor, I had to lean out of my window
and do things that would inspire selfies now. The squirrel did stop appearing
all the time, but I think it was maybe being kind to me, simply making me think
I had won an occasional victory.

So whenever you've moved, you've had to create a different setup?

There's no one technique that works everywhere. Squirrels have all day long to
figure out how to break into your feeder. Right now I'm using a generic
hardware-store-bought baffle feeder. The dome on top is moderately effective at
keeping out squirrels but not entirely effective, so you get to watch them try.
I'm resigned to the fact that squirrels are going to come into my yard, so I put
out unsalted mixed nuts for them, outside alongside our steps. If you feed them,
they will tend to leave the bird feeder alone, and the birds don't seem to mind
sharing.

How did you update the book with new research?

It's so much fun to update. I'd find people through the Internet and get these
great squirrel stories. The strategies haven't changed much over the years; it's
the level of commitment and the breadth of struggle that there is. And I'd test
different products, set them up outside for a few days or a week. Squirrels are
most active in the morning, and I'm not a morning person, so I'd make the
supreme sacrifice and get up around 6 a.m. to observe.

All this new technology has come in.

Yes, there are motion-activated cameras if you want to monitor your feeder, and
motion-activated water-spray defenses. I have not yet seen, but I'm sure there
are, people using drones to protect their feeders. Robots are coming, too, and I
would say that's maybe a little obsessive and extreme, but on the other hand
people probably already think that about me.

You haven't been tempted to patent anything yourself?

No, it's a skill I don't have, which is maybe good. That would just be another
thing that keeps me away from life.

Did your yard become the go-to yard for bored squirrels on your block looking
for new challenges?

Maybe the word spread. When I was doing the rigorous testing, it was squirrel
central here.

What birds have you seen so far this year?

The bright red cardinals are back and the blue jays; the robins have been around
for a while. I hear a woodpecker and occasional hawks; finches I've seen, and
titmice, which are so cute. I really like their faces.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/10/garden/squirrels-are-reading-this-now.html

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Bill Adler Jr., who wrote ''Outwitting Squirrels,'' meets one
of his favorite subjects in Carl Schurz Park in Manhattan. ''Squirrels have all
day long to figure out how to break into your feeder,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
ROBERT WRIGHT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 PATRICIA WALL/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Question

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


