                             1260 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Netflix Resists, Most Firms Just Try to Befriend Comcast

BYLINE: By JONATHAN MAHLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1256 words


In the middle of an otherwise routine earnings report last week, Netflix took an
unexpected detour into the realm of antitrust enforcement: It opposed Comcast's
proposed purchase of Time Warner Cable, it said, because the deal would create a
powerful giant with ''anticompetitive leverage.''

The statement certainly grabbed the attention of the entertainment and
communications industries. What it did not do was rally many others to the
fight. Netflix stormed the hill, only to look back and find that almost no one
was following it.

The $45 billion merger would transform Comcast into a vastly more powerful
gatekeeper, giving it control of 40 percent of the country's Internet service
coverage and 19 of the country's top 20 cable markets. As such, it could
potentially disrupt the entire media and technology ecosystem.

Virtually every media and tech company -- content providers like CBS and Disney,
video streaming services like Amazon, Netflix and YouTube, and social media and
e-commerce sites -- has a major stake in the outcome of the government's review
of the merger. The question these companies now face is whether their interests
are better served by speaking out about it, or by keeping any possible
complaints to themselves as they try to negotiate the best deals they can with
Comcast.

For the time being, almost none are publicly speaking out, partly because they
are wary of antagonizing a company with which they do business.

Privately, though, media executives are eager to echo Netflix's concern about
the deal, and to cast themselves as victims of the potential megamerger. They
use words like ''omnivorous'' and ''rapacious'' to describe Comcast, while
expressing skepticism on the prospect of the largest cable company buying the
second-largest.

''Every company, including ours, knows how we feel about the merger, but the
question is, Are we going to do anything about it?'' said one senior media
executive, who like others, insisted on anonymity to discuss a sensitive
business relationship. ''Who's going to be the first to kick sand in the bully's
face?''

That distinction already belongs to Netflix, and it drew a quick, sharp response
from Comcast, which accused the company of disingenuously cloaking its business
interests in pro-consumer rhetoric. Comcast said Netflix simply did not want to
bear the costs of the enormous amount of Internet traffic that its subscribers
generate. (During peak hours, Netflix streaming can account for nearly one-third
of worldwide Internet traffic.)

Comcast has contended that the merger is not anticompetitive because the company
has very little geographical overlap with Time Warner Cable. More to the point,
Comcast says that the content providers are the players holding most of the
power in their relationships. If consumers cannot watch their favorite shows and
sporting events, they will just cut the cord. When Time Warner Cable blacked out
CBS during a dispute over fees last year, the cable provider lost hundreds of
thousands of subscribers. CBS received most of what it asked for in the contract
negotiations.

''The balance of power in carriage negotiations has tilted pretty decisively to
the programmers' side,'' said D'Arcy F. Rudnay, Comcast's chief communications
officer.

The proposed merger, though, could potentially upend this dynamic, in which
programmers have traditionally had the upper hand, and as a result, put billions
of dollars in play. Media companies are heavily dependent on the immense fees
they receive from Comcast and other distributors. They worry that if Comcast
gets bigger, it will have the ability to drive down those fees. And because
Comcast is also in the business of creating content, through its ownership of
NBCUniversal, competitors worry that the company will offer preferential
treatment to its own networks.

Media executives say a supersize Comcast will essentially have veto power over
any possible innovation. Even something as straightforward as trying to make
content available on a new device would require Comcast's approval.

The chief executive of Univision, Randy Falco, said this week that the deal was
''truly a cause for concern.'' But apart from it and Netflix, almost every other
media and technology company has so far opted for strategic silence. Some
analysts say these companies may be holding on to the threat of publicly
criticizing the merger, while they try to negotiate new agreements with Comcast.

''You can bet that everyone and his brother is trying to strike a sweetheart
deal with Comcast right now in exchange for either supporting or simply not
opposing the deal,'' said Craig Moffett, an independent media analyst.

Netflix's antagonistic stance toward Comcast and the merger is partly a product
of the company's unusual corporate culture. Reed Hastings, its chief executive,
is a Silicon Valley maverick who enjoys tweaking his rivals, both real and
imagined.

Several months ago, he joked that the HBO Go password of his counterpart at the
much larger HBO, Richard Plepler, was ''Netflix'' followed by an expletive. Soon
after, Netflix produced a satirical video of Amazon's delivery drone, the
unnamed aerial vehicle that the company has said will one day deliver its
products.

Netflix has now picked a fight not just with a competitor but also with a
business partner, though it has done so with a considerable amount of leverage.
Netflix is a popular brand with tens of millions of loyal subscribers, and it
could count on a public outcry if its users were suddenly no longer able to
stream ''House of Cards.''

Netflix also has a different relationship with Comcast than traditional media
companies like Disney, HBO and Viacom. Netflix needs Comcast's broadband service
to reach its customers, but as long as Netflix can afford to pay for it, its
business model is safe. And Netflix has already arranged payment terms: The
company waited to speak out against the merger until after it had reached a
multiyear agreement with Comcast to secure faster and more reliable access to
its subscribers.

The absence of corporate opposition is only thickening the air of inevitability
surrounding the deal. Comcast was able to overcome considerable resistance to
its 2011 purchase of NBCUniversal, which gave a cable operator control over a
major broadcast network for the first time. The company is politically well
connected, with more than 100 registered lobbyists in Washington alone,
including a former commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission who
joined the company shortly after voting to approve the NBCUniversal deal.

Still, the regulatory review could easily continue into next year. There is
plenty of time for media companies to speak out -- and some say they might,
particularly if they are unable to get what they want from Comcast. The
grievance process at the F.C.C. is public, but companies that do not want
Comcast to know that they have registered opposition to the merger can do so
anonymously through the Justice Department.

While he stopped short of opposing the merger, Mr. Falco of Univision did say
that if it was approved, the combined company would serve 91 percent of the
country's Hispanic households. He also offered a stark, close-to-home example of
the sway he said Comcast already held over its business.

Comcast, he said, is the only major cable distributor that does not carry
Univision's popular sports network. It does, however, carry the sports content
of Telemundo, Univision's main rival in the Spanish-language TV business -- and
a unit of Comcast's NBCUniversal.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/02/business/media/as-netflix-resists-most-firms-j
ust-try-to-befriend-comcast.html

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Reed Hastings, chief executive of Netflix, is known as a Silicon
Valley maverick who enjoys tweaking his rivals. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBYN BECK/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


