                             1358 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 3, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Playing in a Part of Something Bigger

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 492 words


The musicians spilled off the stage when Adam Schatz's rock band Landlady
performed on Tuesday night at Rough Trade NYC. By the end of the set, there were
a dozen horn players and half a dozen drummers and percussionists along with Mr.
Schatz and Landlady's core musicians, blaring and pounding as Mr. Schatz pushed
the audience to sing along. It was an album party through a show of community.
''This is such a special way to feel like you're a part of something bigger,''
Mr. Schatz announced as the musicians assembled. Mr. Schatz, who is also a jazz
concert promoter, works with many other bands as well as Landlady, playing rock,
funk, jazz, Afrobeat and improvisation. Landlady's more-or-less pop songs hold a
little of them all.

Landlady releases its second album, ''Upright Behavior'' (Hometapes), this
month. It joins a lineage of New York City art-rock bands that transmute
existential questions and primal fears into exultant songs, bands like Talking
Heads, TV on the Radio and Dirty Projectors. ''What am I supposed to do about
it? Dying day,'' Mr. Schatz sang, confronting mortality with confidence and
exasperation in his piquantly reedy voice. The arrangement galloped in
start-stop bursts hinting at African music, lingered in a sustained shimmer,
slowed down to hint at reggae and tossed around some 1950s doo-wop vocal
harmonies before it was done.

There's erudition and ingenuity in Landlady's music, which often changes
radically from verse to verse, even behind Mr. Schatz's most straightforward
melodies. The penetrating tone of Mr. Schatz's Farfisa organ summons garage-rock
and international psychedelia; crisp percussion patterns, moving in and out of
odd meters, touch on carnivals, military parades, Minimalism, swing and world
music. Guitar lines can have the delicacy of folk-rock, the lilt of Congolese
rumba or a spaghetti-western twang. The horns, when they joined Landlady
onstage, offered big shared drones or overlapping riffs.

Along with songs from Landlady's album, the set included a transmogrified
version of a Talking Heads song, ''Mind,'' that started as a dissonant ostinato,
heaved toward rock, eased into a kind of tango and briefly erupted into guitar
noise. Perhaps Mr. Schatz was describing Landlady when he sang in ''The Globe,''
a song of his own: ''Been staring at the globe too long/Put the pieces back
together wrong.''

The concert's finale was ''Above My Ground,'' a march with lyrics of mourning:
''I wish that you were still around,'' it begins. Mr. Schatz beckoned the
audience to get close to the stage, and midway through the song started to
preach, almost gospel style, about how all people are connected, because they've
shared a sense of loss. He got the audience singing, ''Always, always'' as the
music climbed louder and higher, a happy din of cross-rhythms and hooting horns,
with his voice rising toward yelps and whoops. He was singing about feeling
alone, amid abundant proof that he was not.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/03/arts/music/landlady-previews-its-first-album-a
t-rough-trade-nyc.html

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


