                             1910 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            January 12, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

Examining the origins of evil

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1536 words


Banking marijuana profits

Re: "State can deposit cash, but it's hazy," Jan. 5 news story.

I had not considered what Colorado or other states were doing with tax revenue
from legitimate marijuana transactions, but I am not surprised to learn it is OK
for the state to bank those funds but the industry cannot. However, I am
outraged at the hypocrisy, arrogance and evident apathy of the bankers and "the
various state agencies" that The Post cites when questioned about the
discrepancy.

Is this not the very definition of a double standard?

I admire the focus and determination of the scores of pioneers who choose to
pursue this new business.

Obviously, there need to be changes on the federal level. Since financial
institutions are focused primarily on revenue and profit, I would imagine the
banking lobby is working hard to change this absurdity.

Tom Gore, Golden

This morning I heard an ad on the radio for credit counseling. It advised one to
cut expenses and to start paying off debt. Eliminate all unnecessary
expenditures. Too bad our government was not listening to this good advice!

Bill Harrison, Aurora

* * *

May the magic that has been with the Denver Broncos throughout the regular
season continue through the post season games and carry the team to a final
victory in the Super Bowl. Go, Broncos!

Lindsay Smith, Littleton

* * *

Let's see: same sex marriage, legalized pot, and now we learn that, when it
comes to swingers' clubs, we have "the biggest venue of its kind in the nation."
Maybe it's time to tighten our immigration laws to reduce the influx of
Californians.

Jim Malec, Roxborough

* * *

On Magpul leaving Colorado: Please don't let the shrapnel hit you on the way out
the door.

Craig Marshall Smith, Highlands Ranch

* * *

According to the latest rants by the liberal and Democrat talking heads, New
Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is lying and should have known about the bridge
scandal. However, the president only misspeaks and only knows what he reads in
the newspapers or sees on TV. The spin is making me dizzy!

L.W. Hunley, Grand Junction

* * *

Regarding Chris Christie and the George Washington Bridge: "What difference at
this point, what difference does it make?"

Craig Farr, Highlands Ranch

Change the role of FHA

Re: "Changes to the U.S. gas tax have stalled too long," Dec. 29 editorial.

Here's a different view of your editorial:

The chief role of the Federal Highway Administration is collecting the money
raised by the federal gas tax, distributing the funds raised back to the states
from which the tax is collected, and spending several billions of dollars in
that process.

Abolish the federal gas tax and leave it up to the various states to raise their
state gas tax to make up the difference. The role of the federal agency should
be reduced to research, advice, and coordination between state highway
departments of transportation. Billions could be saved by turning these
responsibilities back to the states.

Dick Prosence, Meeker

A good year for Republicans in Colorado? I doubt it

Re: "Ringing in the new year in Colorado politics," Jan. 5 Perspective column.

Thomas Cronin and Robert Loevy predict 2014 "should be a good year for
Republicans in Colorado and in the nation." I doubt it.

No matter how much Republicans put forth good candidates and fashion campaigns
around the shaky premise that Obamacare is our country's leading demise,
intolerable policies and positions on race, gender, sexual orientation, class
and jobs will hurt GOP chances at the polls.

Republicans who oppose raising the minimum wage for working families or
extending unemployment benefits for millions of Americans will prove important
considerations for Colorado voters.

It really is not about left or right politics but the fact that Colorado is very
diverse. Every citizen of our state red, yellow, black, white, brown, male,
female, transgender, straight, gay, bisexual, rich, poor or unemployed counts!

Jeffery Moser, Aurora

Investigate actions of Jeffco School Board

Re: "In defense of hiring by Jeffco school board," Jan. 5 My Turn.

Thank you for publishing former Jeffco School Board member Paula Noonan's
column. Without it, how would we have known that Superintendent Cindy
Stevenson's actions in awarding contracts taken in private with no board
knowledge or input were legal and transparent, while those of the new board,
acting in a public session according to proper procedure, were possibly illegal
and opaque (or so said Post columnist Alicia Caldwell)?

Now that the lid of Pandora's Educational Box has been slightly pried open, can
you please assign a reporter to investigate other Jeffco R 1 irregularities and
skeletons, such as lucrative contracts clandestinely awarded to companies
associated with sitting board members, past and present?

Russell W. Haas, Golden

Re: "Evil isn't so simple," Jan. 5 Perspective story.

Thank you for the excellent article on evil by Kevin Simpson and Electa Draper.
It dovetailed nicely with the compelling piece by Jessica K. Peck, "The death
penalty's lost voices." Human beings are much too complex to reduce to crude
determinism and much too predictable to explain through unqualified free will.
One moves us toward "A Clockwork Orange" and the other toward rejecting the
banality of Adolf Eichmann. We should act very carefully in the face of these
mysteries and, most important, be hesitant to take a life in the name of either
deterrence or justice.

Thad Tecza, Denver

* * *

The article on understanding evil in relation to the current phenomenon of mass
shooters is well researched but it leaves out one major component: the society
these killers are living in. Since the James Holmes case began in July 2012, we
have been interviewing people in their 20s, the very age group that is producing
most of these shooters. They do not talk about brain disorders or "evil," but
focus on the violence of the society they've grown up in.

This violence includes bullying in schools and beyond, in social media,
throughout the entertainment industry, and in the military actions of their
government over the past 12 years. Most do not see evil as existing in the
vacuum of one individual but as the result of many social forces that they've
come of age within. Isn't it time to ask the generation that produces these
killers what forces are shaping them?

Stephen Singular and Joyce Jacques Singular, DenverThe authors are writing a
book on the James Holmes case.

* * *

I read neuroscientist Sam Harris' comment: "Free will is an illusion. None of us
choose our brains. And we are not the authors of our thoughts or actions."

And I think or is it my "auto" brain speaking why read any further? This is
obviously "percolating subconscious" at work, and who would trust this primal
source?" So, I used my free will ... and stopped reading.

Patricia (Pat) Hershwitzky, Arvada

* * *

This article provokes a lot of thought about the nature of evil and free will.
But the authors fail to mention the possibility of a spirit or soul in addition
to our physical bodies. If we are nothing more than our biological makeup, then,
as Sam Harris said, "Free will is an illusion." We are then glorified computers
or androids, hard wired and programmed to respond to various stimuli in a
particular way, and essentially running on "auto pilot."

Even Harris' claim that we can choose to act or not act on what we want, but
that we don't choose what we want is illusional, as our choice to act is also
the result of a pre programming response to stimuli and environment.

If we have a spirit or soul, then we have the possibility of free will, much as
a computer user can modify or choose how to use the computer that is our brain
and body.

Richard Postma, Littleton

* * *

Congratulations on the attempt to explore the origins of behavior that many
people call evil. Attempts to get at the root causes for abhorrent human
behavior are very timely considering advances in medical tools. It is also the
modern replacement for old fashioned attribution to some metaphysical concept as
the source of horrific acts.

Although it introduced more useful and scientifically based ideas early on, the
article returned too much to the notion of evil. Among many recent ideas that
bear reminding is the effect of early childhood abuse and poor nutrition on
brain development and later behavior. Also conspicuously absent was reference to
the role of physical brain damage on the behavior of PTSD affected soldiers.

At a time of shrinking newspapers, The Denver Post still brings important
reporting on major public issues and is essential.

John C. Flemming, Littleton

* * *

What was unfortunately absent from this article was a recognition of any
collective, social, cultural responsibility for such behaviors. Isn't our
government condoning killings of hundreds of innocent civilians by way of
unmanned drones? What about the simple availability of semi automatic weapons to
anyone, anytime? Why are these awful shootings not happening in most other
nations? Are these neurologic complexities that may lead to violent behavior
unique to North Americans?

Isn't it also critical to examine our social model of morality that is too often
rooted in fear and cloaked under the guise of eliminating an enemy?

Martha L. Crawley, Denver

To the Point

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo illustration by Jeff Neumann, The Denver Post/Jupiter Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


