                             2372 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 21, 2014 Thursday 7:26 PM EST

Sen. Rand Paul makes use of surgical skills in Guatemalan operating room;
The senator and possible Republican presidential candidate revealed his careful
surgeon side.

BYLINE: Ed O'Keefe

LENGTH: 1990 words


SALAMÁ, GUATEMALA - Brothers Juan and Andres Hernandez traveled more than four
hours here by bus for the chance to reunite with the man they call "Dr. Pablo."

Fifteen years ago, the two of them were flown to Bowling Green, Ky., to be
examined by a local ophthalmologist named Rand Paul. Fifteen years ago, Paul had
no political aide or press secretary, there was no 13-hour filibuster, no talk
of a possible presidential campaign. No bodyguard named Axel.

Since operating on the Hernandez brothers in 1999, Paul has become the junior
senator from Kentucky and a prospective Republican presidential candidate.

He came face-to-face again with the brothers this week at a local hospital, in
front of a chalkboard where someone had written, "Bien vinedos" when they meant
to write "Bienvenidos." The meeting happened in front of three television
cameras, three photographers, six reporters, a political aide, two press
secretaries, conservative activist David Bossie - and Axel, watching closely.

Paul started speaking Spanish he'd learned as a kid growing up in Texas. Taking
out a pencil light, he examined the brothers' eyes.

"Mire la luz," he said - look at the light. Paul handed Juan his glasses and
asked him to try them on. He asked him: Is your vision better or the same with
the glasses?

"No difference," Hernandez said in Spanish. After a few moments, Paul said he
wanted the brothers to visit a nearby clinic for a thorough exam. Then he asked
them to pose for a picture.

"Smile!" someone shouted. The brothers stared ahead, seemingly unable to
comprehend the political implications of their photo.

Announced a few months ago, Paul's trip to Guatemala came at a time when other
Republicans considering presidential campaigns, including Rep. Paul Ryan
(R-Wis.), are talking more openly about a "compassion agenda," finding ways to
help the poor and less fortunate. Here, before the cameras in Salamá, Paul was
on that terrain - but a world away from the rest of a GOP presidential field
dominated by career politicians.

The stage-managed political voyage exposed logistical shortcomings by its
organizers - and the clear ambitions of the man at the center. But it also
revealed a rarely seen side of a closely watched figure, a careful surgeon
quietly operating in a chaotic environment. Someone who at times appeared
detached from his grateful patients, but who clearly relished a rare opportunity
to discuss the details of modern medicine and politics with other members of the
surgical team.

Paul said he simply wanted some time to practice medicine again. He is licensed
to treat patients in Kentucky, where years ago he established his own
certification board after a dispute with another governing body for
ophthalmologists. He's performed pro bono surgery for years in his home state
but had long wanted to join a medical mission overseas.

"The reason we're here is to try to help people," he said in an interview
between surgeries this week. "It's something I spent a long time learning to do.
It really is my passion - medicine and doing surgery." Plus, he said: "I'd hate
to give up a skill that I spent a long time learning to do."

But David Bossie's presence cast aside any doubt that the trip was merely an
opportunity for the senator to reconnect with his medical roots. Bossie is the
founder of Citizens United, the group that successfully sued and prompted the
U.S. Supreme Court to rule that corporations and labor unions can spend
unlimited funds on direct advocacy for or against political candidates. A
documentary maker who has shadowed Paul before, he traveled here with his
daughter and a film crew equipped with lights, cameras and an unmanned aerial
drone for overhead shots. Bossie said little about his plans, other than that
his footage would appear in a forthcoming film either about Paul or an issue of
importance to him.

Paul's entourage also included family members and friends; his top political
aide, Doug Stafford; and political ad makers Rex Elsass and Rick Tyler, a former
close aide to Newt Gingrich. The ad team was joined by a Spanish-speaking
colleague who was responsible for trailing behind another film crew with legal
release forms that needed to be signed by anyone interviewed or appearing in
their footage. It wasn't clear whether Guatemalans presented with release forms
understood what they were signing.

Stafford was unapologetic about the size or makeup of Paul's delegation.
"There's nothing wrong with letting people see what he does," he said. "This is
what he's done with his life."

Paul and his aides refused to say how much money he spent on the trip. But the
senator said he had asked several political donors, including Donald Trump, to
donate to the John A. Moran Eye Center at the University of Utah, which made
most of the logistical arrangements and shipped medical equipment into
Guatemala. Another group from Utah, Hope Alliance, also helped cover expenses
and operated a clinic that distributed about 8,000 pairs of glasses to local
residents.

Aides stressed that no taxpayer money had been spent to secure or transport the
senator. Security was provided by members of Guatemala's presidential security
detail. In addition to Axel and other plain-clothes bodyguards, officers with
the Guatemalan National Police patrolled the senator's hotel and the sites where
doctors operated.

Ahead of the trip, reporters had been promised that they would be able to file
reports in real time. But once they arrived, Paul's aides told journalists - and
the doctors, nurses and other volunteers - that using social media that way
would be banned while the senator was in town because of unspecified security
concerns. Anyone who broke the rules would be kicked off the trip.

For a senator who is prolific on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and Snapchat, the
blackout meant aides had to throw out their own plans. And the fact that
security concerns weren't revealed to media on the trip until they arrived in
the country suggested that the senator's staff hadn't entirely anticipated the
potential logistical challenges of foreign political travel.

Paul was among roughly 70 Americans who traveled to Salamá. While Hope Alliance
worked on distributing eyeglasses, a team of surgeons, nurses and technicians
from the Moran Eye Center performed cataract surgery on at least 200 patients
over five days.

The lack of care, poor nutrition and the infrequent use of sunglasses here made
cataracts seen this week larger and harder and more difficult to extract,
surgeons said. Some cataracts were the size of corn kernels. Others looked like
chocolate chips.

In an operating room inside the local Lions Club clinic, Paul and the other
surgeons operated in a brightly lit, white-tiled room not much larger than an
urban apartment kitchen. Working on hundreds of patients over five days required
careful coordination, so in order to streamline the process, one table was for
left-eye patients, another for right-eye patients.

Paul wore blue surgical scrubs, hiking boots and a red surgical cap. He
partnered on Monday with David Chang, a leading ophthalmologist, the past
president of the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery and a
clinical professor at the University of California at San Francisco. Chang's
textbooks on cataract surgery have been translated into Spanish to help instruct
Latin American surgeons.

After scrubbing in and suiting up, Paul turned to the surgical table to review
the phacoemulsification machine, a device that he manipulated with a pedal below
his left foot. With a slight tap, he applied the pressure needed for the tools
in his hands to extract a cataract and implant a new lens.

"We have almost no space here," Paul said as he asked one of the nurses to help
him adjust the operating table. "I'd like a couple of more inches." He worked
with the nurses to make adjustments.

An air conditioner whirred as Aerosmith's "Sweet Emotion" and the Rolling
Stone's "You Can't Always Get What You Want" played softly. The senator kept
mostly quiet as Chang observed Paul's work on a patient, sometimes offering
suggestions. "Go on the other side," he said at one point. "Sometimes you can
dig in and spin the lens a little bit."

The surgeons, nurses and technicians said that they had dealt with some of the
most complex cases of their career here.

"The type of cataracts that we see here, they're very challenging for me," Chang
said. "They would really challenge the vast majority of American cataract
surgeons, simply because they're so advanced and the eyes have a whole host of
other problems."

Other surgeons said Paul eagerly tackled some of the most complex cases.

"He's dived in on a few of the tough ones, and he's doing okay," said Alan S.
Crandall, vice chair of ophthalmology and visual sciences at the Moran Eye
Center.

Performing surgery is exhilarating, the surgeons said. But "The morning after"
is what makes ophthalmology so special.

"If you don't like the morning after, then you're just a technician. You're sort
of more of a robot than a human," Paul said.

When patients arrived Tuesday morning to have their bandages removed, smiles
broke out across the waiting room. An older man jumped to his feet in excitement
and hugged a surgeon.

Scanning the room, Paul gave a clinical assessment: "Some of them, they'll be
able to see better as the day goes on," he said, adding later: "We were
commenting that not many of them were smiling yesterday, but we got a few smiles
today."

Notably, Paul didn't smile much. He examined eyes and helped check depth of
vision and awkwardly accepted hugs. But he didn't give many pats on the back or
quiet reassurances, as other surgeons did. During a separate tour of the nearby
National Hospital, Paul breezed through and greeted surgeons, but didn't spend
much time bending down to shake the hands of patients. He admitted later that
he's not a natural retail politician - or surgeon.

He liked shaking hands and meeting people, he said. But "I'm not a huge fan of
just 'Hey, your shirt looks good. Hey, your shoes look nice.' Or sort of the
empty vacuous cocktail talk."

Being a surgeon, he said, is markedly different than being a senator. "In
Washington, nothing is ever solved. Nobody can just try to solve a problem and
fix it or diagnose a problem and fix it," he said. "In medicine, there's not a
lot of arguing. . . . For the most part, everyone knows what's wrong, figures
out what's wrong and moves on to a solution."

During the trip, Paul never disputed or dismissed suggestions that he is
thinking about running for president. He suggested that potential candidates who
aren't career politicians - in other words, candidates like him - would find
favor with most Americans.

"I think that we have plenty of lawyers, we have plenty of career politicians.
But the few people who stand out in Washington are the people who aren't. The
doctors, sometimes businessmen," he said.

In Guatemala, Paul was firmly in doctor mode - showing particular concern for
the Hernandez brothers.

But there wasn't much more he could do for them. A more intensive exam confirmed
that the brothers had never recovered from amblyopia, or lazy eye. Because their
condition wasn't treated before age 7, their brains had never fully corrected
the problem. They can see shadows and hand motions but will never have full
eyesight.

"There's no surgery or medicine that will make it better," Paul told their
father after the examination. Turning to a translator, Paul said: "You can tell
him that we also tried medicine."

The father's face twisted. But Paul's disposition didn't change. He looked
directly at the brothers and their father. "Vaya con Dios," he said. Go with
God.

Matter of factly, Paul said in an interview that the setback is just part of
being a surgeon.

"You're privy to a lot of things that other people aren't," he said. "Some of
them sad, some of them happy. In ophthalmology, mostly happy, and mostly good
outcomes."

ed.okeefe@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


