                             2558 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 8, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

NSA's morale down after Snowden revelations, ex-officials say

BYLINE: Ellen Nakashima

SECTION: A section; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 1015 words


Morale has taken a hit at the National Security Agency in the wake of
controversy over the agency's surveillance activities, according to former
officials who say they are dismayed that President Obama has not visited the
agency to show his support.

A White House spokeswoman, Caitlin Hayden, noted that top White House officials
have been to the agency to "express the president's support and appreciation for
all that NSA does to keep us safe."

It is not clear whether or when Obama might travel the 23 miles up the
Baltimore-Washington Parkway to visit Fort Meade, the NSA's headquarters in
Maryland, but agency employees are privately voicing frustration at what they
perceive as White House ambivalence amid the pounding the agency has taken from
critics.

An NSA spokeswoman had no comment.

Obama in June defended the NSA's surveillance as lawful and said he welcomed the
public debate prompted by revelations from former contractor Edward Snowden
beginning that month.

Though Obama has asserted, for instance, that the NSA's collection of virtually
all Americans' phone records is lawful and has saved lives, the administration
has not endorsed legislation that would codify it. And his recent statements
suggest he thinks some of the NSA's activities should be constrained.

A senior administration official who was not authorized to speak on the record
said that the White House would normally not endorse legislation so early in the
process but that "it's been clear . . . that we prefer legislation" that
preserves the phone records program "while making some changes . . . to
potentially strengthen oversight and transparency."

Said Hayden: "The president has the highest respect for and pride in the men and
women of the intelligence community who work tirelessly to protect our nation.
He's expressed that directly to NSA's leadership and has praised their work in
public. As he said: 'The men and women of our intelligence community work every
single day to keep us safe because they love this country and believe in our
values. They're patriots.'[#x200a]"

She noted that in recent weeks, Lisa Monaco, assistant to the president for
homeland security and counterterrorism, and Denis McDonough, the White House
chief of staff, visited Fort Meade "to express the president's support and
appreciation for all that NSA does to keep us safe."'

'Hung out to dry'

Supporters of the NSA say staffers are not feeling the love.

"The agency, from top to bottom, leadership to rank and file, feels that it is
had no support from the White House even though it's been carrying out publicly
approved intelligence missions," said Joel Brenner, NSA inspector general from
2002 to 2006. "They feel they've been hung out to dry, and they're right."

A former U.S. official - who like several other former officials interviewed for
this story requested anonymity because he still has dealings with the agency -
said: "The president has multiple constituencies - I get it. But he must agree
that the signals intelligence NSA is providing is one of the most important
sources of intelligence today.

"So if that's the case, why isn't the president taking care of one of the most
important elements of the national security apparatus?"

The White House, observers say, is caught between competing desires to preserve
what it has said are valuable national security programs and to shield the
president from criticism from allies abroad and civil-liberties advocates at
home.

Some observers said it is not surprising that Obama would not travel to Fort
Meade before internal and external reviews of surveillance activities have been
completed. The reviews are expected to be done soon.

The NSA's director, Gen. Keith Alexander, who is retiring in the spring after 81
/ 2 years, has been the most vocal defender of the agency's 35,000 employees. In
speeches he has noted that more than 6,000 of them went to Iraq and Afghanistan
to support the military. He has spoken of how 22 cryptologists were killed.
"They're the heroes - not the media leaker," he said in a September speech, in a
reference to Snowden.

NSA counterterrorism analysts have worked "every weekend for eight years since
I've been here. . . . Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, they're there
to defend us," he said then.

On Thursday, Obama said on MSNBC that he would be proposing "some self-restraint
on the NSA" and "some reforms that can give people more confidence."

In an interview with NBC last month, he said: "In some ways, the technology and
the budgets and the capacity [at NSA] have outstripped the constraints. And
we've got to rebuild those in the same way that we're having to do on a whole
series of capacities . . . [such as] drone operations."

Civil-liberties advocates generally agree with that sentiment, but they would go
further and say that the NSA's bulk collection of domestic phone records is
unlawful and ought to be ended.

Bush visit in 2006

Former officials note how President George W. Bush paid a visit to the NSA in
January 2006, in the wake of revelations by the New York Times that the agency
engaged in a counterterrorism program of warrantless surveillance on U.S. soil
beginning after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. "Bush came out and spoke
to the workforce, and the effect on morale was tremendous," Brenner said.
"There's been nothing like that from this White House."

A second former official said NSA workers are polishing up their rsums and
asking that they be cleared - removing any material linked to classified
programs - so they can be sent out to potential employers. He noted that one
employee who processes the rsums said, "I've never seen so many rsums that
people want to have cleared in my life."

Morale is "bad overall," a third former official said. "The news - the Snowden
disclosures - it questions the integrity of the NSA workforce," he said. "It's
become very public and very personal. Literally, neighbors are asking people,
'Why are you spying on Grandma?' And we aren't. People are feeling bad, beaten
down."

ellen.nakashima@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


