                             2537 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 12, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

Haqqani leader shot dead in Pakistan

BYLINE: Kathy Gannon;Rasool Dawar

SECTION: A section; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 405 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Gunmen killed a senior leader of one of the most feared
militant groups fighting U.S. troops in Afghanistan when he stopped at a bakery
on the outskirts of Pakistan's capital, members of the militant organization and
an eyewitness said Monday.

Nasiruddin Haqqani's death Sunday night is one of the biggest blows to the
Haqqani militant network since the Afghan war started, but the commander's
presence in Islamabad and questions over who killed him could spark fresh
tension between Pakistan and the United States.

U.S. officials have accused Pakistan's intelligence agency of supporting the
al-Qaeda-linked Haqqani network to counter the influence of archenemy India in
Afghanistan - an allegation denied by Islamabad.

No one has asserted responsibility for Haqqani's killing, which occurred in an
area of Islamabad only a couple of miles from the U.S. Embassy, but some
Pakistanis suspect that Americans were behind it. That's a contentious
allegation in a country angered by U.S. drone strikes targeting militants in
Pakistan's tribal region that many see as a violation of state sovereignty.

The U.S. Embassy said it was looking into the matter.

Haqqani was a key financier and emissary for the family business. His brother,
Sirajuddin Haqqani, leads the group, which was founded by their father,
Jalaluddin Haqqani, who achieved fame fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan in the
1980s.

The U.S. Treasury imposed sanctions on Nasiruddin Haqqani in 2010 when it added
him to its list of specially designated global terrorists. The Treasury said he
had traveled to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to raise money for the
Haqqani network, al-Qaeda and the Taliban.

The gunmen who killed Haqqani as he got out of his vehicle at a bakery in a
residential area called Bara Kahu were riding a motorcycle, witness Tanveer
Ahmed said. He said he was nearby when the shooting took place but learned the
dead man's name only later. The attack left blood on the pavement and bullet
holes in the bakery's tiled wall.

Ahmed said that when he heard the shooting he first thought it was celebratory
fire, which is common at weddings and other events in Pakistan.

Haqqani's body was taken to the town of Miran Shah in the North Waziristan
tribal area, according to Ahsanullah Ahsan, a Pakistani Taliban commander.
Haqqani was buried Monday, another Pakistani militant said.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


