                             2592 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 11, 2014 Saturday 8:14 PM EST

U.S. advisers are [#xfb01]rst to be sent to Somalia since 1993

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 940 words


The U.S. military secretly deployed a small number of trainers and advisers to
Somalia in October, the first time regular troops have been stationed in the
war-ravaged country since 1993, when two helicopters were shot down and 18
Americans killed in the "Black Hawk Down" disaster.

A cell of U.S. military personnel has been in the Somali capital of Mogadishu to
advise and coordinate operations with African troops fighting to wrest control
of the country from the al-Shabab militia, an Islamist group whose leaders have
professed loyalty to al-Qaeda, according to three U.S. military officials.

The previously undisclosed deployment - of fewer than two dozen troops -
reverses two decades of U.S. policy that effectively prohibited military "boots
on the ground" in Somalia. Even as Somali pirates and terrorists emerged as the
top security threat in the region, successive presidential administrations and
the Pentagon shied away from sending troops there for fear of a repeat of the
Black Hawk Down debacle.

In recent years, the Obama administration has slowly and cautiously become more
directly involved in Somalia.

Drones from a U.S. base in Djibouti - a neighboring Horn of Africa country -
conduct surveillance missions and occasional airstrikes from Somalia's skies.
Elite Special Operations forces have also set foot on Somali territory on rare
occasions to carry out counterterrorism raids and hostage rescues, but only in
the shadows and for no more than a few hours at a time.

In January 2013, the United States officially recognized a new federal
government of Somalia, reestablishing diplomatic relations for the first time
since the country's political structure collapsed in 1991. The State Department
has not reopened an embassy in Mogadishu, but U.S. diplomats often make brief
trips to the capital.

The CIA has quietly operated a base in Somalia for years and finances Somali
security forces, but largely keeps its activities there under wraps.

U.S. intentions to become more involved militarily became apparent last summer,
when Gen. David Rodriguez, the commander of U.S. forces in Africa, visited
Mogadishu.

In October, Amanda Dory, the Pentagon's top policy official for Africa, told
Congress that the military would "increase our presence in Mogadishu in tandem
with the State Department."

Although Dory did not provide details, the U.S. Africa Command around the same
time deployed a handful of advisers to Mogadishu to establish a coordination
cell with Somali security forces and a regional coalition of African troops,
according to the three U.S. military officials, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity because the mission had not been publicly announced.

In a statement late Friday, Army Col. Thomas Davis, a spokesman for the Africa
Command, confirmed the deployment. He said a military coordination cell was
established in Somalia in October "and is now fully operational."

October marked the 20th anniversary of the Black Hawk Down battle between a task
force of U.S. Army Rangers and Delta Force commandos and fighters loyal to
Somali warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed.

U.S. military forces were in Somalia at the time to support a United Nations
humanitarian operation. But the heavy losses - and haunting images of dead
Americans being dragged through the streets - prompted a quick U.S. withdrawal
and for years discouraged Washington from intervening in other conflicts.

Since 2007, the U.S. government has spent more than $500 million to train and
equip an African Union force of more than 18,000 soldiers that has sought to
bring order to Somalia and strengthen the weak Somali national government. Most
of the soldiers come from Uganda and Burundi and receive training in camps
outside Somalia from U.S. contractors and uniformed military advisers.

The United States has also spent more than $170 million to build up the nascent
Somali national army, although that force is relatively weak and unreliable.

The African Union forces control most of Mogadishu and are making gradual
headway in securing other territory.

Ethiopia and Kenya have also sent troops into Somalia and control regions near
their borders. Despite all the interventions, however, al-Shabab remains a
potent force and in control of large parts of the country.

Al-Shabab, which means "the youth" in Arabic, has been leading an insurgency for
several years against Somalia's Western-backed leaders. The militia imposes
strict Islamic law over the cities and villages it controls. Its leaders
announced a merger with al-Qaeda two years ago, although U.S. analysts differ on
how much of a direct threat it poses to the United States.

The militia has organized several terrorist plots in other countries in East
Africa, including a four-day armed siege of an upscale shopping center in
Nairobi in September that killed dozens of people.

Somalia has been plagued by famine and civil strife for more than two decades.

For many years, Mogadishu was known as one of the most dangerous cities in the
world, a symbol of the lawlessness that gripped the entire country. Conditions
are slowly improving, and the State Department has said it wants to reopen an
embassy in the capital, but is waiting for terrorist threats to subside further.

"We eventually need to establish a permanent U.S. diplomatic presence in
Somalia," Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the State Department's deputy assistant
secretary for African affairs, told a Senate panel in October. "Ultimately, it
is the security conditions in Somalia that will dictate when we can establish a
more permanent presence, and we recognize that the time is not right to do
this."

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


