                             2802 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 20, 2014 Friday 11:27 PM EST

Targeting the insurgents

BYLINE: David Ignatius

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 750 words


President Obama came nearly full circle on Iraq on Thursday, sending military
advisers back to cope with that country's disintegration as U.S. officials
lobbied for replacement of the prime minister that the United States helped
install. These were the right choices, but they were a measure of how badly U.S.
policy has gone awry.

Obama has concluded that Iraq faces all-out civil war and partition unless it
replaces Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki with a less sectarian and polarizing
leader. U.S. diplomats are floating the names of alternative candidates in
Baghdad. Meanwhile, Obama is sending up to 300 military advisers to assess if
the Iraqi army can be salvaged after it collapsed in Anbar province, Mosul and
Tikrit.

The people who will pull the plug on Maliki are Kurdish leader Massoud Barzani
and other Iraqi kingmakers. The United States is pushing them to signal
unmistakably that Maliki is finished. Obama knows this silent putsch will
succeed only if it has tacit support from Iran, which effectively has a veto on
the next Iraqi prime minister.

One sign of Iran's hegemony is that Gen. Qassem Suleimani, the head of the Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps, was said to have flown this
week to the northwestern city of Tal Afar, near the border with Syria, to assess
the battle there against Sunni extremists.

To create a broad-based Iraqi government that can fight the brutal insurgency
led by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, the United States and its allies
need to quickly gain the support of Iraq's Sunni tribal leaders. I met with
several of them in Amman two months ago, and it was clear that, although
frightened of ISIS's power, they were using it to attack Maliki. This Sunni
opportunism can be reversed. The tribal leaders told me they want U.S. help, and
they should get it.

Saudi Arabia and Jordan, which have leverage with the Sunni tribes, began
talking this week with tribal leaders to pull them away from ISIS. That's a
plus, but traditional bribes won't be enough here. The Sunnis want a real share
of power.

Senior U.S. officials have been debating how to begin targeting ISIS. U.S.
drones are gathering intelligence over ISIS-controlled areas, in hopes of fixing
the locations of key leaders. The U.S. advisers who will be moving with Iraqi
units on the ground will also gather crucial intelligence. One place to target
ISIS initially might be in its havens and infiltration routes along the
Syria-Iraq border, where there's less chance of hitting Sunni tribesmen.

"We know where their base camps and training camps are, which is where we can
start," says U.S. Central Command adviser Derek Harvey.

The campaign to defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria will need political cover, so that
it doesn't alienate Sunni allies such as Saudi Arabia and Jordan. One
possibility, suggested by a source close to the Jordanian government, would be
the Gulf Cooperation Council. This alliance of Gulf monarchies has sometimes
been toothless in the past, but recently it has worked effectively to keep Yemen
from splintering, and it can play a key role now, working in tandem with King
Abdullah of Jordan.

The Saudis are going to have to swallow the reality that ISIS can't be stopped
without some cooperation with Iran. One bridge might be a GCC summit with the
Iranians to discuss the crisis in Syria and Iraq. The GCC could even propose a
stabilization force to be deployed in Sunni areas of Iraq and Syria. It's a long
shot, but the Saudis long ago backed a similar "Arab Deterrent Force" that
stabilized Lebanon after the worst years of its civil war in 1975 and '76.

Good policy for Iraq and Syria can't rely on military force alone. The United
States' misadventures after the 2003 invasion of Iraq surely teach that lesson.
What will stabilize this part of the world (slowly, slowly) is political action
backed by military power - conducted under a series of umbrellas: The first
umbrella is a new Iraqi unity government; the second is a U.S.-Iranian dialogue
that draws in Saudi Arabia and its GCC partners; the third is an international
coalition backed by the United Nations.

One irony of the current Iraqi mess is that the only stable area is Kurdistan,
whose leader, Barzani, is probably the strongest political figure in the
country. If Iran balks at removing Maliki in Baghdad, the United States should
respond by deepening its ties with the Kurds - a step on the way to an
independent Kurdistan and a new map for the Middle East.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


