                             311 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Is Said to Consider Selective Airstrikes on Sunni Militants

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1111 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama is considering a targeted, highly selective
campaign of airstrikes against Sunni militants in Iraq similar to
counterterrorism operations in Yemen, rather than the widespread bombardment of
an air war, a senior administration official said on Tuesday.

Such a campaign, most likely using drones, could last for a prolonged period,
the official said. But it is not likely to begin for days or longer, and would
hinge on the United States' gathering adequate intelligence about the location
of the militants, who are intermingled with the civilian population in Mosul,
Tikrit and other cities north of Baghdad.

Even if the president were to order strikes, they would be far more limited in
scope than the air campaign conducted during the Iraq war, this official said,
because of the relatively small number of militants involved, the degree to
which they are dispersed throughout militant-controlled parts of Iraq and fears
that using bigger bombs would kill Sunni civilians.

At a meeting with his national security advisers at the White House on Monday
evening, the official said, Mr. Obama was presented with a ''sliding scale'' of
military options, which range from supplying the beleaguered Iraqi Army with
additional advisers, intelligence and equipment to conducting strikes targeting
members of the militant group, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Much of the emphasis at the meeting, the official said, was on how to gather
useful intelligence about the militants. They are not wearing uniforms or
sleeping in barracks; and while there may be periodic convoys to strike, there
are no columns of troops or vehicles.

Given all the hurdles to effective military action, Mr. Obama is continuing to
emphasize a political solution to the crisis, the official said. Administration
officials are prodding the Shiite-dominated government of Prime Minister Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki to take tangible steps to heal sectarian rifts with the
country's Sunnis and Kurds.

''This is not primarily a military challenge,'' the White House press secretary,
Jay Carney, said to reporters on Air Force One, even as he acknowledged that
''Iraq needs significantly more help to break the momentum of extremist
groups.''

The United States is also exploring diplomatic options with Iraq's neighbors,
including Iran, though a senior official played down the extent of the
coordination with Iran, after the deputy secretary of state, William J. Burns,
briefly broached the crisis with his Iranian counterpart at nuclear negotiations
in Vienna.

The limited scale of any military action may make it easier for Mr. Obama to
sell to Congress and the public. The United States already targets suspected
terrorists with drones and warplanes, either alone or with the local
governments, in Yemen, Pakistan, Somalia and Afghanistan. It provides
intelligence and airlift support for strikes in Mali.

Mr. Obama has invited the leaders of the House and Senate for a 3 p.m. meeting
in the Oval Office. Taking part will be the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid
of Nevada; the minority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky;
the House speaker, John A. Boehner, and the House minority leader,
Representative Nancy Pelosi.

The administration's deliberations come amid signs that the sweeping militant
advances of last week are slowing down, as the fighters reach the more heavily
guarded gates of Baghdad.

''We're seeing indications, certainly, that Iraqi security forces in and around
Baghdad are stiffening themselves,'' said Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, the Pentagon
press secretary. ''They're being assisted by Shia militia members. And it
certainly appears as if they have the will to defend the capital.''

The White House is looking at a range of options that can be expanded or scaled
back depending on the gravity of the threat posed by the advancing militants,
current and former administration officials said.

Mr. Obama, Admiral Kirby said, ''hasn't made final decisions right now,''
adding, ''We have to preserve that space for him to do that.''

One step that is likely to happen soon is the creation of one or more
intelligence ''fusion cells,'' where information gleaned from Iraqi commanders
on the ground is combined with satellite imagery, surveillance drones already
flying over Iraq, electronic intercepts and other technical information provided
by the United States.

American intelligence analysts and military planners sent by the Pentagon would
work alongside their Iraqi counterparts to help identify vulnerabilities in the
militants' ranks, and disseminate that information to Iraqi ground troops.
''Iraqi field reporting has never been very accurate,'' said one former American
general who fought in Iraq. ''They pass information to each other by cellphone,
but they really do not have a national structure where they can see everything
that's going on.''

American surveillance and reconnaissance would help provide that fuller picture,
officials said. It would also lay the groundwork, should Mr. Obama order armed
drones to attack specific militant targets, in much the same way the Central
Intelligence Agency and the military have carried out drone strikes in Yemen.

Predator or Reaper drones have the advantage of being able to loiter for hours
over an area and launch their Hellfire missiles when a target -- such as a
pickup truck armed with a .50-caliber gun and loaded fighters -- emerges from a
hiding place or a crowded urban area.

While the administration has not ruled out larger scale airstrikes from
carrier-based aircraft in the Persian Gulf or land-based attack planes in the
region, possibly from Turkey or Kuwait, those kinds of strikes, typically using
much larger precision-guided bombs, increase the potential for civilian
casualties, and agreeing on basing arrangements could be problematic.

''The U.S. will likely want to limit its exposure to the extent possible,'' said
Steven Simon, a scholar at the Middle East Institute and former senior National
Security Council official in the Obama administration.

Some current and former United States military officials said that without
American troops on the ground -- forward air controllers -- to identify targets,
airstrikes might have only a limited impact, especially as militant forces
intersperse themselves in urban areas.

''Airstrikes will have only one good effect: to bolster morale of the Iraqi
Army,'' said the retired American general, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity so as not to jeopardize business relations in the Middle East.
''That's not to be taken lightly. If the Iraqi Army feels we're there to support
them, they're probably willing to stand their ground.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/world/middleeast/obama-is-said-to-consider-sel
ective-airstrikes-on-sunni-militants.html

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An Iraqi Security Forces checkpoint guard at the entrance to a
Shiite mosque in the divided Baghdad neighborhood of Hay-Adel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AYMAN OGHANNA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


