                             548 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

Briefs

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 610 words


BAN ON AGING CHEESE ON WOOD BOARDS EYED

NEW YORK Aging cheese on wood boards is a common practice among artisan
cheesemakers at home and overseas. Now, some in the industry are worried
regulators may crack down on it.

In recent communication to the New York regulators, the Food and Drug
Administration noted that wood shelves and boards cannot be adequately cleaned
and sanitized and, as such, do not conform to a particular regulation regarding
plant equipment and utensils.

The federal agency also noted that "proper cleaning and sanitation of equipment
and facilities are absolutely necessary to ensure that pathogens do not find
niches to reside and proliferate."

In a statement issued Tuesday, however, the FDA seemed to backtrack on the
stance. It noted that it hasn't taken any enforcement action based solely on the
use of wood shelves.

Drone flights approved for North Slope pipeline. The first legally approved
commercial drone flight over land occurred June 8 to survey an oil field in
northern Alaska, U.S. aviation regulators said Tuesday in a statement.

BP PLC flew an Aerovironment Inc. Puma AE, a plane with a 9.2 foot wingspan,
above BP's oil operations in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, the Federal Aviation
Administration and Aerovironment said in releases.

"These surveys on Alaska's North Slope are another important step toward broader
commercial use of unmanned aircraft," Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx
said.

Electronics retailer's woes increase Fort worth RadioShack's first quarter loss
widened and revenue slumped as the retailer dealt with weakness in its mobile
business and consumer electronics.

Its performance missed Wall Street's view. The stock dropped 10.3 percent to
close at $1.38 on Tuesday.

The company is trying to update its image and compete with the rise of online
and discount retailers.

For the period ended May 3, RadioShack Corp. lost $98.3 million, or 97 cents per
share. That compares with a loss of $28 million, or 28 cents per share, a year
earlier. Revenue declined 13 percent to $736.7 million.

Target hires chief information security officer. Target Corp. has named Brad
Maiorino as chief information security officer as the company overhauls its
security department in the wake of a massive data breach.

The nation's third largest retailer, based in Minneapolis, said Tuesday that
Maiorino will join the company Monday and be responsible for the company's
information security and technology risk strategy. He was General Motors Co.'
chief information security and information technology risk officer.

AIG names new president/CEO. American International Group Inc. named company
insider Peter D. Hancock to succeed Robert Benmosche as president and chief
executive. Hancock, head of AIG's property casualty business, was one of two
front runners in race to succeed Ben mosche, The Wall Street Journal reported.

Book database passes appeals court scrutiny new york The creation of a full text
searchable database of millions of books is a fair use of copyrighted works, a
federal appeals court ruled Tuesday, saying it also is permissible to distribute
the books in alternative forms to people with reading disabilities.

The 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals' decision came in a copyright infringement
lawsuit brought by authors and several authors' groups after several research
universities agreed in 2004 to let Google Inc. electronically scan their books
and created a repository for more than 10 million books.

Morgan Stanley to cut currency traders. Morgan Stanley is cutting fewer than 100
jobs from its currency and rates trading businesses in response to the slowdown
in those markets. Denver Post wire services

Briefs

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


