                             705 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq in Peril

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 680 words


What's happening in Iraq is a disaster and it is astonishing that the Iraqis and
the Americans, who have been sharing intelligence, seem to have been caught
flat-footed by the speed of the insurgent victories and the army defections.

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki is said to be in a panic. It is hard to be
surprised by that, because more than anyone he is to blame for the catastrophe.
Mr. Maliki has been central to the political disorder that has poisoned Iraq, as
he wielded authoritarian power in favor of the Shiite majority at the expense of
the minority Sunnis, stoked sectarian conflict and enabled a climate in which
militants could gain traction.

With stunning efficiency, Sunni militants in recent days captured Mosul, the
second-largest city; occupied facilities in the strategic oil-refining town of
Baiji; and are now headed for Baghdad. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have
been forced to flee their homes and untold numbers have been killed.

The insurgency's gains will not be a threat just to Iraq if the militants, who
have also been fighting in Syria, succeed in establishing a radical Islamic
state on the Iraq-Syria border. No one should want that -- not the Kurds, not
the Turks and not the Iranians.

The deadly surge is the work of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, which grew
out of Al Qaeda in Iraq and is considered even more violent than its
predecessor. Since the United States withdrew from Iraq at the end of 2011, the
group has steadily gained strength and recruited thousands of foreign fighters;
it broke with Al Qaeda earlier this year and is now viewed as a leader of global
jihad.

As this week's events unfolded, it was alarming to learn of the swift
capitulation of thousands of Iraqi Army troops who surrendered their weapons to
the enemy and disappeared. After disbanding Saddam Hussein's army in 2003 after
the invasion by coalition forces and dismantling the government, the United
States spent years and many billions of dollars building a new Iraqi Army,
apparently for naught. The militants have captured untold quantities of
American-supplied weaponry, including helicopters, and looted an estimated $425
million from Mosul's banks.

The growing violence in Iraq was apparent throughout 2013, when more than 8,000
Iraqis were killed, including nearly 1,000 Iraqi security forces; news reports
say the militants planned a takeover for more than a year. Given the Iraqi
Army's cowardice, it is understandable that the Kurds, who operate a
well-managed semiautonomous region in northern Iraq, on Thursday took control of
Kirkuk, a disputed northern city with important oil resources. It signals one
more step toward the breakup of the state.

The turmoil has revived a debate over whether President Obama should have left a
small residual force after the 2011 American troop withdrawal. It's an academic
argument, because the Iraqis refused. Falluja was the militants first big
target, and Mr. Maliki did a turnabout last year and sought help from the White
House, which quickly provided Hellfire missiles and low-tech surveillance drones
. Other Iraqi requests -- for more drones, F-16 fighter jets and Apache
helicopter gunships -- are still in the pipeline.

Last month, Mr. Maliki also asked for airstrikes. The United States has a
strategic interest in Iraq's stability and Mr. Obama on Thursday said America
was ready to do more, without going into detail. But military action seems like
a bad idea right now. The United States simply cannot be sucked into another
round of war in Iraq. In any case, airstrikes and new weapons would be pointless
if the Iraqi Army is incapable of defending the country.

Why would the United States want to bail out a dangerous leader like Mr. Maliki,
who is attempting to remain in power for a third term as prime minister? It is
up to Iraq's leaders to show leadership and name a new prime minister who will
share power, make needed reforms and include all sectarian and ethnic groups,
especially disenfranchised Sunnis, in the country's political and economic life
-- if, indeed, it is not too late.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/opinion/prime-minister-maliki-panics-as-insurg
ents-gain.html

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


