                             878 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 31, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Albums From Moon Honey, Peter Walker and Angola Soundtrack

BYLINE: By JON PARELES and BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; NEW MUSIC; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1155 words


MOON HONEY

''Hand-Painted Dream Photographs''

(Self-released)

Whirlwind virtuosity, extremes of delicacy and impact, melodies that leap all
over the place, suite-like structures, cryptic lyrics based on literary conceits
-- all the hallmarks of progressive rock are robustly in place on ''Hand-Painted
Dream Photographs,'' the first full-length album by Moon Honey, a musically
hyperactive band from Baton Rouge, La. It released a 2010 EP, ''Lemon Heart
Opera,'' under a different band name, Twin Killers.

The guitarist Andrew Martin, the keyboardist Jeffrey Livingston and the drummer
Jermaine Butler back the high, quivery vocals (and lyrics) of Jessica Ramsey in
songs that segue amid folky-baroque intricacy; power-trio stomps; odd-meter
excursions; and pealing, crystalline multiple-guitar constructions. Moon Honey's
repertory could plausibly be collaborations among Joanna Newsom, the Mars Volta
and Grizzly Bear.

Each song is an odyssey, like ''The Two Fridas,'' which, in its six minutes,
moves through pageant, barrage, rush, reconsideration, private reflection,
desperate waltz and wailing affirmation, not to mention lyrics that tease at
possibilities of meaning. Ms. Ramsey sings

Deliriously

I walked across a rickety beam gray drone

clogged throat

couldn't speak but you said you'd help me

up a ladder.

Salvador Dalí described his paintings as ''hand-painted dream photographs,'' and
on the band's lyrics page, Dalí is one of the painters and poets who provide
epigraphs -- and perhaps imagined narrators -- for every song, among them Frida
Kahlo, Sylvia Plath, Edvard Munch and the self-taught Cayman Islands artist
Gladwyn K. Bush. (Mr. Martin is from the Cayman Islands.) Yet if Ms. Ramsey is
imagining artistic minds at work, she also hints at the ups and downs of romance
throughout the album, which ends with a pair of songs called ''The Lovers'' (I
and II). The latter concludes:

This game of hide and seek

was fun

I lost but I was found

I won one more time

promise you'll hide inside my arms

this time.

Moon Honey often describes its music as ''psychedelic,'' but its songs aren't
the psychedelia of amorphous, open-ended jamming. They are fully composed from
end to end, meticulously plotted voyages through chaotic states of mind. It's
strenuous music for both players and listeners; the tempestuous ride is its own
reward. JON PARELES

PETER WALKER

''Has Anybody Seen Our Freedoms?''

(Delmore Recording Society)

When John Fahey's folkloric but futuristic, proto-neo, Mississippi
Delta-to-the-Ganges acoustic guitar style was rediscovered in the 1990s, the
second-wave enthusiasts scattered his ideas far and wide. But recognition for
some of Fahey's fellow travelers, including Peter Walker, came a bit later. Mr.
Walker is still around; he retreated from recording for four decades, between
''Second Poem to Karmela or, Gypsies Are Important,'' from 1968, and ''Echo of
My Soul'' in 2008. He'd already studied Indian music at the beginning, and
during his long interim went deep into Flamenco, learning from teachers in
Andalusia. Perhaps more than his better-known peers, he was interested in doings
outside of his own art, plunging into the antiwar movement and the study of
traditional musical languages.

But the tapes for ''Has Anybody Seen Our Freedoms?,'' not released until now,
suggest a different path: inward, gnarled and stubbornly personal. He performed
some of it in 1970 at the Goose Lake International Music Festival -- an event in
Michigan that drew several hundred thousand -- and recorded these tracks several
months later; in the liner notes, he calls it his ''requiem for the '60s.''

It's rough, passionate and often raga-like, with surging and falling tempos,
drone notes at the bottom, scale melodies on top, fast fingerpicking patterns
clumping together. In a flat, conversational voice, Mr. Walker sings words as
melody, doubling them with steel-string acoustic guitar lines, building a
flowing stream-of-consciousness narrative about art and love and constant
travel, with words coming out in clipped, jagged bursts; sections keep repeating
and doubling back, among strummed crescendos.

This is a solitary, even recessive kind of music, but very special. You get the
sense it's been intensely, almost ritually practiced, with text and guitar
filigree woven together into a kind of epic poem meant mostly for the performer.
BEN RATLIFF

ANGOLA SOUNDTRACK 2

''Hypnosis, Distortions and Other Sonic Innovations 1969-1978''

(Analog Africa)

One way to listen to this compilation of music from the short-lived heyday of
Angola's record companies is to marvel at how magnificently inventive each band
could be. Despite the album's subtitle, this collection revolves around songs,
not sound effects, though there are a few buzzier guitar tones and some
spookier, inside-out mixes than are found in the tracks on Analog Africa's
equally worthwhile 2010 compilation, ''Angola Soundtrack.''

With just a few electric guitars, hand percussion and voices -- horns or
electric organ were rare add-ons -- bands like Os Kiezos (the Brooms, because
their shows raised so much dust from the dance floor), Africa Ritmos and Jovens
do Prenda came up with grooves that never let go. Those bands also, in various
combinations, backed many singers credited on other tracks.

Angolan musicians were aware of music from Brazil, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
the United States and their African neighbors. Their fondness for the reco-reco,
a scraper heard in nearly every track, particularly connected them to Brazilian
samba and Dominican merengue, but those rhythms were transformed by Angolans'
own touch, tone and sensibility.

They had transparent arrangements of interlaced guitars, often with the bass
line lightened by being played on guitar rather than on bass. They had a taste
for the kind of syncopation that perpetually discovers new offbeats in tracks
like Negoleiros do Ritmo's ''Lemba'' and Elias Dia Kimuezo's ''Chamavo.'' They
also had a penchant for minor keys that lend a melancholy tinge, even while the
songs dance ahead.

The album's copious liner notes suggest why. Angola was in turmoil. A war for
independence from Portugal lasted from 1961-74. The Portuguese outlawed the
percussion troupes of carnival but encouraged music in clubs in the townships,
leading to the formation of the electric-guitar bands on the album. Some songs
carried protests, subtly or not. After independence came a protracted civil war
between factions; Angolan record labels were among the casualties, and so were
some musicians, like the singers Urbano de Castro and Cisco.

On this album, when Cisco sings, ''I do not know what is the crime and why they
wanted to kill us'' over the breezy, samba-tinged beat of ''Divua Diami,''
hindsight makes his plaintive voice even sadder. To hear the irrepressible
musicianly joys and tense undertones of these songs is to wonder how Angola's
music would have developed with a different history. JON PARELES

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/31/arts/music/albums-from-moon-honey-peter-walker
-and-angola-soundtrack.html

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


