                             895 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Military Wages Assault Against Militants

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and
Declan Walsh from Dublin. Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud and Salman Masood contributed
reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan, and Saba Imtiaz from Karachi, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1147 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Ending years of hesitation, Pakistan's military on Sunday
said it was launching a major military operation against the Pakistani Taliban
and allied foreign militants at their main base in the tribal belt along the
Afghan border.

The assault on North Waziristan, a lawless district that heavily armed militants
have used as a sanctuary to stage attacks in Pakistan and Afghanistan, comes one
week after an audacious Taliban assault on the country's busiest airport, in
Karachi, left at least 36 people dead.

But a military campaign was anticipated before the Karachi attack, and tens of
thousands of residents have fled North Waziristan while the government has
evacuated the families of officials posted to the area.

In a prelude to the announced offensive, Pakistani fighter jets pounded
suspected militant hide-outs in North Waziristan early Sunday. The military said
in a statement that it had killed 105 militants, mostly from Uzbekistan, but it
was not possible to independently confirm the toll because Waziristan is
inaccessible to most journalists.

Hours later, the military announced the start of a ''comprehensive operation''
against the Taliban on Sunday night. Militants in North Waziristan had ''waged a
war against the State of Pakistan,'' the statement said, ''disrupting our
national life in all its dimensions.''

Yet the military offered no details about how many troops were involved or how
the operation would be carried out.

Local news media reported that the prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, would address
the lower house of Parliament on Monday to discuss the operation.

At least two opposition parties said they would support the drive, and there was
a broad sentiment of support for the military on television and on social media.

''The time has come to reclaim our country,'' Yasir Latif Hamdani, a lawyer from
Lahore, wrote on Twitter.

Security officials in the major cities said they were bracing for possible
Taliban reprisals, particularly in the form of suicide bombings, and announced
increased security measures across the country.

The initial focus, though, is likely to be in the tribal belt, a notoriously
treacherous area that has frustrated conventional armies since the days of the
British Raj. In recent years only American drone strikes managed to successfully
penetrate the militant presence in North Waziristan, although critics said they
had come at a cost of civilian casualties and the inflaming of anti-American
opinion across Pakistan.

Attempts by the Pakistani military to restrict the Taliban had limited success,
either because the militants managed to flee into adjoining areas, or because
the army was adhering to its much-criticized policy of siding with one militant
group against another.

In the days after the Karachi assault, military officials hinted that plans were
underway for a major operation in the northwestern tribal area. And last week,
American drones attacked militant targets twice in the region after an almost
six-month lull during which Pakistani officials tried and failed to negotiate a
peace deal with the Taliban.

The military said it had been ''tasked to eliminate these terrorists regardless
of hue and color, along with their sanctuaries.''

Although an operation in North Waziristan is a longstanding demand of American
officials, it also carries significant strategic and political risks for
Pakistani political and military leaders.

Mr. Sharif worries that Taliban reprisals could focus on Punjab, the country's
wealthiest province and his electoral base. He tried to avoid a military
campaign by initiating peace talks with the Taliban in February, but that
initiative effectively collapsed amid Taliban infighting and continued suicide
bombings in Pakistan's major cities that were apparently the work of Taliban
splinter groups.

The military, at the same time, intends to disable the Taliban while not
upsetting its relationship with other groups -- a delicate demand in a fight
that is likely to be waged, at least in its early stages, with artillery salvos
and fighter jet attacks.

Pakistani intelligence has traditionally had a close relationship with the
Haqqani network, a powerful militant group based in North Waziristan that has
close ties to both the Afghan and Pakistani Taliban, and which has generally
avoided attacking the army. Haqqani militants were believed to have held Sgt.
Bowe Bergdahl for much of his five years in captivity, until his release on May
31 in exchange for five Taliban commanders.

Initial indications from the military were that it would focus its firepower on
the other jihadis, particularly Uzbeks affiliated with the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, which claimed responsibility for the attack on the Karachi airport.

The military said the airstrikes on Sunday morning hit an Uzbek base and seven
other targets that were ''linked with planning'' the Karachi attack.

Among the targets of Sunday's air attacks was a house where Abdur Rehman, a
senior commander of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, was believed to be
staying, said the security official in Peshawar. ''We don't know if he was
there, but it has been hit,'' the official said.

Away from the tribal belt, Pakistanis were bracing for possible reprisals. Army
officers were ordered to secure prominent locations in the capital of Islamabad,
television channels reported. Security at jails across the country was stepped
up.

The police in Karachi, the country's largest city, said they were on high alert.

Though military operations in the tribal areas, and in areas in the northwest of
Pakistan like Swat, have led to an influx of ethnic Pashtuns to Sindh Province,
which includes Karachi, the provincial government said it did not have any plan
in place to prepare for people fleeing the conflict.

Syed Waqar Mehdi, a special assistant to the Sindh chief minister, said the
authorities there were awaiting orders from the federal government. ''But,'' he
added, ''we will not accept terrorists entering the province'' in the guise of
internal refugees.

In the tribal belt, the military announcement was met with widespread
trepidation. ''The government should have informed us before launching an
operation,'' Abdul Rehman Wazir, a cloth merchant said by telephone from Miram
Shah, the main town in North Waziristan. ''We have started packing but we don't
know if we will be able to leave safely.''

Early Sunday, officials estimated that 70,000 residents of North Waziristan had
fled into adjoining areas. Afghan officials estimated that 6,000 had crossed
into Khost, an Afghan province that borders North Waziristan.

One Taliban member vowed to retaliate after the overnight airstrikes. ''We will
certainly avenge the killing of both our fighters and innocent civilians,'' said
the commander, who spoke on the condition of anonymity when reached by telephone
because he is not an official Taliban spokesman.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/16/world/asia/pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Some attempted to flee Miram Shah in North Waziristan on
Saturday, ahead of the offensive. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY
IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


