                              9 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 22, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

More than 400 have since 2001, U.S. military records show

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 4265 words


More than 400 large U.S. military drones have crashed in major accidents around
the world since 2001, a record of calamity that exposes the potential dangers of
throwing open American skies to drone traffic, according to a year-long
Washington Post investigation.

Since the outbreak of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, military drones have
malfunctioned in myriad ways, plummeting from the sky because of mechanical
breakdowns, human error, bad weather and other reasons, according to more than
50,000 pages of accident investigation reports and other records obtained by The
Post under the Freedom of Information Act.

Commercial drone flights are set to become a widespread reality in the United
States, starting next year, under a 2012 law passed by Congress. Drone flights
by law enforcement agencies and the military, which already occur on a limited
basis, are projected to surge.

The documents obtained by The Post detail scores of previously unreported
crashes involving remotely controlled aircraft, challenging the federal
government's assurances that drones will be able to fly safely over populated
areas and in the same airspace as passenger planes.

Military drones have slammed into homes, farms, runways, highways, waterways
and, in one case, an Air Force C-130 Hercules transport plane in midair. No one
has died in a drone accident, but the documents show that many catastrophes have
been narrowly averted, often by a few feet, or a few seconds, or pure luck.

"All I saw were tents, and I was afraid that I had killed someone," Air Force
Maj. Richard Wageman told investigators after an accident in November 2008, when
he lost control of a Predator that plowed into a U.S. base in Afghanistan. "I
felt numb, and I am certain that a few cuss words came out of my mouth."

Investigators were unable to pinpoint a definitive cause for the accident but
said wind and an aggressive turn by the pilot were factors. Wageman did not
respond to a request for comment through an Air Force spokeswoman.

Several military drones have simply disappeared while at cruising altitudes,
never to be seen again. In September 2009, an armed Reaper drone, with a 66-foot
wingspan, flew on the loose across Afghanistan after its handlers lost control
of the aircraft. U.S. fighter jets shot it down as it neared Tajikistan.

The documents describe a multitude of costly mistakes by remote-control pilots.
A $3.8 million Predator carrying a Hellfire missile cratered near Kandahar in
January 2010 because the pilot did not realize she had been flying the aircraft
upside-down. Later that year, another armed Predator crashed nearby after the
pilot did not notice he had squeezed the wrong red button on his joystick,
putting the plane into a spin.

While most of the malfunctioning aircraft have perished in combat zones, dozens
have been destroyed in the United States during test and training flights that
have gone awry.

In April, a 375-pound Army drone crashed next to an elementary-school playground
in Pennsylvania, just a few minutes after students went home for the day. In
Upstate New York, the Air Force still cannot find a Reaper that has been missing
since November, when it plunged into Lake Ontario. In June 2012, a Navy RQ-4
surveillance drone with a wingspan as wide as a Boeing 757's nose-dived into
Maryland's Eastern Shore, igniting a wildfire.

Defense Department officials said they are confident in the reliability of their
drones. Most of the crashes occurred in war, they emphasized, under harsh
conditions unlikely to be replicated in the United States.

Military statistics show the vast majority of flights go smoothly and that
mishap rates have steadily declined over the past decade. Officials acknowledge,
however, that drones will never be as safe as commercial jetliners.

"Flying is inherently a dangerous activity. You don't have to look very far,
unfortunately, to see examples of that," said Dyke Weatherington, director of
unmanned warfare for the Pentagon. "I can look you square in the eye and say,
absolutely, the [Defense Department] has got an exceptional safety record on
this and we're getting better every day."

The Post's analysis of accident records, however, shows that the military and
drone manufacturers have yet to overcome some fundamental safety hurdles:

l A limited ability to detect and avoid trouble. Cameras and high-tech sensors
on a drone cannot fully replace a pilot's eyes and ears and nose in the cockpit.
Most remotely controlled planes are not equipped with radar or anti-collision
systems designed to prevent midair disasters.

l Pilot error. Despite popular perceptions, flying a drone is much trickier than
playing a video game. The Air Force licenses its drone pilots and trains them
constantly, but mistakes are still common, particularly during landings. In four
cases over a three-year period, Air Force pilots committed errors so egregious
that they were investigated for suspected dereliction of duty.

l Persistent mechanical defects. Some common drone models were designed without
backup safety features and rushed to war without the benefit of years of
testing. Many accidents were triggered by basic electrical malfunctions; others
were caused by bad weather. Military personnel blamed some mishaps on
inexplicable problems. The crews of two doomed Predators that crashed in 2008
and 2009 told investigators that their respective planes had been "possessed"
and plagued by "demons."

l Unreliable communications links. Drones are dependent on wireless
transmissions to relay commands and navigational information, usually via
satellite. Those connections can be fragile. Records show that links were
disrupted or lost in more than a quarter of the worst crashes.

Among the models that crashed most often is the MQ-1 Predator, the Air Force
drone manufactured by General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, of San Diego. Almost
half the Predators bought by the Air Force have been involved in a major
accident, according to purchasing and safety data.

Frank W. Pace, president of aircraft systems for General Atomics, the leading
producer of large military drones, said the Predator has exceeded expectations
for reliability. It was designed to be lightweight and inexpensive, costing less
than $4 million apiece. During the early years of the wars in Afghanistan and
Iraq, he said, nobody expected the Predator to last very long.

"It was more of a mind-set that you were going to get shot down or have other
losses, so you don't want to put all this money into a redundant system," Pace
said, referring to backup systems designed to kick in when a failure occurs.

He emphasized that none of the Predator accidents have been fatal.

"We've never reported a loss of life," he said, "so we're doing pretty good."

Accidents span globe

Drones have revolutionized warfare. Now they are poised to revolutionize civil
aviation. Under the law passed by Congress, the Federal Aviation Administration
is scheduled to issue rules by September 2015 that will begin the widespread
integration of drones into civilian airspace.

Pent-up demand to buy and fly remotely controlled aircraft is enormous. Law
enforcement agencies, which already own a small number of camera-equipped drones
, are projected to purchase thousands more; police departments covet them as an
inexpensive tool to provide bird's-eye surveillance for up to 24 hours straight.

Businesses see profitable possibilities for drones, to tend crops, move cargo,
inspect real estate or film Hollywood movies. Journalists have applied for drone
licenses to cover the news. Amazon.com chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos wants
his company to use autonomous drones to deliver small packages to customers'
doorsteps. (Bezos also owns The Post.)

The military owns about 10,000 drones, from one-pound Wasps and four-pound
Ravens to one-ton Predators and 15-ton Global Hawks. By 2017, the armed forces
plan to fly drones from at least 110 bases in 39 states, plus Guam and Puerto
Rico.

The drone industry, which lobbied Congress to pass the new law, predicts $82
billion in economic benefits and 100,000 new jobs by 2025.

Public opposition has centered on civil-liberties concerns, such as the morality
and legality of using drones to spy on people in their back yards. There has
been scant scrutiny of the safety record of remotely controlled aircraft. A
report released June 5 by the National Academy of Sciences concluded that there
were "serious unanswered questions" about how to safely integrate civilian
drones into the national airspace, calling it a "critical, crosscutting
challenge."

Nobody has more experience with drones than the U.S. military, which has logged
more than 4 million flight hours. But the Defense Department tightly guards the
particulars of its drone operations, including how, when and where most
accidents occur.

The Post filed more than two dozen Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests
with the Air Force, Army, Navy and Marine Corps. Responding intermittently over
the course of a year, the military released investigative files and other
records that collectively identified 418 major drone crashes around the world
between September 2001 and the end of last year.

That figure is almost equivalent to the number of major crashes incurred by the
Air Force's fleet of fighter jets and attack planes during the same period, even
though the drones flew far fewer missions and hours, according to Air Force
safety statistics.

The military divided the major accidents into two categories of severity, based
on the amount of damage inflicted to the aircraft or other property. (There are
three other categories for more minor accidents.)

According to the records, 194 drones fell into the first category - Class A
accidents that destroyed the aircraft or caused, under current standards, at
least $2 million in damage.

Slightly over half of those accidents occurred in Afghanistan and Iraq. Almost a
quarter happened in the United States.

In most instances, military officials convened an accident investigation board
to determine the cause. In 18 cases, the drone crashes were so sensitive that
the military classified the names of the countries where they occurred and
details of what happened.

Two hundred and twenty-four drones crashed in Class B accidents that, under
current standards, cost between $500,000 and $2 million. Officials withheld
basic details about those mishaps, such as the dates and locations, on the
grounds that the lesser damage totals did not warrant a public investigation.

The military documents do not include information about drones operated covertly
by the CIA. The spy agency has its own fleet of about 30 armed Predator and
Reaper drones overseas, all flown remotely by Air Force pilots assigned to the
CIA.

The CIA also flies highly advanced RQ-170 Sentinel surveillance drones,
including one that U.S. officials have acknowledged went down in Iran in
December 2011.

'Hit by a UAV!'

As the military dispatched drone after drone to Iraq and Afghanistan in the
mid-2000s, some Air Force commanders saw the potential for trouble in the
increasingly crowded skies.

Air Force leaders circulated briefing materials that quoted an unnamed general
as saying, "What I worry about is the day I have a C-130 with a cargo-load of
soldiers and a [drone] comes right through the cockpit window."

The general's worries were well founded. On Aug. 15, 2011, a C-130 Hercules
weighing about 145,000 pounds was descending toward Forward Operating Base
Sharana, in eastern Afghanistan. Suddenly, a quarter-mile above the ground, the
huge Air Force plane collided with a 375-pound flying object.

"Holy shit!" yelled the Hercules's navigator, according to a transcript of the
cockpit voice recorder. "We got hit by a UAV! Hit by a UAV!"

It was an unmanned aerial vehicle, or UAV in military jargon. An RQ-7B Shadow,
flown by an Army ground crew, had smashed into the cargo plane's left wing
between two propellers. Jet fuel cascaded out of a gash in the wing.

The Hercules crew shut down one engine and radioed to clear the runway. Within
two minutes, the plane landed, smoke pouring from the left side. "There's a big
frickin' hole in the airplane," the pilot said, according to the cockpit voice
recorder. No one was hurt.

About 50 seconds later, the unwitting drone operator radioed the control tower
to confess he had lost track of his aircraft.

"We had a, ah, C-130, um, that hit a UAV," the air-traffic controller responded.
"I'm suspecting that it's yours."

The collision pulverized the Shadow. As word spread, it left drone manufacturers
and drone advocates in the military on tenterhooks. If investigators determined
the drone crew was responsible for a midair disaster, it would undermine plans
to fly robotic aircraft not just overseas but back in the United States.

The military has never publicly disclosed the outcome of the investigation. Two
Pentagon officials said in interviews that the drone operator was not at fault,
but they did not give further details.

In response to a FOIA request from The Post, the Air Force released hundreds of
pages of documents from its safety probe. The official finding of what caused
the crash was censored, but some of the documents suggest the air-traffic
controller was at least partly blamed. The records show the controller, a
civilian contractor whose name was redacted, was temporarily demoted and given
remedial training.

Military officials said there has been only one other case of a midair drone
collision, involving a helicopter and a small, hand-launched drone in Iraq a
decade ago.

Close calls on the ground have been more frequent.

"Where the hell is - where is the runway?" screamed Air Force Capt. Matthew
Scardaci as his engine conked out and his Predator crashed into Kandahar air
base on May 5, 2011, according to a voice-recording transcript. "Oh shit, oh
damn, oh my God what is that!? . . . What was all that stuff that I just hit?"

A row of empty shipping containers, it turned out. Nobody was hurt. Scardaci did
not respond to a request for comment through an Air Force spokeswoman.

In eastern Afghanistan, Predators armed with Hellfires crashed near residential
areas in the city of Jalalabad twice in the space of six months.

In one instance, on Aug. 20, 2011, a drone "began falling out of the sky" after
its propeller broke. "I looked below us, and there were houses everywhere," the
camera operator told investigators.

The Predator smashed into two Afghan housing compounds and sparked a fire. No
one was hurt. The military compensated the homeowners with an undisclosed amount
of money.

'Oops' and 'uh-oh'

Inside ground-control stations, drone pilots sit with binders of checklists that
guide them through every conceivable scenario. But costly errors are still easy
to make.

One recurring mistake: forgetting to turn on the Stability Augmentation System,
which prevents the drone from going wobbly or into a spin. In at least five
cases, pilots did not switch it on, or accidentally switched it off, then sat
perplexed as the aircraft went into a nose dive.

On Aug. 16, 2010, neither the pilot nor the camera operator noticed the bright
red warning lights on the video screens in front of them when their Predator
took off from Balad air base in Iraq with the stabilizer turned off.

"That's freaking us!" the camera operator yelled as the drone crashed, leaving a
hole three feet deep near the runway. "What in the hell happened?" Investigators
blamed "pilot inattention" for the accident.

In four cases between 2009 and 2012, Air Force officials determined that pilots
were willfully negligent, placing them under investigation for suspected
dereliction of duty, a criminal charge under military law.

One flew a Predator, unintentionally, into a 17,000-foot Afghan mountain, even
after he was warned to watch out for high terrain.

Investigators concluded that the inexperienced pilot was rushing to help troops
on the ground and preoccupied with nearby storm clouds, unaware of the mountain
looming ahead.

The accident reports do not disclose the outcomes of the dereliction-of-duty
cases or identify the pilots. Air Force officials declined to elaborate.

In another dereliction case, voice-recorder transcripts show an irritated camera
operator lecturing a habitually nervous pilot right before takeoff at Jalalabad
on July 24, 2012.

"Stop saying 'uh-oh' while you're flying," the operator chided. "It's never
good. Like going to the dentist or a doctor. . . . 'Oops? What the f--- you mean
oops?' "

Sure enough, a few minutes later - oops. The armed Predator rammed a runway
barrier and guardhouse.

"Whoa," the pilot said. "I don't know what the hell just happened."

Reliability gripes

The original Predator was designed without redundant systems common to larger,
manned aircraft. It bore only one engine, one alternator, one propeller. If any
of those parts failed, the plane would come down.

Since the drone program began, the Air Force has acquired 269 Predators. Forty
percent have crashed in Class A accidents, the most severe category. An
additional 8 percent wrecked in Class B accidents.

As the accidents piled up, Air Force crews griped about reliability. Some of the
complaints were aimed at General Atomics, the manufacturer.

"I don't want to be the one that crashes a plane, but I hope that this causes
folks - and when I say folks, I mean GA [General Atomics] - I hope we hold them
accountable for some of this stuff," Air Force Maj. Elizio Bodden, a Predator
instructor pilot, told an accident investigation board after a crash in Iraq on
Nov. 29, 2007. "We know we are flying with some defective stuff, but we still do
it."

Pace, the General Atomics executive, blamed most Predator accidents on pilot
mistakes during landings. He said that the company has made some safety upgrades
to the aircraft but that adding extra engines or duplicate power systems was not
practical, because it would require "a big redo."

He noted that the aircraft has a limited future. General Atomics ceased
production of the original Predator model in 2011 and replaced it with the MQ-9
Reaper, a more reliable aircraft that can fly twice as fast and carry more
missiles and bombs. The Air Force plans to stop flying Predators by 2018 and has
not been "interested in putting their money into upgrades," Pace said.

The Air Force acknowledged that Predators crash more frequently than regular
military aircraft, but officials said the drone's safety record has improved
markedly.

During its first dozen years of existence, the Predator crashed at an
extraordinarily high rate - for every 100,000 hours flown, it was involved in
13.7 Class A accidents.

Since 2009, as the Air Force has become more experienced at flying drones, the
mishap rate for Predators has fallen to 4.79 Class A accidents for every 100,000
flight hours.

Army crash rates

The Reaper has fared better than the Predator, incurring 3.17 Class A mishaps
per 100,000 hours over the past five years.

Air Force officials pointed out that the crash rate for Reapers now approaches
the standard set by two fighter jets, the F-16 and F-15, which over the past
five years have posted Class A mishap rates of 1.96 and 1.47 respectively,
according to statistics from the Air Force Safety Center at Kirtland Air Force
Base in New Mexico.

"We've learned a lot about flying [drones] because we had to," said Air Force
Col. James Marshall, the safety director for the Air Combat Command. "War is a
great motivator when lives are on the line."

The Reaper has not been immune to deficiencies.

After one crashed during a training mission in California on March 20, 2009, Air
Force investigators blamed a faulty temperature control valve in the oil system.
A similar incident had occurred one month before.

Further investigation revealed that sliders in the valves had been installed
upside-down. Air Force inspectors were even more surprised to learn from General
Atomics that the firm had bought the valves from a Houston company that did not
design its products for use in airplanes.

The valve "is not of aerospace grade. In other words, the thermostatic valve was
designed specifically for industrial applications ONLY," an Air Force
investigator wrote in the accident report. "This thermostatic valve was not
intended for aircraft."

Unlike the Air Force, the Army does not make the argument that its drones are
nearly as safe as regular planes.

In June 2013, Army safety officials posted a bulletin noting that their drones
had crashed at 10 times the rate of manned Army aircraft over the previous nine
months.

As bad as that number sounded, the officials said it actually understated the
problem. Commanders were not reporting many drone mishaps, as required, to the
Army Combat Readiness/Safety Center at Fort Rucker, Ala.

About 55 percent of the Army's MQ-5 Hunter drones, which can carry weapons, have
been "lost for various reasons" in accidents during training and combat
operations, according to Col. Tim Baxter, the Army's project manager for
unmanned aircraft systems.

The RQ-7 Shadow, the smaller reconnaissance model that crashed into the Hercules
cargo plane, has also been accident-prone. At least 38 percent of the Army's
fleet has been involved in a major accident, according to a Post analysis of
Army safety statistics.

Into mountains, into the sea

The accident investigation reports describe a profusion of emergencies in which
drones swerved so far out of control that crews had to resort to extreme
measures to prevent catastrophes.

On six occasions between 2006 and 2012, records show, pilots intentionally flew
straight into the side of a mountain after their aircraft's engines began to
fail.

Under military guidelines, it was considered safer to ram a remote peak on
purpose than to risk a drone falling on someone during a Hail Mary landing
attempt at an airfield.

"He smashed it to smithereens," an Air Force mission supervisor reported
approvingly after a pilot struggling with a broken propeller motor commanded his
Predator to strike a mountain in eastern Afghanistan on Oct. 26, 2012.

In several other cases, drones simply disappeared and were never found.

The nighttime skies were clear, with little wind, on July 10, 2011, when crew
members who had been flying an armed Predator at an altitude of 16,500 feet over
eastern Afghanistan saw their screens go blank. The satellite links had gone
down. Despite hours of searching, nobody could find the plane on radar. An
airborne search also proved fruitless.

Large drones are equipped with transponders to broadcast their locations. If
they lose all electrical power, the transponders do not work; most models do not
carry battery-powered backup systems, because of the extra weight.

Such was the fate of an armed Predator that disappeared 20 minutes after taking
off from Kandahar air base on Nov. 20, 2009. Searchers looked for two days but
found no trace and declared it lost.

Five weeks later, troops stumbled across the wreckage, crumpled in the dirt
seven miles from the base. Investigators determined the crash was a caused by a
"catastrophic electrical failure" triggered by a short-circuited alternator
cable.

Lightning, high winds and icing can be especially lethal for drones.

On Dec. 13, 2012, a Navy helicopter drone was trying to land on the USS Robert
G. Bradley, a guided-missile frigate, off the coast of Libya when the tail rotor
shattered just 15 feet above the flight deck.

Witnesses saw a two-foot chunk of ice fall off the tail; investigators concluded
that icy conditions were to blame. Luckily for the crew, the drone, an MQ-8B
Fire Scout, veered into the sea at the last second, narrowly missing the ship.

Lost links

Drones depend on wireless links for navigation and control. Pilots and camera
operators issue directions to the drone by a command link, usually by satellite.
Data about the aircraft's movements and internal operations returns via a
separate link.

The links can be easily interrupted by various forms of interference. Usually,
the outages last only a few seconds and are harmless. Just in case, drones are
programmed to fly in a circular pattern until the links are restored. In
worst-case scenarios, they are supposed to return automatically to their launch
base.

Records show that does not always happen. In more than a quarter of the
accidents examined by The Post, links were lost around the time of the crash.

Several pilots told investigators that they were so accustomed to lost links
that they tended not to get nervous unless the disruptions lasted for more than
a few minutes.

"I'd say after the three- or five-minute period, you sort of get the feeling
that the plane just stopped talking to us and we may not recover this one," a
Predator pilot testified after an April 20, 2009, crash in Afghanistan.

Less than a month later, five hours into a reconnaissance mission over
Afghanistan, a Predator lost its links and vanished in midair. Investigators
never found the wreckage and were unable to determine a cause; the weather was
clear, and there were no signs of mechanical problems or errors by the crew.

Satellite connections can be lost when a drone banks too sharply or drops in
altitude too quickly. Electrical problems on the ground can also disrupt links.

On July 21, 2008, chaos erupted inside an Air Force ground-control station where
crew members were flying three Predators simultaneously over Afghanistan. The
station lost its power supply, and all its screens went black.

After several minutes, power was restored and pilots regained control over two
of the Predators that had followed their programmed flight patterns and were
flying in circles.

The third disappeared.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


