                             1005 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 29, 2014 Wednesday 8:14 PM EST

Studio Theatre to replace 'Beats' with 'Grounded'

BYLINE: Rebecca Ritzel

SECTION: Style; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 1178 words


As bait-and-switches go, Studio Theatre is offering D.C. theater patrons a
pretty honest deal. The theater announced Tuesday that because of scheduling
conflicts, it will not be bringing the big hit of the 2012 Edinburgh Festival
Fringe to Washington in June. Instead, Studio has booked the big hit of the 2013
Edinburgh Festival Fringe.

"This is theatre's answer to 'Zero Dark Thirty,' " said Britain's Independent
newspaper in its rave review of Studio's replacement play. That's high praise,
especially given that "Grounded" is a 21 / 2-year-old show by a little-known
Ohio-based playwright that took off once it received attention overseas. The
production coming to Studio will be the same that appeared at the festival and
transferred to London's Gate Theatre. Lucy Ellinson, a 30-something British
actress, director and activist, will continue to star as a former fighter pilot
who joins a drone technician team after she becomes pregnant.

George Brant's play will replace "Beats," Kieran Hurley's one-man show about
coming of age at '90s disco raves. David Muse, Studio Theatre's artistic
director, said Hurley asked to pull out of his summer engagement in Washington
after being offered a commission from the National Theatre of Scotland. Muse
says Studio is still looking to bring "Beats" to Washington, possibly for the
2014-15 season.

Muse says he's pleased that the opening will allow Studio to jump on a play that
is so hot right now. "Grounded" is running off-Broadway at Walkerspace in
Manhattan and was the subject of a New York Times feature Sunday. The Studio
production is one of at least three others planned in United States this season,
but before the Edinburgh festival run, the most visible stagings of "Grounded"
were readings at small Midwestern theaters.

"This is play that bubbled up, rather than coming from the top down," Muse said.
"Usually you hear about shows after a big run in New York. This one started
smaller."

Brant, 44, wrote "Grounded" in 2011,  and the play received a series of readings
in 2012, including one directed by his wife, Laura Kepley, who is the artistic
director of the Cleveland Play House. Another was at Baltimore's Theatre
Project, with Georgetown University's Derek Goldman directing and
Washington-based actress Kimberly Gilbert in the role of the fighter pilot.
Goldman said he is in discussions to direct the show next season at Baltimore's
Everyman Theatre.

But as of June, this American play will receive its first full Washington
staging designed and performed entirely by Brits. "Grounded" will be the final
show in what Studio is calling its "British Invasion" series, featuring
contemporary plays from the U.K. Muse said importing the Gate Theatre's
production isn't a snub to local talent; he simply saw the show at Edinburgh and
couldn't imagine a better production.

"We could have chosen to produce the play ourselves," he said. "But they've just
figured out such a smooth way to stage it. After I've seen that, I don't want to
try to do it."

Both "Beats" and "Grounded" reflect a similar budget line for Studio, Muse said,
and the British Council, an arm of the British government that supports cultural
exchange, has come on board as a funder for "Grounded." This follows a string of
Studio projects that have received international support, including 2011's
"Penelope" (Ireland) and last year's "Baby Universe" (Norway).

"Grounded" will be a much more politically charged play than an updated myth or
a Scandinavian puppet show. Studio will capitalize on that by planning post-show
conversations on the topics of drone warfare, U.S. unmanned-aircraft policy and
mental health in the armed services.

"It is much more about what it means psychologically, and about what it means
for a soldier to go through that experience, than it is a political play," Muse
said.

Synetic's focus on development

When Muse              became Studio's artistic director in 2010, there was a
changing of the guard not only at the top but farther down the line in the
theater's leadership. Since 1987, Morey Epstein had played a role at the theater
informally described as former artistic director "Joy Zinoman's right-hand man."
In actuality, Zinoman gave Epstein a series of titles, starting with "marketing
assistant" and ending with "executive director of institutional development."

In December, he joined the staff of Synetic Theater as director of development.
Epstein is the fourth person to hold the job in theater's 10-year history, but
he's the first with serious experience in Washington philanthropy. His goal is
not to help Synetic beg for money, but to attract investors by doing a better
job of communicating its needs. The company, which specializes in Eastern
European movement theater, is helmed by Paata and Irina Tsikurishvili, emigres
from the former Soviet republic of Georgia.

"Philanthropy is not a matter of getting people to do things but giving them the
opportunity to do want they want to do," Epstein said. "You have to have a
conversation along the lines of, 'What do you need in order to make things
happen?' . . . Synetic has a core group of supporters, it is just a matter of
expanding that . . . and communicating what the needs are."

For example, Synetic would like to take more of its productions into schools.
The company's rough-and-tumble fight scenes and rowdy dance numbers appeal to
tweens and teens, and the literary bases for the shows - usually Shakespeare or
classics such as "The Three Musketeers" - should appeal to English teachers. But
the company's $1.5 million operating budget needs more targeted donations and
grant money before it can put on more school assemblies.

Signature rewards loyalty

Working as an arts administrator can be exhausting, which is why Signature
Theatre's executive director, Maggie Boland, was happy to spend a recent
relaxing afternoon with theatergoers who have been enjoying the company's shows
for 24 years instead of schmoozing with corporate donors or filling out grant
applications.

In honor of Signature's upcoming 25th anniversary season, the theater held a
luncheon Jan. 15 to honor the 13 people who have subscribed to the company's
previous 24 seasons. Over food from Carmines and homemade cupcakes, Artistic
Director Eric Schaeffer told his guests they'd all be receiving free
subscriptions for 2014-15.

"These are the folks who, 24 years ago, signed up for three plays with this
unknown company," Boland said.

The 13 subscribers include three women who knew Schaeffer when he was a director
at a community theater in Arlington and one man who now frequently stops by
Shirlington to deliver baked goods to the box-office staff members. In early
January, he stopped in to drop off bread and insisted on filling out his renewal
form, which the theater didn't process.

"There are so many reasons in the world to be cynical, and then you go to a
lunch like this, and we just wanted to stay for hours talking with these
people," Boland said. "It was just so lovely."

style@washpost.com

Ritzel is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


