                             1098 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 29, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Vaccine Aide Gunned Down In Pakistan

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 338 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- A health worker supervising a polio vaccination campaign
was fatally shot and two others were wounded on Saturday when gunmen opened fire
at a hospital in northwestern Pakistan, officials said.

No one immediately took responsibility for the killing, but the Taliban, which
accuses the United States of using a drive to eradicate polio in the country as
a cover for spying, has threatened the lives of health workers who immunize
children.

Pakistani officials said two gunmen riding a motorbike had opened fire at a
government hospital in Matni, a suburb of Peshawar, the provincial capital of
the restive Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province. Zahid Gul, who was overseeing the
vaccination campaign, was killed and another man and a woman were wounded in the
attack. The gunmen fled.

Saturday's episode was a particular setback to the former cricket star and
current opposition leader Imran Khan, whose political party controls
Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa.

Mr. Khan this month condemned the attacks on health workers taking part in
vaccination efforts. He said that he would personally lead the anti-polio drive
and warned that the country risked being quarantined internationally if the
attacks continued. Pakistan is one of only a few countries where the polio virus
is still rampant.

Mr. Khan has supported peace talks with Taliban militants and opposes the
Pakistani military's operations against them in the semiautonomous tribal
regions adjoining Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province. He also vehemently opposes drone
strikes by the United States Central Intelligence Agency and says civilian
casualties from the missile strikes fuel more militancy, instead of curbing it.

The Taliban's resistance to polio vaccination hardened after the raid in May
2011 on Osama bin Laden's compound in northern Pakistan, as revelations surfaced
that the C.I.A. had used a Pakistani doctor, Shakil Afridi, to run a vaccination
campaign that aided efforts to locate Bin Laden.

Since then, the Taliban has repeatedly targeted the vaccination campaign.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/29/world/asia/vaccine-worker-killed-in-pakistan-a
mid-taliban-hostility.html

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


