                             1034 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

States Take On Privacy

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 482 words


Tired of waiting for Congress to pass comprehensive privacy legislation, state
lawmakers are taking matters into their own hands, and not a moment too soon.
Legislatures across the country have enacted laws to regulate the kinds of
information that companies and law enforcement agencies can collect about
individuals and how it can be done.

Businesses ranging from social networking services to little-known data brokers
collect all kinds of information about consumers, often without their knowledge
or permission. The data includes basic details like what websites people visit,
what they purchase online and in retail stores and whom they interact with. The
information is most commonly used to help businesses deliver targeted ads, but
it can also be amassed into detailed profiles for purchase by anybody, including
potential employers.

In Washington, lobbyists from technology, marketing and related industries have
effectively put the brakes on privacy protection legislation. Lawmakers have
done nothing to advance a consumer privacy bill of rights that President Obama
proposed in 2012, which would have allowed consumers to restrict the data
collected and required businesses to give individuals access to files about
them. And despite the Federal Trade Commission's support for a ''do-not track''
option on Internet browsers that could prevent advertisers from monitoring
consumers online, it has not been implemented.

This is why more than 10 states have passed more than two dozen state privacy
laws just this year, as reported in The Times by Somini Sengupta. Texas passed a
bill that would force police to get a warrant to look at emails -- a similar
federal bill was approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee in April but has not
come to a vote in the Senate. California made it illegal to publish the nude
pictures of someone online without his or her consent. Other states have
restricted the use of drones for surveillance.

Industry officials complain that these state efforts are creating a patchwork of
rules that will be hard for companies to satisfy, in part because it's not easy
to tailor websites to comply with state-specific rules that might even
contradict one another in some cases.

Some of the laws might be hard to carry out, but if that turns out to be the
case, the technology and advertising industries have only themselves to blame.
By stalling legislation in Congress, they have essentially invited state
lawmakers to take up the cause of consumers, who are increasingly worried about
privacy. The response of businesses to this trend has been to increase lobbying
in state capitols to kill or water down privacy bills.

If these industries are actually interested in uniform rules for the entire
country, here is a suggestion: Stop obstructing legislation in Washington, and
sit down with lawmakers and consumer advocates to come up with effective federal
laws.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/opinion/sunday/states-take-on-privacy.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


