                             1082 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Great War's Ominous Echoes

BYLINE: By MARGARET MacMILLAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 2278 words


Oxford, England -- Earlier this year, I was on holiday in Corsica and wandered
into the church of a tiny hamlet in the hills where I found a memorial to the
dead from World War I. Out of a population that can have been no more than 150,
eight young men, bearing among them only three last names, had died in that
conflict. Such lists can be found all over Europe, in great cities and in small
villages. Similar memorials are spread around the globe, for the Great War, as
it was known before 1940, also drew soldiers from Asia, Africa and North
America.

World War I still haunts us, partly because of the sheer scale of the carnage --
10 million combatants killed and many more wounded. Countless civilians lost
their lives, too, whether through military action, starvation or disease. Whole
empires were destroyed and societies brutalized.

But there's another reason the war continues to haunt us: we still cannot agree
on why it happened. Was it caused by the overweening ambitions of some of the
men in power at the time? Kaiser Wilhelm II and his ministers, for example,
wanted a greater Germany with a global reach, so they challenged the naval
supremacy of Britain. Or does the explanation lie in competing ideologies?
National rivalries? Or in the sheer and seemingly unstoppable momentum of
militarism? As an arms race accelerated, generals and admirals made plans that
became ever more aggressive as well as rigid. Did that make an explosion
inevitable?

Or would it never have happened had a random event in an Austro-Hungarian
backwater not lit the fuse? In the second year of the conflagration that
engulfed most of Europe, a bitter joke made the rounds: ''Have you seen today's
headline? 'Archduke Found Alive: War a Mistake.''' That is the most dispiriting
explanation of all -- that the war was simply a blunder that could have been
avoided.

The search for explanations began almost as soon as the guns opened fire in the
summer of 1914 and has never stopped. The approaching centenary should make us
reflect anew on our vulnerability to human error, sudden catastrophes, and sheer
accident. History, in the saying attributed to Mark Twain, never repeats itself
but it rhymes. We have good reason to glance over our shoulders even as we look
ahead. If we cannot determine how one of the most momentous conflicts in history
happened, how can we hope to avoid another such catastrophe in the future?

Though the era just before World War I, with its gas lighting and its
horse-drawn carriages, seems very far-off, it is similar to ours -- often
unsettlingly so -- in many ways. Globalization -- which we tend to think of as a
modern phenomenon, created by the spread of international businesses and
investment, the growth of the Internet, and the widespread migration of peoples
-- was also characteristic of that era. Even remote parts of the world were
being linked by new means of transportation, from railways to steamships, and
communication, including the telephone, telegraph and wireless.

The decades leading up to 1914 were, as now, a period of dramatic shifts and
upheavals, which those who experienced them thought of as unprecedented in speed
and scale. New fields of commerce and manufacture were opening up, such as the
rapidly expanding chemical and electrical industries. Einstein was developing
his general theory of relativity; radical new ideas like psychoanalysis were
finding a following; and the roots of the predatory ideologies of fascism and
Soviet Communism were taking hold.

Globalization can have the paradoxical effect of fostering intense localism and
nativism, frightening people into taking refuge in small like-minded groups.
Globalization also makes possible the widespread transmission of radical
ideologies and the bringing together of fanatics who will stop at nothing in
their quest for the perfect society. In the period before World War I,
anarchists and revolutionary Socialists across Europe and North America read the
same works and had the same aim: to overthrow the existing social order. The
young Serbs who assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria at Sarajevo
were inspired by Nietzsche and Bakunin, just as their Russian and French
counterparts were.

Terrorists from Calcutta to Buffalo imitated one another as they hurled bombs
onto the floors of stock exchanges, blew up railway lines, and stabbed and shot
those they saw as oppressors, whether the Empress Elisabeth of Austria-Hungary
or the president of the United States, William McKinley. Today, new technologies
and social media platforms provide new rallying points for fanatics, enabling
them to spread their messages to even wider audiences around the globe.

With our ''war on terror,'' we run the same risk of overestimating the power of
a loose network of extremists, few in number. More dangerous may be our
miscalculations about the significance of changes in warfare. A hundred years
ago, most military planners and the civilian governments who watched from the
sidelines got the nature of the coming war catastrophically wrong.

The great advances of Europe's science and technology and the increasing output
of its factories during its long period of peace had made going on the attack
much more costly in casualties. The killing zone -- the area that advancing
soldiers had to cross in the face of deadly enemy fire -- had expanded hugely,
from 100 yards in the Napoleonic wars to over 1,000 yards by 1914. The rifles
and machine guns they faced were firing faster and more accurately, and the
artillery shells contained more devastating explosives. Soldiers attacking, no
matter how brave, would suffer horrific losses, while defenders sat in the
relative security of their trenches, behind sandbags and barbed wire.

A comparable mistake in our own time is the assumption that because of our
advanced technology, we can deliver quick, focused and overpowering military
actions -- ''surgical strikes'' with drones and cruise missiles, ''shock and
awe'' by carpet bombing and armored divisions -- resulting in conflicts that
will be short and limited in their impact, and victories that will be decisive.
Increasingly, we are seeing asymmetrical wars between well-armed, organized
forces on one side and low-level insurgencies on the other, which can spread
across not just a region but a continent, or even the globe. Yet we are not
seeing clear outcomes, partly because there is not one enemy but a shifting
coalition of local warlords, religious warriors and other interested parties.

Think of Afghanistan or Syria, where local and international players are mingled
and what constitutes victory is difficult to define. In such wars, those
ordering military action must consider not just the combatants on the ground but
the elusive yet critical factor of public opinion. Thanks to social media, every
airstrike, artillery shell and cloud of poison gas that hits civilian targets is
now filmed and tweeted around the world.

Globalization can heighten rivalries and fears between countries that one might
otherwise expect to be friends. On the eve of World War I, Britain, the world's
greatest naval power, and Germany, the world's greatest land power, were each
other's largest trading partners. British children played with toys, including
lead soldiers, made in Germany, and the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden
resounded with the voices of German singers performing German operas. But all
that did not translate into friendship.

Quite the contrary. With Germany cutting into Britain's traditional markets and
vying with it for colonies and power, the British felt threatened. As early as
1896, a best-selling British pamphlet, ''Made in Germany,'' painted an ominous
picture: ''A gigantic commercial State is arising to menace our prosperity, and
contend with us for the trade of the world.'' Many Germans held reciprocal
views. When Kaiser Wilhelm and his naval secretary Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz
built a deepwater navy to challenge British naval supremacy, the unease in
Britain about Germany's growing commercial and military power turned into
something close to panic.

It is tempting -- and sobering -- to compare today's relationship between China
and America to that between Germany and England a century ago. Lulling ourselves
into a false sense of safety, we say that countries that have McDonald's will
never fight one another. Yet the extraordinary growth in trade and investment
between China and the United States since the 1980s has not served to allay
mutual suspicions. At a time when the two countries are competing for markets,
resources and influence from the Caribbean to Central Asia, China has become
increasingly ready to translate its economic strength into military power.

Increased Chinese military spending and the buildup of its naval capacity
suggest to many American strategists that China intends to challenge the United
States as a Pacific power, and we are now seeing an arms race between the
countries in that region. The Wall Street Journal has published authoritative
reports that the Pentagon is preparing war plans against China -- just in case.

Before 1914, the great powers talked of their honor. Today, Secretary of State
John Kerry refers to America's credibility or prestige. It amounts to much the
same thing.

Once lines are drawn between nations, reaching across them becomes difficult. In
the Europe of 1914, the growth of nationalist feeling -- encouraged from above
but rising from the grass roots where historians, linguists and folklorists were
busy creating stories of ancient and eternal enmities -- did much to cause ill
will among nations who might otherwise have been friends. What Freud called the
''narcissism of small differences'' can lead to violence and death -- a danger
amplified if the greater powers choose to intervene as protectors of groups
outside their own borders who share a religious or ethnic identity with them.
Here, too, we can see ominous parallels between present and past.

Before World War I, Serbia financed and armed Serbs within the Austrian Empire,
while both Russia and Austria stirred up the peoples along each other's borders.
In our time, Saudi Arabia backs Sunnis, and Sunni-majority states, around the
world, while Iran has made itself the protector of Shiites, funding radical
movements such as Hezbollah. The Middle East today bears a worrying resemblance
to the Balkans then. A similar mix of toxic nationalisms threatens to draw in
outside powers as the United States, Turkey, Russia and Iran all look to protect
their interests and their clients. We must hope that Russia will have more
control over the Damascus government to compel it to the negotiating table than
it had over Serbia in 1914.

Like our predecessors a century ago, we assume that all-out war is something we
no longer do. The French Socialist leader Jean Jaurès, a man of great wisdom who
tried unsuccessfully to stanch the rise of militarism in the early years of the
20th century, understood this well. ''Europe has been afflicted by so many
crises for so many years,'' he said on the eve of World War I, and ''it has been
put dangerously to the test so many times without war breaking out, that it has
almost ceased to believe in the threat and is watching the further development
of the interminable Balkan conflict with decreased attention and reduced
disquiet.''

With different leadership, World War I might have been avoided. Europe in 1914
needed a Bismarck or a Churchill with the strength of character to stand up to
pressure and the capacity to see the larger strategic picture. Instead, the key
powers had weak, divided or distracted leaders. Today, America's president faces
a series of politicians in China who, like those in Germany a century ago, are
deeply concerned that their nation be taken seriously. In Vladimir V. Putin,
President Obama must deal with a Russian nationalist who is both wilier and
stronger than the unfortunate Czar Nicholas II.

Mr. Obama, like Woodrow Wilson, is a great orator, capable of laying out his
vision of the world and inspiring Americans. But like Wilson at the end of the
1914-18 war, Mr. Obama is dealing with a partisan and uncooperative Congress.
Perhaps even more worrying, he may be in a position similar to that of the
British prime minister in 1914, Herbert Asquith -- presiding over a country so
divided internally that it is unwilling or unable to play an active and
constructive role in the world.

The United States on the eve of 2014 is still the world's strongest power, but
it is not as powerful as it once was. It has suffered military setbacks in Iraq
and Afghanistan, and has had difficulty finding allies that will stand by it, as
the Syrian crisis demonstrates. Uncomfortably aware that they have few reliable
friends and many potential enemies, the Americans are now considering a return
to a more isolationist policy. Is America reaching the end of its tether, as
Britain did before it?

It may take a moment of real danger to force the major powers of this new world
order to come together in coalitions able and willing to act. Instead of
muddling along from one crisis to another, now is the time to think again about
those dreadful lessons of a century ago -- in the hope that our leaders, with
our encouragement, will think about how they can work together to build a stable
international order.

Margaret MacMillan is warden of St. Antony's College, Oxford, and the author,
most recently, of ''The War That Ended Peace: The Road to 1914.'' This article
is adapted from The Brookings Essay, a series published by the Brookings
Institution.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/14/opinion/macmillan-the-great-wars-ominous-echoe
s.html

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


