                             108 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 29, 2014 Friday 12:20 AM EST

Google reveals its delivery drone ambitions with 'Project Wing';
The company has been looking into developing a delivery service for two years,
but only began tests of the self-flying vehicles in mid-August.

BYLINE: Hayley Tsukayama

LENGTH: 449 words


Google on Thursday announced that it has been testing a small fleet of drones in
the Australian outback, looking into ways to use self-flying robots to deliver
goods. The drones, in development by Google's "moonshot" laboratory Google X, is
called Project Wing. The company has been looking into developing a delivery
service for two years but only began tests of the self-flying vehicles in
mid-August.

The drones fly between a range of approximately 130-195 feet -- far above houses
and the standard tree line, the company said. So far, the company says that it's
run more than 30 successful delivery flights, carrying items such as a first aid
kit, water bottle and cattle vaccine to Australian farmers. One flight, the
company said, was about 1 km (.62 miles) away.

"We're now back in California reviewing what we've learned from the tests and
preparing our next set of adventures," the company said in a press statement.
Google expects it will take years to develop a full service to deliver goods,
but it said in press materials that the final drones will fly programmed routes
and have software that can deal with unscheduled obstacles such as a strong gust
of wind.

The company said that it sees a lot of potential in drones that can deliver
goods quickly, and with little intervention from humans.

"When you can get something near-instantly, it changes how you think about it,"
Google said in press materials. "Think of the mom stuck at home with two sick
kids, the hiker who's met a poisonous snake, or the farmer out in the field with
a sick animal. It could also open up new models for sharing goods rather than
owning them - who needs a power drill for more than eight minutes a year?"

Google, of course, is not the only company to study how drone use could change
the future of its business. Most notably, Amazon chief executive Jeffrey P.
Bezos, who owns The Washington Post, unveiled his company's secret drone project
last December in an episode of 60 Minutes. Facebook has also revealed plans to
work with drones to help provide Internet service to rural areas that may not
have the infrastructure for fast connections. Even Disney has looked into drone
use, filing a patent last week that showed plans for massive drone-controlled
puppets-- though there's not any indication that we'll see those in parks any
time soon.

Any company looking into drones does face a major hurdle in the United States,
however. The Federal Aviation Administration is still working on rules for
commercial drone use. According to a report from my Post colleague Craig
Whitlock, the agency is expected to miss its Sept. 2015 deadline to lay down
those rules due to "technical and regulatory obstacles."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


