                             1073 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 5, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Cites Urgency in Reaching Pact Between U.S. and Afghanistan

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN; Haris Kakar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 886 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- International officials signaled new urgency on Wednesday
for the United States and Afghanistan to reach an agreement on a long-term
security deal, but officials suggested that there had been little movement on
either side of the deadlock.

Coming out of a meeting with NATO foreign ministers in Brussels that included
Afghanistan's foreign and interior ministers, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, the
alliance's secretary general, said there had been no progress on signing the
bilateral security deal.

''The ministers didn't indicate anything as regards time lines as far as the
bilateral security agreement is concerned,'' he said, referring to Interior
Minister Umar Daudzai and Foreign Minister Muqbil Osmani.

Adding that ''time is of the essence,'' Mr. Rasmussen underscored that without a
deal finalized with the United States, NATO would not be able to conclude its
own post-2014 security agreement with Afghanistan on behalf of its member
states.

If neither the American-Afghan security agreement nor the NATO status of forces
agreement are in place, it will be difficult to persuade European parliaments to
continue to pour in military and civilian aid, international officials said.

''Many provisions in those agreements will be the same, so if there is no
signature on the bilateral security agreement, we can't finalize a NATO status
of forces agreement,'' Mr. Rasmussen said.

The unfolding drama from Washington to Brussels to Kabul was a reminder that it
is not just the Americans who have soldiers and money at stake.

NATO countries have about 27,000 troops in Afghanistan. While much of what they
do is logistics, training and support, the United States is counting on the
countries to contribute several thousand troops to help with training the Afghan
security forces after the NATO combat mission ends in 2014.

President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan threw that post-2014 plan into doubt
recently when he indicated that he was not ready to sign the security agreement
that had been negotiated with senior American officials and instead demanded
additional commitments. American officials said a deal would have to be signed
by the year's end to make a long-term military presence possible, but Mr. Karzai
said he wanted to wait until after the Afghan presidential election in April.

Despite criticism from many within his government, some of it offered publicly,
Mr. Karzai has not backed down, and in the last few days the language on both
sides has toughened.

While some officials said it might not be necessary that the deal be signed
within the month, many close to the negotiations believe that President Obama
will need to make a decision about whether troops are going to stay on Afghan
soil before he delivers the State of the Union address in January.

''He can't go before the Congress and say he's waiting for Mr. Karzai to make up
his mind,'' said one Western diplomat here.

At the same time, Mr. Kerry's seemingly offhand comment on Tuesday in Brussels
that perhaps some other Afghan official could sign the security agreement if Mr.
Karzai would not has raised hackles in Kabul.

The president's spokesman, Aimal Faizi, said that Mr. Karzai wanted the
bilateral security agreement, but only if his demands were met for the United
States to stop all raids -- whether by commandos or drones -- on Afghan homes
and help the government take steps toward a peace deal with the Taliban. If the
agreement were to be signed, Mr. Faizi said, it would only be with Mr. Karzai's
direct authorization.

''We are certain that the U.S. can meet our conditions in practical terms within
days or weeks,'' Mr. Faizi said.

But, he added, ''As long as these demands are not accepted, Mr. Karzai will not
authorize any minister to sign it.''

Many Afghan officials have been publicly critical of Mr. Karzai's stance. The
most notable voices of support for Mr. Karzai, meanwhile, have come from two
militant groups that in the past were sworn to overthrowing him: the Taliban and
Hezb-i-Islami.

In a statement released this week, the Taliban, for the first time in recent
memory, refrained from describing Mr. Karzai as an American puppet and instead
called him ''the Kabul administration's leader.'' They urged him to continue to
refuse to sign the pact and ''save himself and the nation from this historic
shame.''

Hezb-i-Islami responded to questions from The New York Times by saying through
its spokesman in Pakistan that the group was against the deal and that it had
delivered a letter to the presidential palace urging Mr. Karzai not to sign it.

''It means making Afghanistan into a slave if the deal is sealed,'' said Haroon
Zarghon, the spokesman. ''We strongly oppose this agreement. We can't accept
it.''

''We won't give up fighting if even one U.S. soldier stays here,'' Mr. Zarghon
said. ''We can't tolerate it.'' He added that the letter, from the group's
leader, the warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, warned Mr. Karzai that if he did sign
the deal, ''he will be marked as the second Shah Shuja in Afghan history.''

Shah Shuja was a puppet ruler installed by the British in 1839, precipitating
the First Anglo-Afghan War. He was deposed and assassinated three years later --
a bit of historical resonance that many people here believe haunts Mr. Karzai
and has made him wary of striking deals with the Americans.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/05/world/asia/time-is-of-the-essence-nato-head-sa
ys-urging-afghanistan-deal.html

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Anders Fogh Rasmussen, NATO's leader, said a delay in an
American deal would affect the alliance's security pact. (POOL PHOTO BY VIRGINIA
MAYO)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


