                             1064 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 29, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

They're Already Boxed, Now Just Wrap

BYLINE: By JON PARELES, NATE CHINEN, BEN RATLIFF and JON CARAMANICA

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 5014 words


DEEP catalog keeps getting deeper in the annual outpouring of boxed sets. The
latest collections are less likely to be anthologies of hits -- that's been done
-- than plunges into the archives. Superstars are represented by alternate
versions, outtakes, live tracks, remixes and official versions of
long-bootlegged material. Unknowns, meanwhile, get a new hearing, as compilers
and collectors work through the holdings of ever more obscure labels and
producers. Annotators, for their part, piece together stories, and art directors
enjoy creating packages larger than a CD case. Here, the critics of The New York
Times delve into the year's notable boxed sets. Prices may vary, depending on
where the purchase is made.

THE BAND: 'LIVE AT THE ACADEMY OF MUSIC 1971' The Band's 1972 live album, ''Rock
of Ages,'' was recorded on the last four nights of 1971 at the Academy of Music
in New York, when the group teamed up with a horn section arranged by Allen
Toussaint. The Band was absolutely in its prime, with Robbie Robertson's guitar
making every solo sting, and the horns punching up its R&B side. An expanded
reissue in 2001 added, among other songs, the group's four encores with Bob
Dylan from New Year's Eve. Now there's more: a new, polished Bob Clearmountain
mix of the expanded ''Rock of Ages'' tracks in the two-disc version and, in the
deluxe box, pricey extras for die-hard fans: the complete New Year's Eve concert
(repeating 11 songs, in less spacious so-called soundboard mixes, from the other
discs) and a DVD with 5.1 surround mixes of the ''Rock of Ages'' set (though
audiophiles would prefer even higher resolution) and two live film clips from
Dec. 30. (Capitol, two CDs, $19.99; four CDs, one DVD, 48-page hardbound book,
$109.99.) JON PARELES

THE BEACH BOYS: 'MADE IN CALIFORNIA' The Beach Boys have traced a long arc over
a five-decade career: high school California pop exuberance, psychedelic
innovation and introspection, craftsmanlike persistence and nostalgia.
Originally planned for the Beach Boys' 50th anniversary in 2012, but delayed,
this boxed set surrounds the hits -- often, for variety, in recent stereo mixes
or old mono versions -- with material for collectors, notably the
long-bootlegged Dennis Wilson song ''(Wouldn't It Be Nice to) Live Again.'' It
also culls from the sprawling ''Smile Sessions'' set and includes live
recordings of unusual concert material like ''Friends'' and ''Little Bird.'' The
rarest rarities fill the sixth disc: Brian Wilson's solo recordings of
''California Feelin' '' and ''Surf's Up,'' instrumental backing tracks, youthful
1964 recordings from BBC studios.

For the many Beach Boys fans obsessed with the way the songs were assembled,
this set offers plenty of fascinating nuggets. More casual listeners should be
impressed, in the many tracks of unaccompanied or fully exposed vocals, at how
precisely the Beach Boys harmonized in the decades before pitch correction.
(Capitol, six CDs, $149.99.) JON PARELES

ERIC CLAPTON: 'GIVE ME STRENGTH: THE '74/'75 RECORDINGS,' 'MTV UNPLUGGED (DELUXE
EDITION)' Each of these reissues captures a key moment of rejuvenation for Eric
Clapton, the first chronicling his post-heroin emergence as a viable solo
artist, and the second padding out the blockbuster that warded off midcareer
obsolescence. ''Give Me Strength'' is the more instructive collection,
encompassing a pair of studio albums (''461 Ocean Boulevard'' and its shakier
follow-up, ''There's One in Every Crowd''); an acclaimed live album (''E.C. Was
Here''); and a small assortment of outtakes and previously unreleased live
tracks. A Blu-ray disc has surround sound and quadraphonic mixes of the studio
albums, but the greater trove is the expanded live material that puts Mr.
Clapton's guitar playing squarely in the spotlight.

But note, too, how ''Lonesome Road Blues (Walkin' Down the Road)'' -- a castoff
from the sessions for ''461 Ocean Boulevard'' -- points toward the laid-back
acoustic sound of ''MTV Unplugged.'' That 1992 album, which won six Grammy
Awards and has sold more than 10 million copies, is best remembered for
introducing ''Tears in Heaven,'' which Mr. Clapton wrote after the tragic death
of his young son. ''MTV Unplugged (Deluxe Edition)'' includes the album, a DVD
of the concert broadcast (with rehearsal footage), and a few tracks that didn't
make the cut -- but nothing you didn't already know. (''Give Me Strength,''
Universal, five CDs, one Blu-ray disc, $69.92. ''Unplugged (Deluxe Edition),''
Reprise, one CD, one DVD, $24.98.) NATE CHINEN

'COOLER THAN ICE: ARCTIC RECORDS AND THE RISE OF PHILLY SOUL' The talent pool
for the independent Philadelphia soul label Arctic Records in the 1960s included
Kenny Gamble, Daryl Hall, Harold Melvin & the Blue Notes, and Barbara Mason,
whose 1965 ''Yes, I'm Ready'' was the label's big pop hit. Arctic didn't have
many of those, but a majority of the singles it released -- presented in
numerical order in this boxed set, most with both A and B sides -- have
craftsmanship and spirit. Arctic's producers and songwriters were very clearly
looking toward Motown or, far less often, to Stax.

But their knockoffs were spiffy -- not just the perpetually devoted Ms. Mason,
but more obscure figures like Dee Dee Barnes, Kenny Hamber and a high-octane
gospel singer, Mary De Loach. And in songs from Mr. Gamble and Honey & the Bees,
there are harbingers of the close-harmony Philly soul of the 1970s.
(Jamie/Guyden, six CDs, six 45-r.p.m. singles, $149.98.) JON PARELES

BOB DYLAN: 'THE BOOTLEG SERIES, VOL. 10: ANOTHER SELF PORTRAIT' Bob Dylan
released ''Self Portrait'' in 1970 in a petulant moment, determined to puncture
the overweening expectations that had come to plague him. It was a perverse
hodgepodge: mostly cover versions gooped up with strings and backup vocals,
along with a few live tracks from his 1969 Isle of Wight Festival performance
with the Band, his first concert since 1966. ''Another Self Portrait'' has
second thoughts; it brings to light some intriguing tidbits, but no revelations.
It strips the sweetening from some ''Self Portrait'' tracks, revealing
wholehearted vocals, and it gathers other recordings from 1969 to '71: alternate
takes from ''Nashville Skyline'' (sounding fairly similar); alternate versions
from ''New Morning'' (generally quite different, including two introspective
takes on ''Went to See the Gypsy''); and traditional songs left off ''Self
Portrait'' (including a hair-raising ''House Carpenter'' and a crooned ''Pretty
Saro''). ''Another Self Portrait'' hints that before ''Self Portrait'' curdled,
it could have been Mr. Dylan's reflections on his contemporaries and on the
Tennessee of Appalachia, Nashville country and Elvis Presley (whom he mimics at
times). The more expensive packages include a remastered ''Self Portrait'' and,
in its priciest version, a rowdy gem that deserves a separate release: the full
Isle of Wight set. (Columbia, two CDs, $19.99; three LPs and two CDs, $89.99;
four CDs and two hardcover books, $119.99.) JON PARELES

GRATEFUL DEAD: 'SUNSHINE DAYDREAM' If you know the Grateful Dead's live
recordings more than a little bit, you will know about Veneta, Oregon, 8/27/72.
(In a New York Times reader poll a few years ago, it came in as the group's
third-greatest concert.) Played on the grounds of the Oregon Country Fair, the
gig was a benefit for the nearby Springfield Creamery, owned by Ken Kesey's
brother Chuck. You may also have watched, in some form of bootlegged,
poor-quality video transfer, parts of ''Sunshine Daydream,'' a film made about
the concert: footage of the stage being built out of logs; water supply problems
in tremendous summer heat; and many, many naked celebrants. The cleaned-up
recording as well as the fully remastered and re-edited film were both finally
issued this year as one boxed set, and it's tempting to say that this is all you
need to know about the group: Americanist avant-garde dance-band mysticism that,
over the course of a long day, goes way out and comes back in. Good price, too.
(Rhino, three CDs and one DVD, $32.99.) BEN RATLIFF

'ENJOY THE EXPERIENCE: HOMEMADE RECORDS 1958-1992' Nowadays, it's easy to make a
record at home and invite the world to listen. Five decades ago, the recording
and the distribution were tougher, but people still felt the urge to be heard.
The songs on ''Enjoy the Experience,'' an anthology of whimsical and sometimes
entertaining selections from private-press releases, are all over the place in
genre and quality, but the real gems come in the heavily annotated booklet, with
its stories of sister keyboard-competition winners, gospel trumpeters and
records made solely to sit in a warehouse as part of a tax scam. This album
serves as a companion piece to the book of the same title, which is full of even
taller tales. (Now-Again, two CDs, $15.04.) JON CARAMANICA

WOODY GUTHRIE: 'AMERICAN RADICAL PATRIOT' The first four discs of ''American
Radical Patriot'' tell a familiar story about Woody Guthrie: the singer as
empathetic chronicler and interpreter of the American folk tradition. They
comprise the complete Library of Congress recordings of Guthrie -- undertaken in
1940 by Alan Lomax -- and the songs are peppered with striking interviews.

But the remainder of this set is given over to a handful of quixotic collections
of songs, in essence commissions from the government Guthrie made a career of
agitating against. The songs inspired by the Bonneville Power Authority fit
cleanly into his catalog, but things begin to turn left with songs recorded in
support of the anti-fascist war effort: ''Whoopy Ti-Yi, Get Along, Mr. Hitler,''
anyone? Those are followed by what would from someone else be considered novelty
songs about venereal disease. So then: Woody Guthrie, American pragmatic
patriot, maybe? (Rounder, six CDs, one DVD and one 10-inch record, $89.49.) JON
CARAMANICA

DONNY HATHAWAY: 'NEVER MY LOVE -- THE ANTHOLOGY' ''Zyxygy Concerto,'' a
four-part, 20-minute suite for piano and orchestra recorded in 1973, is the
unexpected find on this collection. Somber, triumphal, shimmering and lushly
Romantic, it's a grand statement from a musician whose ambitions weren't
contained by the funk and R&B that made him a touchstone for the neo-soul
generation. The six albums Hathaway released from 1970 to '73 meld deep gospel
roots with classical training, jazz agility, social consciousness and an ardent,
supple, melisma-loving voice. But Hathaway suffered from mental illness and deep
insecurity; he released no new solo recordings after 1974, and only Roberta
Flack, with whom he had made a best-selling duet album, coaxed more duets from
him before he died, apparently of suicide, in 1979.

This anthology has a disc of unreleased tracks -- an expansive version of the
Association's hit ''Never My Love,'' extended instrumental workouts,
Motown-style songs from the late 1960s, instrumentals awaiting vocals -- along
with a live set from 1971 (culminating in 14 absorbing minutes of ''The
Ghetto'') and a disc of the Hathaway-Flack duets. A disc titled ''Favorites''
sidesteps previous anthologies by turning, often, to mono versions or radio
edits of his best-known songs. Hathaway's official recordings are still his best
introduction, but this collection underscores the loss. (Rhino, four CDs,
$49.99.) JON PARELES

LEE HAZLEWOOD: 'LEE HAZLEWOOD INDUSTRIES: THERE'S A DREAM I'VE BEEN SAVING,
1966-1971)' The producer, songwriter, singer and legendary eccentric Lee
Hazlewood parlayed his early hits -- notably ''These Boots Are Made for Walkin'
''-- into his own label, Lee Hazlewood Industries, which spent five profligate
years in search of a hit. It signed groups like the Kitchen Cinq, the Surprise
Package, the Aggregation and Honey Ltd., and recorded them with some of Los
Angeles's top musicians and arrangers. They wrapped elaborate productions around
what are now artifacts of wistfully orchestral and then, as of 1968, gleefully
fuzz-toned psychedelic pop. The label also continued Mr. Hazlewood's own
recording career of country-rooted, existentially downhearted, easy-listening
story-songs and duets with women including Ann-Margret, with whom he made an
album.

Two discs hold Mr. Hazlewood's own songs and duets; two more sample the label's
signings, including one song from its most significant group: Gram Parsons's
International Submarine Band. The DVD is his loose-limbed precursor to music
videos, ''Cowboy in Sweden.'' For dedicated novelty-seekers, the deluxe box
digitizes all of the label's releases onto DVDs -- except, alas, the
International Submarine Band. (Light in the Attic, four CDs, one DVD, 172-page
hardcover book, etc., $80; Deluxe four CDs, four DVDs, 172-page hardcover book,
$180.) JON PARELES

'HOUSTON RAP' ''Houston Rap,'' the book, is a handsome collection of photos by
Peter Beste and interviews by Lance Scott Walker that capture the city's hip-hop
history in full. But the deluxe bundle edition is where the goodies are -- an
additional book of interviews, a vinyl pressing of DJ Screw's album ''All
Screwed Up,'' a seven-inch single with DJ Screw remixing UGK on one side and Fat
Pat on the other, and most exciting, a DVD of ''Fat Pat: Ghetto Dreams,'' a
hard-to-come-by late-'90s document of the hip-hop scene on Houston's south side.
It showcases the candy-painted cars, the molasses-slow music and, ultimately,
the casualties: Fat Pat was shot dead in 1998, and, in 2000, DJ Screw died of a
codeine overdose. (Sinecure, two books, one LP, one seven-inch single and one
DVD, $150.) JON CARAMANICA

'I AM THE CENTER: PRIVATE ISSUE NEW AGE MUSIC IN AMERICA, 1950-1990' Among the
most spectacularly odd and transfixing historical anthologies in recent memory,
''I Am the Center'' collects widely in the too often neglected area of new age
music. This is soothing, sometimes disorienting music, from the dynamic harps on
Joel Andrews's ''Seraphic Borealis'' to the giddy flutes on Joanna Brouk's
''Lifting Off'' to the breathtaking ''Formentera Sunset Clouds'' by the genre
elder Iasos, who is also the subject of his own new stand-alone collection,
''Celestial Soul Portrait'' (Numero Group). ''I Am the Center'' comes with
mystical and sometimes detailed liner notes, including anecdotes like the one
about Brian Eno's inviting Laraaji to collaborate by slipping a note into his
zither case in Washington Square Park. (Light in the Attic, two CDs, $15.99.)
JON CARAMANICA

'I HEARD THE ANGELS SINGING: ELECTRIFYING BLACK GOSPEL FROM THE NASHBORO LABEL,
1951-1983' The gospel label Nashboro, based in Nashville, was the parent company
of Excello, the more famous blues label -- known for idiosyncratic, echoey
sessions by Slim Harpo and Otis Spann, among others, that have traveled far and
wide. But most of the Southern singers on Nashboro, including Brother Joe May
and the Fairfield Four, were putting God first, working for steady local radio
play and sales directly through the Nashville record store run by Nashboro's
owner, Ernest Young. In the early years these are tight and quiet sessions --
brushed drums under close-harmony groups -- until the late '50s, when gospel's
relationship with hotter R&B grows closer: You hear where early James Brown
comes from in the lead vocalist of the Kindly Shepherds' ''Take the Lord With
You,'' from 1958, and Sister Lucille Barbee's ''Let the Church Roll On,'' from
1960, could have been conceived by Bo Diddley. By the late '60s to the '80s,
Nashboro made gospel as modest but excellent soul music: no more, no less.
(Tompkins Square Records, four CDs, $39.95.) BEN RATLIFF

'IT'S A SCREAM HOW LEVINE DOES THE RHUMBA: THE LATIN-JEWISH MUSICAL STORY,
1940S-1980S' The link started out plainly enough -- one New York subculture
encountering another in the postwar boom -- but it became a developed
subcurrent, as Latin bands became mainstays at Jewish resorts, as Jewish
musicians (including the pianist Larry Harlow and the trombonist Barry Rogers)
became central to the evolution of salsa, and as Jewish pop composers directly
or indirectly interpolated Afro-Latin rhythm in very popular songs. It's a
complicated narrative, but the producers at the Idelsohn Society for Musical
Preservation -- which has, in the past, brought you provocative CD anthologies
centering on the histories of Jewish minstrelsy and Tikva, the long-running
Jewish independent label -- break it down with style, humor, learned booklet
essays and two discs' worth of many Jewish-Latino crossovers, including Xavier
Cugat's ''Miami Beach Rhumba,'' Celia Cruz's version of ''Hava Nagila,'' to
Puente's ''Grossinger's Cha Cha Cha,'' and Mickey Katz's cleverly ridiculous
''My Yiddishe Mambo,'' which rhymes ''challahs'' with ''Noro Morales.''
(Idelsohn Society, two CDs, $17.98.) BEN RATLIFF

'THE COMPLETE CLIFFORD JORDAN STRATA-EAST SESSIONS' ''Glass Bead Games,'' the
1974 album that concludes this illuminating set, has long been considered the
high-water mark for Clifford Jordan, a tenor saxophonist who hailed from Chicago
but made his name in New York. For many years, the album -- inspired by the
Herman Hesse novel, with two soulful and contemplative quartets at work -- was
also a rare find, like most titles on the musician-run label Strata-East. Jordan
had his own imprint on Strata-East for a while: the Dolphy Series, named after
the visionary multireedist Eric Dolphy. Among its output, which is all included
here, are one horizon-scanning album apiece by the drummer Ed Blackwell and the
saxophonists Pharoah Sanders, Cecil Payne and Charles Brackeen. (The Brackeen
album, ''Rhythm X,'' from 1968, is a superb precursor to the band Old and New
Dreams -- in other words, like the Ornette Coleman Quartet, but with a tenor
saxophonist as his proxy.)

Jordan doesn't appear on all of these sessions, but he plays beautifully on
''Glass Bead Games,'' and on both ''Clifford Jordan in the World,'' another
vehicle for his writing, and ''Super Bass,'' an engaging album by the bassist
Wilbur Ware that was first released last year. The unmistakable impression here
is of a calmly exploratory peer group with serious thoughts about
self-determination. (Mosaic, six CDs, $102.) NATE CHINEN

JOSEPH KABASELE: 'LE GRAND KALLÉ -- HIS LIFE, HIS MUSIC' The singer Joseph
Kabasele, who became known as Le Grand Kallé, led the pioneering band most often
called Orchestre African Jazz in music that spread across Africa: Congolese
rumba, later known as soukous. In these recordings, from 1951 to 1970,
Afro-Cuban music is reclaimed from an African perspective, with sweet lead
vocals and twining electric-guitar lines. ''Baila,'' from 1957, brought the
electric guitar into Congolese music, a pivotal moment. Members of Mr.
Kabasele's band, like Tabu Ley Rochereau and Manu Dibango, went on to start
their own renowned groups.

The music's development was shaped by the turbulent politics of what was once
the Belgian Congo and is now the Democratic Republic of Congo, and this
collection's exemplary liner notes elucidate the political changes and band
turnover behind the lilting, swaying, major-key grooves of songs like
''Indépendance Cha Cha.'' (Sterns Africa, two CDs and a 104-page hardcover book,
$32.) JON PARELES

'CALL IT ART: NEW YORK ART QUARTET 1964-1965' The New York Art Quartet --
consisting of the alto saxophonist John Tchicai; the trombonist Roswell Rudd;
the drummer Milford Graves; and a succession of bass players, including Reggie
Workman and Lewis Worrell -- made only two official recordings during its
original run, amid the avant-garde fervor of the mid-1960s. Given that those
albums have accrued an almost mythic stature in their field, there's reason to
hail ''Call It Art'' five LPs of previously unissued music, with a book of
archival materials and acutely informed analysis by the set's producer, Ben
Young -- as this year's most significant release for partisans of free jazz.
(The title comes from a line in ''Western Front,'' an Amiri Baraka poem that
he's heard reading with the group early in 1965.)

These performances, in studios and live settings ranging from a Greenwich Street
loft to the sculpture garden at the Museum of Modern Art, capture the band's
unmistakable peak, when it stood for an airier, more collectivist ideal of open
improvisation than the combustible norm at the time. There's a sleek, furtive
magic in the interplay between Mr. Tchicai and Mr. Rudd, and something just as
bewitching in the abstract polyrhythms of Mr. Graves. Maybe it's fitting that
music so far on the margins would be available only as a collector's splurge,
but the level of artistry here begs for broader exposure. (Triple Point, five
LPs, $340.) NATE CHINEN

HARRY NILSSON: 'NILSSON: THE RCA ALBUMS COLLECTION' Was Harry Nilsson the oddest
popular singer-songwriter in American history? He basically didn't perform live;
he made radio soft-rock gold in ''Everybody's Talkin' '' and ''Without You''; he
made a milestone of sadness in the LP ''Nilsson Sings Newman,'' and of sweetness
in the song ''Perfect Day''; elsewhere, he gargled and belched on mike. He
recorded all his music for RCA, and he's incoherent unless you hear the whole
opus. Therefore, he's perfect for a full retrospective. This set is that: full
albums, with mono versions where they're available, as well as unreleased
alternate takes and radio spots. It begins in the late '60s, during the hunt to
find and hype the next Brian Wilson, John Lennon or Paul McCartney. (Nilsson was
something else again, closer to Tin Pan Alley classicism and a genuine
self-sabotaging perversity; today, his aesthetic finds its locus more in the
weirdo roster of the Chicago label Drag City than in anything that really sells.
And what was up with his sense of quality control -- eccentric, perverse or just
intermittent?) The perspective afforded here may tell you that his mid-'70s
career dive yielded way more interesting music than most career dives. It also
may inform you that his last studio album, ''Knnillssonn,'' from 1977, is
severely underrated. (RCA, 17 CDs, $139.99.) BEN RATLIFF

'LOS NUGGETZ: '60S GARAGE & PSYCH FROM LATIN AMERICA' Even before the Internet,
great music spread at lightning speed. ''Los Nuggetz'' shows how rock --
particularly, British rock -- traveled across borders and languages in the
mid-'60s with a minimum of friction. Take ''Me Atrapaste,'' by the Mexican band
Los Matemáticos, a winning translation of the Kinks' ''You Really Got Me'': so
goes a not insignificant portion of this collection, which spans Mexico, Latin
America and Spain. Start with a song by the Kinks, the Beatles, maybe the
Rolling Stones; translate into Spanish; cursorily study the arrangement; then
lay to tape. Repeat until trends change.

Plenty of the versions are strong, but the odder numbers stand out, like
Kaleidoscope's ''Colours,'' bang-up psychedelia from a Puerto Rican and
Dominican band on a Mexican label, or the dark, surf-inflected instrumentals of
the Peruvian group Los Holy's. (RockBeat, four CDs, $49.98.) JON CARAMANICA

OVERHANG PARTY: 'COMPLETE STUDIO RECORDINGS' The power trio Overhang Party -- a
loose, loud improvising rock band led by the guitarist and singer Rinji Fukuoka
-- was part of the Japanese psychedelic-rock scene of the 1990s, a scene that
included Ghost and Acid Mothers Temple. (If you are congenitally opposed to
feedback, stop reading now.) The band lasted halfway into the oughts, but wasn't
very widely heard: The notes in this comprehensive boxed set, including three
albums and an extra disc called ''Last Recordings,'' imply that only 700 copies
each of ''Overhang Party'' and ''Overhang Party II'' were ever issued.

This band exploded powerfully in the beginning, updating the Velvet
Underground's drone or recording a whirlier, more anarchic version of the
Grateful Dead's early-'70s ''Space'' jams; then they tightened up along the
lines of biker-rock and prog, and by ''Overhang Party IV,'' they were making
loud, stately processionals. (Important Records, four CDs, $24.99.) BEN RATLIFF

'PURPLE SNOW: FORECASTING THE MINNEAPOLIS SOUND' This is where Prince was
hatched, a Minneapolis teeming with dirty funk, sophisticated soul and electric
boogie. ''Purple Snow'' -- in a lavish and sturdy box with a vivid book full of
band histories and photos -- is, in effect, a prehistory for an artist so
naturally syncretic that he all but erased what came before him. But that
doesn't devalue these songs, though many of them are less funky than you'd
expect, given what was to follow.

Alexander O'Neal's synthetic come-ons are highlights, as are Steven's sly and
sweaty ''Quick'' and the sharp ''I've Got My Eyes on You,'' by the Girls. The
biggest revelations are the forward funk songs (like ''I'm Under Your Spell'')
by Mind & Matter, an early band of the influential producer Jimmy Jam. Wisely,
Numero Group has also issued an excellent companion piece to ''Purple Snow'':
Mind & Matter's previously unheard demos, ''1514 Oliver Avenue (Basement).''
(Numero Group, two CDs, $35.21.) JON CARAMANICA

WOODY SHAW: 'THE COMPLETE MUSE SESSIONS' Woody Shaw, the incisive and
influential post-bop trumpeter, released some of his strongest work on Muse
Records in the 1970s, which amounts to two reasons that he's still more of a
connoisseur's pick than a household name: small label, difficult era. This
survey of that output -- organized by Michael Cuscuna, his former producer, and
Woody Shaw III, his son -- renews the case for his peerless achievement as an
improviser on his instrument, from both a technical and conceptual vantage.

The earliest recordings here, originally made for Blue Note, involve the
organist Larry Young and the tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson in 1965; the latest
is a more buttoned-up standards session from 1987, two years before Shaw's death
from kidney failure at 44. The choice meat is in the middle, with the urgent
material that would yield albums like ''The Moontrane,'' a vital sextet outing,
and ''The Iron Men,'' featuring an avant-gardish cohort that included Anthony
Braxton on saxophones and Muhal Richard Abrams on piano. Shaw holds to an
imposing baseline of poise throughout, making the intervallic leaps in his solos
seem instinctual, but never thoughtless. (Mosaic, seven CDs, $119.) NATE CHINEN

'SKYDOG: THE DUANE ALLMAN RETROSPECTIVE' This ambitious boxed set documents
Duane Allman's robust productivity, from 1965 to his death, at 24, in 1971. That
means his early days in the Allman Joys and Hour Glass, up through the first
Allman Brothers Band albums. The playing is oily, dirty, confident, effortless
-- and, moreover, familiar, given that his blues- and soul-inflected style
helped shape the sound of Southern rock and more.

Notably, this set traces his parallel history as a session guitarist, improving
tracks for a host of artists, from Wilson Pickett to John Hammond to,
stunningly, Derek & the Dominos. And also plenty who didn't quite deserve it,
especially given how little time Allman had. (Rounder, seven CDs, $139.98.) JON
CARAMANICA

SLY AND THE FAMILY STONE: 'HIGHER!' When he started producing music in the
1960s, Sylvester Stewart, a.k.a. Sly Stone, started out with more ideas than a
three-minute song could easily hold: soul propulsion, rock guitar, jazzy horn
lines, elaborate counterpoint, oblique lyrics. By simplifying just a little, he
came up with indelible, euphoric, era-defining songs like ''Everyday People''
and ''Stand!'' Then his band fell apart, and his vista narrowed to darker,
murkier, more private tracks.

That arc is traced on ''Higher!,'' which is geared more to existing fans than to
newcomers; the hits are mono, live or edited single versions. This collection
unearths zanily inventive songs left off the band's first album, as well as
oddities like the Family Stone's backing an obscure R&B shouter, Johnny
Robinson. It doesn't hide Sly's decline in the 1970s, but even when he was
retreading his past, he was a remarkable architect of tricky, pointillistic
funk. (Epic/Legacy, four CDs, $59.99.) JON PARELES

'THE SUN ROCK BOX, 1954-59' Sun Records in Memphis was a magnet for wild men and
a few feisty women, too. The label recorded not only its familiar pantheon --
Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison -- but also plenty of
other whooping, howling, wailing, yipping, rasping, twanging contenders who
never became as famous. This 254-track collection, an expanded digital version
of a 12-LP set that the collector-minded Bear Family Records released in 1986,
includes the big names but concentrates on the others, including some that Sun
recorded but never released. Some were just Elvis imitators, but the set also
has considerably more unhinged voices, like Jimmy Wages and Jack Earls, as well
as tangy, gutsy women, like Barbara Pittman and Patsy Holcomb, whose potential
careers were fumbled at the male-oriented Sun.

The backup bands -- largely unheralded but perpetually jumping -- treat the Sun
studio like a supercollider, hurling together honky-tonk and R&B, boogie-woogie
and rumba, Western swing and doo-wop until the tracks explode. The luxury price
of this set reflects its hard-bound book, a trove of diligent yet unpretentious
research. (Bear Family, 8 CDs, 224-page hard-bound book, $243.13.) JON PARELES

DAVE VAN RONK: 'DOWN IN WASHINGTON SQUARE' Dave Van Ronk didn't have the sweet
voice of the title character in ''Inside Llewyn Davis,'' the Coen brothers movie
that's very loosely based on his peregrinations through the Greenwich Village
folk scene. He lived by the rasp he could deploy as a warning, a flirtation, a
protest or a snarl. This collection -- mostly recordings from 1959-61, as well
as a handful of considerably more recent ones -- is a rich document of the folk
revival. It's a mixture of folk scholarship and rambunctious individuality, of
guitar propulsion and proud vocal imperfection; it's an assortment of vintage
blues, ragtime, work songs and, modestly, his own songs. Prizing the past and
trying to make it alive in the moment: That was the folk revival at its best.
(Smithsonian Folkways, download, $21.99; three CDs, $29.98.) JON PARELES

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/29/arts/music/theyre-already-boxed-now-just-wrap.
html

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY CENICOLA/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


