                             1023 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 28, 2014 Thursday 2:58 AM EST

As calm nears, death strikes

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1112 words


GAZA CITY

In war, nobody wants to be the last to die. In Gaza, it was the chief of the
electric company's maintenance division and his deputy. In Israel, it was a pair
of volunteers working a security detail on their kibbutz.

The four deaths on Tuesday, hours before an open-ended cease-fire began between
Israel and Hamas, reflected the often indiscriminate, opaque and lethal nature
of a conflict that dragged on for 50 days and more than 2,100 deaths, only to
end where it began, with a truce deal that is essentially a retread of the one
signed in 2012 after the last Gaza war.

The cease-fire was still holding Wednesday, and that was good news in a conflict
beset by breaches by Hamas and the other militant resistance groups operating in
the Gaza Strip.

Israeli drones could still be heard flying circles overhead, but there was no
rocket or missile fire. In Gaza, fishermen went farther out to sea than they
have in years, and farmers were allowed to work fields close to the Israel fence
line.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Wednesday that Israel had dealt Hamas
"the greatest blow since the organization's founding." But in Gaza, Ismail
Haniyeh, the Hamas leader, praised the 1.8 million residents of Gaza as "the
true heroes." It was Haniyeh's first public appearance since the war began seven
weeks ago.

U.N. agencies report that 2,104 Palestinians were killed in the Gaza
hostilities, including 495 children and 253 women. Sixty-nine Israelis were
killed - 64  soldiers and five civilians. A guest worker from Thailand also was
killed in Israel.

Among those who perished in the final hours, Mohammad Daher, a 49-year-old
Palestinian, was a chief of maintenance in the northern district for Gaza
Electricity Distribution Corp., where he had worked since 1991.

He was driving in his company pickup truck when witnesses say a missile fired
from an Israeli drone struck the vehicle, instantly killing Daher and his
27-year-old deputy, Tamir Hamad, who was driving.

"They wouldn't even let me see his body in the morgue. He was just pieces," said
his brother Raed Daher, a Gaza policeman who worked for the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah, not for Hamas.

"I could recognize his shoes," he said.

Israel's senior military spokesman, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, said that the truck
was identified as "escaping the scene of a rocket launch."

Mohammad Daher was no militant, his family said.

"He worked two shifts a day, morning and night," his brother said. "It was a
dangerous job. They worked while the Israelis were shelling them. He kept the
lights on."

Why was his truck targeted? His brothers said the four-door Toyota was clearly
marked with the logo of the electric company and was flying a company flag,
which sports a red lightning bolt.

"He was killed because he was a Palestinian," his brother said. "He was a father
and a grand-father. He was an old guy. He didn't have a gun or a jet plane."

Jamal Dardasawi, a public information officer for the Gaza electricity company,
told the Palestinian news agency Maan that he believed the work truck was
deliberately targeted. Daher and his extended family are Fatah loyalists,
members not of Hamas but the party led by Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas.

Inside Israel, a few hours after Daher was killed, a dozen mortar rounds from
Gaza rained down on a kibbutz called Nirim.

It was just an hour beforethe cease-fire began. Shahar Melamed, 43, and Zeevik
Etzion, 55, were outside repairing an electricity line damaged by an attack
earlier that day. The two men died in the mortar barrage.

Etzion, a father of five, headed the community's security detail and Melamed, a
father of three, volunteered as his deputy. He was also responsible for
irrigation of the kibbutz crops.

"Everyone here is in great pain after what happened yesterday," said Dedy
Rubenstein, who runs an agricultural cooperative for farming communities in the
south. "We have not started mourning for them yet. Everyone is too busy making
the preparations for their funerals."

"This is a very intimate community, we are all very close and know each other
very well," said Rubenstein, adding that thequiet kibbutz of only 380 members
was also now struggling with all the media attention resulting from the deaths.

Rubenstein said the fact the two were killed just before the cease-fire went
into effect was irrelevant.

"It only takes a second for this to happen, and it does not matter if it happens
during the first day or the last day," he said.

More than half the kibbutz's residents, particularly those with young children,
had fled their homes during the 50 days of fighting between Israel and Hamas.

"The last four days was literally a battlefield here, not a place for kids,"
said Rubenstein, describing constant air-raid sirens, rockets falling and mortar
shells being fired at the kibbutz. "Only those that had to work, manage the
animals and tend to the fields stayed here. The others left."

"The other side tried to destroy us. They tried to make us leave," said
Rubenstein, referring to Hamas. "But we are committed to staying here, this is
our home, we won't leave."

On Wednesday, Israeli and Palestinian leaders made rival claims that their side
had won.

Speaking at a news conference in Jerusalem, Netanyahu said Israel had achieved a
great political and military success.

"A thousand Hamas terrorists were killed, many of them commanders,'' Netanyahu
said. "Thousands of rocket arsenals, launch sites and weapons caches were
destroyed along with hundreds of command centers.''

Rebutting the claims of triumph made by Hamas leaders and militants, the Israeli
prime minister insisted that Hamas and the Palestinians had won nothing.

"They demanded a seaport and did not achieve this; they demanded an airport and
did not achieve this; they demanded the release of prisoners placed back under
arrest following the murder of the three Israeli boys; they demanded monetary
compensation and salaries, which they did not receive; they demanded that
negotiations be conducted by Turkey or Qatar and this they did not get,"
Netanyahu said.

Haniyeh, the Hamas leader, delivered a speech in the Shijaiyah neighborhood in
east Gaza City, which now was in ruins after serving as the front lines during
the Israeli ground offensive. Haniyeh promised, "This victory will lead the way
to Jerusalem."

During his speech, burly fighters dressed in black, their faces masked, from the
Hamas military wing, the Izzedine al-Qassam Brigades, milled in the crowd. They
brandished weapons and posed for photos with children.

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Eglash reported from Nirim. Hazem Balousha in Gaza contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


