                             1003 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 18, 2014 Saturday 8:14 PM EST

A candidate's promises vs. a president's duty

BYLINE: Scott Wilson

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1336 words


Four months after taking office, President Obama spoke at the National Archives,
steps away from the Constitution, and described in sharply critical terms "the
season of fear" in the United States that followed the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Torture had been practiced in interrogations. Terrorism suspects were held
without trial in an offshore military prison. U.S. troops invaded a country
without links to the attacks on New York and Washington. The National Security
Agency was exposed for eavesdropping on U.S. citizens without warrants.

"In other words," Obama said, "we went off course."

It was understood that Obama, the constitutional law lecturer, would find the
country's compass.

But as Obama acknowledged Friday, in a speech delivered just around the corner
from the archives at the Justice Department, he is still navigating the
politically complicated legacy of the "war on terror." It is a legacy that has
profound implications for his own as president.

"When you cut through the noise, what's really at stake is how we remain true to
who we are in a world that is remaking itself at dizzying speed," Obama said
Friday, in an echo of his message almost five years ago.

Obama moved quickly to fulfill his pledge to close the military prison at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, although political obstacles have prevented him from
seeing it through. Also in those first days, he officially banned the practice
of torture in interrogation, methods that had ceased by the close of the Bush
administration.

But those were issues where Obama's policy inclinations, his principles and the
politics of his party all came together - the easiest remnants of post-9/11
national security policy to criticize and work to end. Now he faces a more
consequential challenge in changing, amid public pressure at home and abroad, a
series of intelligence practices that he has called useful in preventing another
terrorist attack in the United States.

"This is the hard stuff," said Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the
American Civil Liberties Union. "The surveillance collection issues will go to
the heart of what America is all about for generations to come. The due process
issues, the torture issues certainly go to American values. But they will not
affect the vast majority of Americans or others around the world. This is where
the rubber meets the road."

Obama spoke both as a longtime lawyer and as a second-term commander in chief,
more defensive than contrite over the work done by U.S. intelligence officers
and of the utility and care with which the NSA's bulk collection program has
been managed.

"It may seem sometimes that America is being held to a different standard, and
I'll admit the readiness of some to assume the worst motives by our government
can be frustrating," Obama said. "But let us remember that we are held to a
different standard precisely because we have been at the forefront in defending
personal privacy and human dignity."

The changes Obama ordered to NSA practices emphasize additional oversight - the
"checks and balances and accountability" that he first mentioned at the National
Archives years ago.

Other than curtailing American eavesdropping on allied leaders, the agency's
collection efforts will remain largely intact, an enduring concern to privacy
groups who argue that the government has no right to collect information about
U.S. citizens without a warrant.

Many of the programs disclosed by The Washington Post and the British newspaper
the Guardian in recent months, based on documents provided by former NSA
contractor Edward J. Snowden, will remain untouched.

Having run for office as a critic of the Bush administration's national security
policies, Obama was always going to be measured, in part, by how he scaled back
the excesses of post-9/11 national security practices and preserved the
essentials in a still-dangerous world. The reviews on that account have been
mixed.

Obama withdrew U.S. troops from Iraq, a conflict he once called a "dumb war,"
and has set an end-of-the-year end date for U.S. participation in Afghanistan's
war.

At the same time, he has expanded the battlefield for the U.S. drone fleet and
stepped up the tempo of strikes from the Bush years, another counterterrorism
tool that many within his party say should have far more accountability and
oversight.

Only the bombings in Boston last year could be considered a successful mass
terrorist attack on Obama's watch, although there have been some near misses.

As Obama alluded to several times Friday, technological leaps have both greatly
expanded U.S. surveillance capabilities and made obsolete the rules governing
those practices.

Setting those limits now involves a set of decisions, some of which Obama
presented Friday, that put into conflict his role as a commander in chief and
the promises he made as a new president, particularly to those in his own party.

Obama made himself vulnerable to conservative charges that by ending some Bush
administration national security policies, he was putting the nation at risk of
another attack. He argued that American values and national security policy
could coexist.

But he and his advisers were also mindful that his credibility on the subject -
and more broadly, his political viability - would likely be only a terrorist
attack away from ruin as a result.

As the more visible elements of post-9/11 national security policy diminished,
namely the large military deployments overseas, the secret elements typified by
drone strikes and electronic spying grew under a president who had promised
unprecedented transparency. He captured the conflict in his Friday speech.

"I maintained a healthy skepticism toward our surveillance programs after I
became president," Obama said Friday, even though he had previously acknowledged
that he was unaware of the sensitive "head of state" program that targeted the
personal cellphones of such allies as German Chancellor Angela Merkel.

Obama's political considerations are particularly challenging on the question of
surveillance, resembling those he had to consider when deciding whether to
increase the U.S. presence in Afghanistan four years ago.

Now, as then, many in his party are demanding more change to the NSA's spying
practices than he is willing to carry out. A Washington Post-ABC News poll in
November found that Democrats were twice as likely to disapprove of Obama's
handling of the NSA than of his overall job performance.

The party ambivalence was reflected on Capitol Hill in the hours after Obama's
speech. Some Democrats applauded the president for addressing the controversy,
particularly over the phone-record collection program, while others urged him to
do more.

"The reforms outlined by President Obama today are a welcome first step in
reining in the government's unacceptable infringement on Americans' privacy
rights," Sen. Tom Udall (D-N.M.) said in a statement. "But I'm not satisfied
these reforms go far enough."

Behind Obama's words Friday was a question asked increasingly around the West
Wing: How does he want to be remembered?

To a president who has already made history by being the first African American
to hold the office, Obama's answer goes beyond a simple record of his
administration.

He is mindful of history and his place in it, and to many of his advisers and
supporters, any assessment of his legacy should provide the end of the sentence:
"He was the president who . . ."

Successfully ended the "season of fear" and the government excesses that defined
it? Or cemented in place a vast surveillance state he once opposed? On Friday,
he began to provide the answer.

"I have often reminded myself that I would not be where I am today were it not
for the courage of dissidents, like Dr. King, who were spied on by their own
government," Obama said. "And as a president, a president who looks at
intelligence every morning, I also can't help but be reminded that America must
be vigilant in the face of threats."

scott.wilson@washpost.com

Scott Clement contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


