                             1038 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Playing the Game Again, With an Insider's Look at the Players

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1562 words


DOUBLE DOWNGame Change 2012

By Mark Halperin and John HeilemannIllustrated. 499 pages. The Penguin Press.
$29.95.

Barack Obama's performance in Denver in Debate No. 1 against Mitt Romney was
widely perceived as something between a flop and a disaster: even supporters
complained that the president seemed listless, passive, peevish, disdainful and
distracted. The president and his aides promised a comeback in Debate No. 2 --
suddenly a must-win showdown, needed to stop the bleeding, reassure the base and
stem a migration of independents to Mr. Romney.

What the veteran political reporters Mark Halperin and John Heilemann report in
''Double Down,'' their buzzy, behind-the-scenes book on the 2012 election, is
that on the eve of the second debate, the usually self-possessed president was
having doubts about his ability to rise to the occasion. ''I just don't know if
I can do this,'' they quote him saying to his advisers in a last-minute crisis
meeting.

In Mr. Heilemann and Mr. Halperin's account, Mr. Obama confided to his advisers
that he was bothered about the thinness of his second-term agenda, and that his
methodical temperament and training as a lawyer made it difficult for him to
deliver the pointed, up-tempo and emotional performance his debate coaches
wanted, saying, ''I am wired in a different way than this event requires.'' In
the final rehearsals, the authors report, his debate coach Ron Klain would say
''Fast and hammy! Fast and hammy!'' whenever the president's delivery started to
flag.

Such provocative scenes -- served up with fuzzy sourcing and breezy prose --
pepper ''Double Down,'' the follow-up to ''Game Change,'' the authors'
best-selling book about the 2008 presidential campaign. Again the emphasis is on
creating a novelistic narrative that provides a you-are-there immediacy but that
can make the reader wonder at the authors' supposed omniscience. And again,
small telling details -- like Mr. Romney reportedly being prone to poke fun at
fat people or Mr. Obama trying to quiet his mind by making lists on yellow legal
pads -- take precedence over historical perspective and analysis. The book
testifies to its authors' energetic legwork and insider access, while pointing
up their eagerness to emphasize the roles that personality and process (as
opposed to pure policy) play in politics.

There was less genuine political drama in the 2012 race than in the 2008 one --
not to mention, no Sarah Palin -- and potential readers may well ask why they
should revisit that campaign, especially given the miles of print, television
and digital coverage devoted to it in real time, as well as several earlier
books, including ''Collision 2012'' by Dan Balz, ''The Center Holds'' by
Jonathan Alter and ''The Message'' by Richard Wolffe.

''Double Down'' won't substantially alter how politically informed readers see
President Obama or Mr. Romney, and it sheds light on the current face-off
between the White House and its Republican critics mainly by indirection,
underscoring the pettiness and self-serving spin engaged in by both sides. But
those hungry for political news will read ''Double Down'' for the scooplets and
insidery glimpses it serves up about the two campaigns, and the clues it offers
about the positioning already going on among Republicans and Democrats for 2016.

Inside-the-Beltway types will sift through ''Double Down'' for spinning and
hidden agendas on the part of sources, and they will speculate about who leaked
what information and for what purpose. It seems clear, for instance, that
someone close to the Romney campaign, which was still smarting over New Jersey
Gov. Chris Christie's post-Hurricane Sandy appearances with President Obama just
before the election, disclosed details of a vetting dossier on Gov. Christie,
with unanswered questions about his onetime work as a lobbyist, details about
his household help and a Securities and Exchange Commission settlement involving
his brother.

The dossier, Mr. Halperin and Mr. Heilemann write, ''was littered with potential
land mines.'' On Sunday, on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Romney was asked about
this passage in the book, and he said the vetting turned up ''nothing new''
about Mr. Christie; he added that Mr. Christie could easily become the 2016
Republican nominee and ''save our party.''

Mr. Heilemann and Mr. Halperin have wisely avoided spending a lot of time on
aspects of the 2012 race that have been minutely dissected, like the Obama
campaign's pioneering use of data analytics and the ''clown car'' antics of the
Republican primaries. ''Game Change'' devoted considerable attention to the 2008
candidates and their spouses (most notably Hillary and Bill Clinton, John and
Cindy McCain, and the spectacular marital meltdown of John and Elizabeth
Edwards). ''Double Down'' is more focused on internal campaign debates over
strategy, tactics and turf, and inside-the-White-House discussions, providing a
window on the sausage machine that is politics and, increasingly, governance
today.

The authors recount a September 2011 White House meeting in which they say Mr.
Obama arrived with legal pages filled with notes and laid out his earnest and
unsparing self-assessment: that over the past three years, he had too often
trimmed his sails, allowing his more progressive impulses to be overshadowed by
the demands of pragmatism. As the book recounts, the president told his advisers
that he needed to push harder on vital issues he believed in, like climate
change, immigration, poverty and same-sex marriage.

In that same meeting, the authors report, Mr. Obama seemed to be thinking about
the killing of Osama bin Laden and the United States' use of drones in the war
against Al Qaeda. ''Turns out I'm really good at killing people,'' they quote
him as saying. ''Didn't know that was gonna be a strong suit of mine.''

In late 2011, when the president's approval numbers were sinking, Mr. Halperin
and Mr. Heilemann declare, some of Mr. Obama's top aides secretly considered
replacing Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. with Mrs. Clinton on the ticket,
going so far as to conduct polling on the subject. The idea was abandoned, the
authors write, when research suggested that ''adding Clinton to the ticket
wouldn't materially improve Obama's odds.''

Similar behind-the-scenes tidbits percolate throughout this volume. The authors
assert that when one of the helicopters crash-landed during the SEAL raid on the
Osama bin Laden compound, ''two words appeared like a billboard in President
Obama's mind: Jimmy Carter.'' They suggest that Mr. Obama found Bill Clinton's
voluble personality hard to take, quoting him saying to an aide after a golf
game: ''I like him ... in doses.'' And they write that Mr. Obama had little
patience not only for the ''professional left,'' but also ''for what one of his
senior African-American aides, Michael Strautmanis, referred to as 'professional
blacks' (as opposed to black professionals).''

''Apart from Georgia Congressman John Lewis and Jim Clyburn of South Carolina,''
the authors declare, ''Obama had nearly as much contempt for the C.B.C.'' -- the
Congressional Black Caucus -- ''as he did for the Tea Party Caucus. New York's
Charlie Rangel he derided as a hack; Jesse Jackson Sr. was effectively banned
from the White House.''

As for the Republicans, Mr. Halperin and Mr. Heilemann ratify perceptions of a
party riven with divisions and unhappy with its eventual nominee, Mr. Romney. In
gossipy asides, they write that former Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi
considered Mr. Romney to be, in their words, ''self-centered, tin-eared and
inauthentic''; that Mr. Romney thought his fellow candidate Rick Santorum was
''sanctimonious, severe and strange''; and that Gov. Christie regarded the
former House Speaker Newt Gingrich as ''the worst human being he had ever met in
politics.''

Echoing earlier reports that the Romney campaign was given to unforced errors,
the authors write that Mr. Romney had yet to practice his important convention
speech 24 hours before he was to go onstage, and they describe his
vice-presidential search process -- code named Project Goldfish -- as behind
schedule because of delays in vetting Gov. Christie (nicknamed Pufferfish).

The portraits of the players in campaign 2012 -- from the candidates to their
strategists to their big-money backers -- are drawn in this volume with a light
and snappy hand. The authors write that non-Mormon Romneyites found the feud
between their man and the Republican hopeful Jon Huntsman Jr. ''as impenetrable
as a Tolkien subplot rendered in Elvish.'' They write that the Republican
contender Representative Michele Bachmann of Minnesota had a reputation on the
Hill for ''churning through staffers as if they were disposable razors.'' And
they describe Clint Eastwood's wacky talking-to-a-chair speech at the Republican
National Convention as ''partly an homage to Bob Newhart and 100 percent Dada
dinner theater.''

The authors' taste for highly caffeinated prose can sometimes feel forced (they
describe Gov. Christie, for instance, as having a ''capacious personality and a
coriaceous hide''), but for the most part they succeed in taking readers
interested in the backstabbing and backstage maneuvering of the 2012 campaign
behind the curtains, providing a tactile, if sometimes ''fast and hammy,'' sense
of what it looked like from the inside.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/05/books/double-down-by-mark-halperin-and-john-he
ilemann.html

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTO (C1)
Mitt Romney and Barack Obama during their October 2012 presidential debate at
Hofstra University on Long Island. ''Double Down'' reveals how their campaigns
prepared for debates. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The authors Mark Halperin, top, and John Heilemann. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANNY KIM
 BRIGITTE LACOMBE) (C4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


