                             1047 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 17, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trying to Outrace Scientific Advances

BYLINE: By HUGH HART

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 896 words


Before he created the futuristic TV cop show ''Almost Human,'' J. H. Wyman faced
a recurring challenge as producer of the sci-fi series ''Fringe.'' Actual
scientists continually spawned projects that rivaled the wildest imaginary ones
dreamed up in the writers' room.

After one ''Fringe'' episode about an invisible man, Mr. Wyman said, he caught
wind of a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency experiment. ''We read about
Darpa making a car with an incredible number of little sensors that basically
makes the car disappear, because you wouldn't be able to see it,'' he said.
''And you go, 'Well, this is far out.' ''

When it comes to envisioning the year 2048 for the new series, he said, ''we can
see it, we can feel it, because we're already almost there.''

In ''Almost Human,'' starting Sunday on Fox, Karl Urban plays Detective John
Kennex, who wakes up from a 17-month coma to discover that his leg has been
amputated and replaced by a bionic replacement. Kennex reluctantly teams with a
reactivated android, Dorian (Michael Ealy), that had been discontinued for
showing a defective excess of humanlike empathy.

''Almost Human'' trafficks in the realm of future realism by modeling its ideas
on existing technologies. Shortly after production wrapped on the pilot, for
example, Kennex and his seamlessly integrated bionic leg suddenly seemed more
feasible when the New England Journal of Medicine reported that amputees could
move artificial limbs with their brain waves.

''What's next, synthetic hearts? Synthetic lungs?'' Mr. Wyman marveled. ''Sooner
or later, it's just a natural progression. Somebody's going to make an
artificial limb that's far superior to the original, and you'll be able to
replace body parts, so people will live longer, more fruitful lives.''

The tech-enhanced amputee hero of ''Almost Human'' struck a resonant chord with
J. J. Abrams, an executive producer of the series. Director of two ''Star Trek''
movies based on Gene Roddenberry's uncannily prescient science-fiction series,
Mr. Abrams has witnessed, firsthand, remarkable advances in bionic technology
through his work with the Mission Continues veterans organization.

''Quite a number of these wounded warriors come back and receive artificial
limbs,'' Mr. Abrams said. ''Part of what 'Almost Human' is about is the help
that technology can provide, whether it's in the case of an artificial limb or a
partner.''

As a biomimetic police officer of the future, Dorian gains credibility in light
of android public servants already in development. Next month, the Darpa Robot
Challenge is to review disaster-relief prototypes that execute complex tasks in
dangerous environments, according to the Defense Department's website. The
National Air and Space Museum recently unveiled a walking, talking bionic man
named Frank, built from more than one million sensors, 200 processors, 70
circuit boards and 26 motors.

And where ever humanlike behavior leads, ethical questions surely follow, Mr.
Abrams noted. ''When I visited the M.I.T. Media Lab recently, I talked to one of
the researchers and discovered that the focus of her research is robots and
morality,'' he said. ''I realized this is a very real thing that we're going to
be grappling with.''

Mr. Wyman added that his series's premise draws on the ''Singularity'' theories
of the futurist Ray Kurzweil, who forecasts the merging of flesh, blood and
minuscule nanobot devices into self-healing man-machine hybrids.

''Kurzweil talks about how, if you had cancer, you could get a pill the size of
a marble containing hundreds of tiny computers programmed to attack your cancer
cells,'' Mr. Wyman said. ''By dinner time, you don't have cancer any more. This
is something I believe is going to happen.''

Current black-market technologies inform a number of ''Almost Human'' episodes,
including one story line on sexbots. Mr. Wyman said, ''There are these things
right now called Real Dolls that are lifelike sex dolls. I understand they're
quite expensive, but people of means can design how they look and access them
now.''

Drone bullets will also play a starring role as the season progresses. Mr. Wyman
outlined how today's consumer data-mining practices might lay the groundwork for
tomorrow's search-and-destroy weaponry.

''There are credit cards in your wallet right now that can be read when you walk
into certain stores,'' he said. ''Next, your jeans will have a sensor, your
cellphone will have a sensor, your car will have sensors. People will be able to
access your history of shopping, where you've been and where you've gone that
day.

''Now imagine a world in the future that has a hundred times the sensors. I
could put a program into a bullet that essentially hijacks those sensors to find
out where you are. Then I can fire a bullet into the air, and it's going to come
find you. And now I can kill you.''

''Almost Human'' staff members routinely consult with experts to make sure their
speculative premises remain more or less credible. But Mr. Wyman reserves the
right to exercise poetic license.

He said: ''There are times where it's like, 'Yes, it could be slightly adjusted
if we wanted to be exactly like the real world.' But sometimes, we want to be
more imaginative, because we're not in the real world anymore. We're in the
future. Who's to say there hasn't been some development that makes the thinking
of today obsolete?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/17/arts/television/almost-human-on-fox-police-sho
w-based-in-the-future.html

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Top, from left, Mackenzie Crook with Michael Ealy, who plays a
reactivated android police officer
  Karl Urban portrays a detective  who wakes up  from a coma to find that  he
has a bionic leg, like  the one above. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LIANE HENTSCHER/FOX)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


