                             1085 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 17, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel and Lebanon Try Easing Tension After Border Shooting

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 524 words


JERUSALEM -- Israel and Lebanon appeared to be trying to defuse tensions on
Monday after a cross-border shooting that killed an Israeli soldier and
subsequent fire from Israeli forces that may have hit a soldier on the Lebanese
side.

Military liaison officers from the two countries met with representatives of
Unifil, the United Nations peacekeeping force in southern Lebanon, at a border
crossing near where the shootings occurred late Sunday to clarify the
circumstances and restore calm.

The commander of Unifil, Maj. Gen. Paolo Serra, said preliminary findings
indicated that the shooting of the Israeli soldier was ''an individual action''
by a Lebanese Army soldier ''in contravention of the existing operational rules
and procedures,'' Agence France-Presse reported.

The Lebanese Army command issued a statement describing that shooting as an
isolated episode and said a military committee was investigating the matter.

Late Sunday, hours after the initial shooting, Israeli troops fired at two
Lebanese soldiers in the same area who were described by the Israelis as moving
suspiciously. An Israeli military spokeswoman said that at least one of the two
Lebanese soldiers was hit by Israeli fire, but there were no reports of
casualties from the Lebanese side.

Israel's defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, described the killing of the Israeli
soldier, Master Sgt. Shlomi Cohen, 31, as ''a very grave incident.'' He said
that Israel held the Lebanese government and army responsible for what happened
on their side of the border, and that Israel awaited an explanation. ''We will
not tolerate the violation of our sovereignty along any border,'' he added. But
Mr. Yaalon also suggested that the killing was the work of a ''rogue'' Lebanese
soldier, indicating that Israel was unlikely to take any major action against
Lebanon.

The Israel-Lebanon border has been tense but mostly quiet since 2006, when a
United Nations-brokered cease-fire ended a 34-day war between Israel and
Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite organization. The war began after Hezbollah
captured two Israeli soldiers and killed several more in a cross-border raid.
Afterward, the Lebanese Army was deployed along the border.

The flare-up on Sunday began around 8:30 p.m. when Sergeant Cohen was driving
from one military base along the border to another as part of his regular
military duties, according to Lt. Libby Weiss, a military spokeswoman. Sergeant
Cohen was in uniform and driving an army-issued car that had no obvious military
markings, Lieutenant Weiss said. The shooting took place near the border
crossing of Rosh Hanikra, known as Ras Naqoura in Lebanon.

''It is in nobody's interest for things to escalate, but it is our right to
defend our border,'' Lieutenant Weiss said.

Lebanon's official National News Agency reported that Israeli warplanes and
drones had circled over various regions of Lebanon on Monday, and Lieutenant
Weiss said that Israeli forces in the area were placed on heightened alert.

Shots were fired toward an Israeli patrol from across the border last week, but
the Israeli military said that shooting may have been errant fire from Lebanese
hunters.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/17/world/middleeast/israel-lebanon-border-shootin
g.html

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


