                             1072 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 4, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Biden Backs Ally Japan But Avoids Roiling China

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and JANE PERLEZ; Mark Landler reported from Tokyo, and
Jane Perlez from Beijing.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 993 words


TOKYO -- Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. delivered a carefully calibrated
show of support for Japan on Tuesday, expressing deep concerns about China's
move to control airspace over islands in the East China Sea, but stopping short
of a demand that Beijing reverse itself. Instead, he urged the feuding neighbors
to talk to each other.

Mr. Biden's statement, at the start of an unexpectedly challenging trip to Asia
that is next taking him to Beijing, captured the complexities for the United
States as it navigates a bitter standoff between Japan and China over the
territorial claims -- a dispute it wishes neither to mediate nor to see
escalate.

China's air defense identification zone, Mr. Biden said after meeting with
Japanese leaders, is an effort to ''unilaterally change the status quo in the
East China Sea'' that raises ''the risk of accidents and miscalculation.'' He
said he would bring up these concerns in detail when he met with the Chinese
leadership.

But with China unlikely to rescind a move so laden with nationalistic overtones,
the vice president's focus appeared to be less on rolling back the defense zone
than on neutralizing its impact by persuading the Chinese authorities to stop
scrambling fighter jets or otherwise disrupting the busy air corridors between
Japan and China.

China also seemed eager to defuse tensions. On the eve of Mr. Biden's visit, the
Defense Ministry issued an unusual clarification, saying the zone ''will not
affect the freedom of overflight, based on international laws, of other
countries' aircraft.''

The statement said that the Chinese military was ''fully capable'' of exercising
control over the zone, a wide swath of the East China Sea, but it added that
such deterrence would not always be needed. ''Fighter planes are unnecessary,''
it said, ''when an entering aircraft is found to pose no threat to us, but
necessary surveillance is needed.''

In Tokyo, Mr. Biden said that China and Japan needed ''crisis management
mechanisms and effective channels of communication'' to avoid the risk of
miscalculation. The countries have discussed a hotline, but the talks have gone
nowhere.

''The only conflict that is worse than one that is intended is one that is
unintended,'' the vice president said as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan,
looking grave, stood next to him.

The Japanese government has called for China to roll back the zone. But Mr. Abe,
perhaps seeking to project unity with Mr. Biden, did not repeat that demand
Tuesday. He said the United States and Japan had reaffirmed that they would not
alter any joint military operations in the area. ''We will not condone any
action that will threaten the safety of civilian aircraft,'' he added.

That appeared to be an attempt to smooth over a disconnect between the United
States and Japan over the Federal Aviation Administration's guidance to American
carriers that they identify themselves before entering the restricted zone.
Officials in Tokyo have instructed Japanese carriers to ignore the Chinese
demand.

Obama administration officials insisted that there was no discord between the
United States and Japan on how to respond to the Chinese zone. The aviation
administration, they said, routinely gives guidance whenever a country issues a
warning to ships and planes.

''Nothing that the F.A.A. has done constitutes any acceptance or recognition of
this,'' said a senior administration official traveling with Mr. Biden. ''The
U.S. has clearly set forth that our military aircraft will continue to operate
normally.''

Administration officials said that Mr. Biden would urge China not to create any
other such zones and to show restraint in policing this one. By treating the
zone as irrelevant, American officials hope to reduce the Chinese government's
incentive to declare zones in the South China Sea or the Yellow Sea, where it
has other territorial disputes.

The Japanese government perceives the zone as an attempt by the Chinese to
assert control over disputed islands, known in Japan as the Senkaku and in China
as the Diaoyu. Japan has a long-established air defense identification zone that
covers much of the East China Sea, including those islands.

Pointedly taking note of that, the Chinese Defense Ministry statement said that
Japan's actions, including ''playing up the so-called China threat'' and
threatening to shoot down Chinese drones, had forced China to make ''necessary
reactions.''

The dispute has raised tensions in the region to their highest level in nearly
two decades. Some analysts said they believed that the Chinese government was
caught off guard by the ferocity of the opposition from the United States, the
European Union and Australia, on top of a predictably angry response by Japan
and South Korea.

But in Beijing, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Hong Lei, rejected suggestions
that China rescind the defense zone, saying it was fully in compliance with
international law. He suggested that China was open to the idea of establishing
crisis management mechanisms.

Mr. Hong contended, however, that Japan was not. ''The Japanese side
unilaterally, on one hand, declares they want dialogue, but then they close the
door to dialogue,'' he said.

For Mr. Biden, the dispute has been a distraction on a trip he had hoped would
promote a range of other issues, like a trans-Pacific trade agreement and
efforts to curb the nuclear threat in North Korea. Still, Mr. Biden found time
to tour a Japanese Internet company founded and run by a female entrepreneur,
Tomoko Namba. Joined by the new United States ambassador to Japan, Caroline
Kennedy, and Catherine Russell, the State Department's ambassador for global
women's issues, he chatted with five female employees at the company's Tokyo
offices.

''Do your husbands like you working full time?'' he asked the women, who nodded
energetically. He also inquired whether the company, known as DeNA, offered
child care service, and whether female employees could work from home.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/04/world/asia/biden-in-japan-calibrates-message-o
ver-tensions-with-china.html

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. with Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe in Tokyo on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KOJI SASAHARA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


