                             1009 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                         May 4, 2014 Sunday 1:22 AM EST

The Air Force

BYLINE: ;Robert M. Farley

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 317 words


In 1947, with the Red Army occupying much of Europe, the United States tasked
its Air Force with planning for the atomic destruction of the Soviet Union's
cities and industrial heartland. This was the first mission for the newly
independent Air Force, after a 30-year campaign by aviators to separate from the
Army. The Air Force was expected to essentially win wars by airpower alone.

Except it's tough to win wars from the air. Over Korea in the 1950s, cheap
Soviet interceptors cut B-29s to pieces. A decade later, the Air Force's bombers
couldn't force Hanoi to give up on South Vietnam, and its fighters struggled
against pesky, agile North Vietnamese MiGs. In 1999, it took three months for
NATO to bring Serbia to its knees. The Air Force performed well in Iraq and
Afghanistan, but mainly in a supporting role.

Now we have several air forces - in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard
- because none of the other services trust the Air Force to meet its needs.
America needs military aviation, but it doesn't need a bureaucracy specifically
devoted to airpower.

Drones further complicate the picture. For generations, the promise of flying a
powerful jet drew would-be pilots to the Air Force. Managing robots from Nevada,
however, is much less appealing. And the Air Force's image has been hurt by
growing unease over drones' targeted killings, especially when it comes to
assassinating U.S. citizens overseas.

Rather than continuing the Air Force's search for definition and purpose, we
should distribute its assets and responsibilities to the Army and the Navy. This
would concentrate U.S. airpower on the support missions it performs so well,
rather than the independent missions the Air Force does poorly. Cutting the Air
Force might also correct the inaccurate notion that conflicts can be ended by
airpower alone.

Read more from Outlook, friend us on Facebook, and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


