                             1071 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 3, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan: Gunmen Attack Media Office

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 504 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Unidentified gunmen opened fire on the office of a
leading news media group in Karachi on Monday evening, wounding a security guard
and underscoring the threats journalists face in the country.

The motive of the attack, on the offices of the Express Media Group, remained
unclear, and there was no immediate claim of responsibility.

Pakistan is one of the world's most dangerous countries for journalists, who
face frequent harassment and intimidation here from a variety of groups,
including the Pakistani Taliban and other militants, state security forces and
intelligence agencies, and local political and criminal groups. So far this
year, at least five journalists have been killed. And 44 more have been killed
over the past decade, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect
Journalists.

The Express Media Group publishes an Urdu-language newspaper and an English
daily, The Express Tribune, which is a partner publication of The International
New York Times. The group also owns the Urdu television network Express News.

The number of attackers was not immediately clear, said Bilal Lakhani, the
publisher of The Express Tribune. The gunmen opened fire on the building at 7:10
p.m. from an adjacent bridge. However, they did not try to approach the main
entrance, located in a narrow, barricaded alley off the main road. Security
guards on the rooftop of the building fired back, and the attackers fled, Mr.
Lakhani said.

Though the Pakistani Taliban did not claim responsibility for the attack, some
officials believe that recent threats suggested that they were probably behind
the shooting.

Most recently, the Taliban criticized the news media for praising the Indian
cricket star Sachin Tendulkar, who retired in November.

One employee of Express Media Group speculated that Monday's attack might have
been a reaction to a recent news article in The Express Tribune that said
Taliban militants had been hiding in the Defense Housing Authority Phase II
neighborhood, an upscale district of Karachi.

The newspaper's office in the northwestern city of Peshawar had received threats
after the killing of the Pakistani Taliban leader Hakimullah Mehsud by an
American drone strike on Nov. 1, the employee said.

The attack on Monday was the second time the office had come under fire in
recent months. In August, four unidentified gunmen opened fire at the office,
wounding a security guard and a woman. Extortion -- which is rampant in the city
considered to be the country's commercial and industrial hub -- was thought to
be the motive of that attack, according to police officials.

Sultan Ali Lakhani, the chief executive of Express Media Group, said that the
company was taking the attacks very seriously, and that he planned to increase
security at the main office.

Still, he said staff morale was ''great'' despite the two attacks in four
months. ''They are journalists,'' he said. ''They are used to such stuff.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/03/world/asia/gunmen-attack-offices-of-pakistani-
media-group-in-karachi.html

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


