                             1081 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Wichita Airport Technician Charged With Terrorist Plot

BYLINE: By DAN FROSCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 415 words


An avionics technician was charged Friday morning with plotting to detonate a
car bomb at Mid-Continent Airport, in Wichita, Kan., federal authorities said.

The technician, Terry Lee Loewen, 58, of Wichita, was arrested by F.B.I. agents
as he was transporting what he thought were explosives toward a secure part of
the airport, the United States attorney for Kansas, Barry R. Grissom, said at a
news conference. The explosives were inert.

Mr. Loewen, who was employed at the airport, apparently worked alone and had
planned to kill himself in the explosion, Mr. Grissom said. ''He made statements
that he was resolved to commit an act of violent jihad against the government of
the United States,'' Mr. Grissom said.

According to a complaint filed Friday in Federal District Court in Wichita, Mr.
Loewen had been talking with two undercover F.B.I. agents over the Internet
since early this year. He told the agents that he had been studying Islam and
sharia -- Islamic law -- and wanted to engage in jihad on behalf of Al Qaeda,
the complaint said.

He continued corresponding with the agents for several months, the complaint
said, outlining ideas for a jihad attack and expressing admiration for Osama bin
Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical American-born cleric who was killed in a
drone strike in 2011. Mr. Loewen then agreed, the complaint said, to participate
in an operation in which he would detonate explosives near passenger jets at the
airport during the holiday season.

During a series of meetings with one agent, Mr. Loewen assembled what he thought
was an explosive, the complaint said. The authorities said he had also studied
the layout of the airport, taking photographs and researching flight schedules.

On Friday, Mr. Loewen drove to the airport and tried to get to the tarmac
through a secure gate when he was arrested, Mr. Grissom said. ''At no time was
the airport perimeter breached, and at no time was any citizen or member of the
traveling public in any type of danger,'' he said.

In a note left for a family member and included in the complaint, Mr. Loewen
said the operation was orchestrated to cause ''maximum carnage and death.''

''By the time you read this, I will -- if everything went as planned -- have
been martyred in the path of Allah,'' the note said.

He was charged with attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction, attempting
to damage property by means of an explosive and attempting to provide material
support to a designated foreign terrorist organization.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/14/us/man-accused-of-airport-bombing-attempt-in-k
ansas.html

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


