                             1089 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 22, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Test Run at Russia's Olympic Hopeful

BYLINE: By ANDY ISAACSON.

Andy Isaacson is a writer and photographer in New York. His most recent cover
article for Travel was on RV subculture.

SECTION: Section TR; Column 0; Travel Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2259 words


Before I could board the gondola at Rosa Khutor, a ski area that is part of
Sochi, the site of next year's Winter Olympics, I first had to trundle through a
metal detector manned by Russian soldiers with machine guns and furry hats. This
is not something I'm used to. At chairlifts in the American West, where I
typically ski, you find cheerful young attendants who are stoked to be on their
feet all day because that's what it takes to live the dream.

Unlike those armed soldiers, Sasha Krasnov, a local guide I'd arranged to meet,
would be at home in the Rockies. Twenty-seven and shaggy haired, he is a
self-identified ''free rider'' -- an off-piste skier. A storm had delivered two
feet of fresh snow overnight, ending a long dry spell, and Sasha, his head
tucked under a dirt bike helmet, was as giddy as a child on Christmas morning.

The gondola ferried us out of the base area, high above an Italianate clock
tower built with an oligarch's money, across a birch forest stippled with
powder. Thick clouds obscured my view, so I unfolded a trail map, which was
entirely in Russian. On it, I could see that Rosa Khutor was laid out much like
a European resort, with a series of chairlifts linking the river valley, at
1,800 feet, with a craggy, treeless summit at 7,612 feet. As in the Alps, the
resort takes a laissez-faire approach to marking trails. Only a handful had
designated names, which weren't helpful anyway, unless you read Cyrillic or had
a knack for symbol recognition. I wondered aloud whether any rope or signage
designated the resort's boundary.

''No rope!'' Sasha replied with a knowing smile. ''This is Russia.''

Vladimir Putin may be better known as a judo master and shirtless fisherman, but
come winter, when snow coats the onion domes atop St. Basil's Cathedral in
Moscow, the Russian president heads for the slopes. The Wikipedia entry for ski
suit, in fact, features an image not of the Olympic stars Lindsey Vonn or Bode
Miller but of Mr. Putin, wearing the red two-piece uniform of Russia's national
team. On his personal website, he declares skiing ''a dynamic sport that
requires mastering a technique, and is a great opportunity for an active
holiday, to stay fit and get a boost of energy and good spirits.''

He also claims to prefer skiing in Russia. Until recently, however, there was
little the country offered a foreign skier seeking an active holiday, never mind
those good spirits. Russia's tallest peaks are along its southern border with
Georgia, in the Caucasus mountain range. The mountains stretch diagonally in a
belt from the Black Sea, east to the Caspian. The tallest of them, Mount Elbrus,
reaches higher than any in the rest of Europe, with an elevation of 18,500 feet.
But beyond some heli-skiing operations, the handful of ski areas dating from the
Soviet era hardly justified an Aeroflot ticket.

Not surprisingly, then, wealthy Russians have preferred skiing the Alps. Around
a decade ago, the Russian government decided that there was no reason they
needed to lose those vacation rubles to Switzerland, France and Italy. They flew
in a mountain resort developer from Whistler, British Columbia, Paul Mathews, to
evaluate the potential of the Caucasus for winter tourism. Mr. Mathews looked at
the jagged ridgelines surrounding the sleepy village of Krasnaya Polyana,
nestled in a river valley above Sochi, a city of about 400,000; at the long,
deep gulleys that tumbled down from them; at the region's glaciated bowls and
gentle plateaus. It reminded him of Les Trois Vallées in France, among the
world's largest linked ski areas. Mr. Mathews drafted some plans, and in 2002,
Interros, a conglomerate controlled by Vladimir Potanin, one of Russia's richest
men, and Gazprom, the world's largest natural-gas producer, began building ski
resorts.

Situated on the Black Sea, Sochi has a pleasant, temperate climate that has
lured Russians to seaside sanitariums since the days of Stalin. The palm trees
there can almost fool you into believing you're in another country. ''Sochi is a
unique place,'' Mr. Putin told the International Olympic Committee in his
winning pitch to host the 2014 Games. ''On the seashore, you can enjoy a fine
spring day -- but up in the mountains, it's winter.''

When I flew into Sochi last March, joined by my friend Than, it was neither
springlike nor fine. The late-winter storm, which had diverted our flight from
Moscow the previous night, cast a gray and despondent mood over the subtropical
city. We took a taxi to Krasnaya Polyana, an hourlong trip up a winding,
two-lane road, through the gorge of the Mzymta River. (A new highway and
high-speed railway, being built across the river, will cut the travel time in
half.)

It was less than a year before the Olympic torch would arrive in early February,
and Krasnaya Polyana didn't resemble a quaint French mountain valley so much as
the world's largest alpine construction site. Cranes towered over the half-built
shells of condos and hotels that lined the river like a speculative stretch of a
Monopoly board. Dump trucks rumbled down the main road, kicking up dust and
snarling traffic. Out the taxi window, I watched groups of olive-skinned guest
workers carrying plastic bags shuffle out of convenience stores and then
disappear behind wire fences lined with banner ads that depicted sun-drenched
resort villages and smiling ski tourists.

Rosa Khutor, the largest of the four new ski areas based a short drive apart
along the valley floor, was nearly complete. It appeared much like a visitor
will find it this season: two rows of pastel-colored hotels with ground-level
restaurants flanking the Mzymta River; a clock tower square; lamp-lit pedestrian
bridges; an indoor skating rink. When I arrived, a few families strolled the
brick-lined esplanade lining the river, throwing snowballs. In the lobby of our
hotel, the Tulip Inn, members of the Russian ski team lounged around with beers.
Rosa Khutor, which is hosting the Olympic alpine events, ran test competitions
last winter, but many had been canceled for lack of snow. Resolved not ever to
let this happen again, the resort has been equipped with the most robust
snow-making system in existence.

''This is a nice present for us,'' Sasha said as we rode the gondola the next
morning. The storm had delivered too much of a good thing, it turned out, as the
exposed upper half of the mountain -- arrayed with chutes and couloirs -- was
closed. Sasha handed me an avalanche transceiver from his bag, and asked if I
had used one before. We would be skiing inbounds and close to the lift --
nothing too steep -- but the implication was clear: We were, for all practical
purposes, on our own. This was Russia.

At the top of the lift, a digital board displayed ski conditions, rating the
avalanche danger as four on a scale of five. ''Very dangerous in alpine zone,''
Sasha said.

We were joined by a handful of other locals, including Inna Didenko, a blond
Sochi native and competitive free rider. Than and I followed their tracks into
the woods. The crystalline snow there was thigh-high and untouched; a
snowboarder in neon yellow pants jokingly declared, in Russian, the universal
skiing dictum of there being ''no friends on a powder day'' before leaving us
behind.

Each of us then picked our own line, first Sasha, who banked three turns and
swiftly vanished behind some birch trees. I chose a route to his right. Midway
down, from across the slope, I could make out Than, hooting loudly.

That evening, at the swanky bar inside the Park Inn, I met with Jean-Louis
Tuaillon, the mountain manager at Rosa Khutor. ''Have you been on the road in
Russia and seen how people are driving?'' he asked me. I thought of my taxi
driver's slalom turns and tailgating up the winding road from the airport.
''They are skiing the same way. The typical Russian experience is wild skiing.''

Mr. Tuaillon was with the French company Compagnie des Alpes, which operates
major resorts like Chamonix and Val d'Isère and has been tasked by Rosa Khutor's
owner with turning it into a world-class ski area. This apparently entailed
making Rosa Khutor less Russian.

''Our goal is to have friendly people at guest services,'' added Mr. Tuaillon's
colleague Jean-Marc Farini, the ski area's general manager. ''In Russia, this
hasn't been done before. You still have this Soviet legacy. People don't care.''

I described my experience renting skis that morning -- late-model Rossignols,
with a snazzy sticker reading ''CZAR'' -- which had involved the usual Russian
formalities: relinquishing my passport at a cashier's window in return for a
paper stamped with an official-looking seal.

Mr. Farini nodded sympathetically. ''For the cash register, I wanted to adopt a
single line, so you go up to the first one that's available,'' he said. ''But
that just doesn't work in Russia.''

The next morning, we found the mountain still socked in. With the upper half of
Rosa Khutor closed -- still with an avalanche rating of ''very dangerous'' -- we
took a free village bus 10 minutes downriver toward the center of Krasnaya
Polyana, to Gornaya Karusel (Mountain Carousel), another new ski area.

The entrance to the base gondola is beside the main road, and as we lifted off,
I was afforded an aerial view of the bulldozers and earthmovers remaking this
former backwater. The build-out of the Sochi Olympics -- a megaproject of new
tunnels, highways, ski lifts, stadiums and lodging -- is said to have cost $51
billion, the highest price tag ever for the Games. But its environmental cost
might add untold billions to that figure. Environmental groups point to
pollution and deforestation, of Sochi National Park shrinking in size, of
coastal wetlands being used as a dump, of the Mzymta River becoming unswimmable.
As activists have spoken, they've also been detained.

The issue that has gained more attention is gay rights, following a new Russian
law banning ''homosexual propaganda'' that went into effect earlier this year.
Though there have been calls for boycotts, officially, gay tourists are welcome,
and Olympic organizers have agreed to set up protest zones during the Games.
This week, in what has been widely perceived as a snub, President Obama named
two openly gay athletes to be part of the American delegation to Sochi -- but
none of the nation's top political figures.

Meanwhile, in response to violence promised by Islamist insurgent leaders, based
just 250 miles or so from Sochi in the republics of Chechnya and Dagestan,
Russia has put in place unprecedented security, including the use of underwater
sonar and drones.

That security plan also includes armed soldiers at ski lifts. After two
gondolas, we wended our way down an empty, untracked chute along the ski
boundary that fed into a spacious glade. The air was warmer than the previous
day, cementing the powder as we descended. Our trail petered out at the edge of
a dirt service road, which we had to walk across to reach the chairlift. The
security guard manning the lift glared disapprovingly at our muddy boots,
muttering something to Sasha, who lectured something back. The guard shrugged
and looked away.

Sasha later explained: ''He says to us, 'You cannot get on with your dirty
boots.' I tell him, 'You are not the boss. You have to be hospitable to the
guests.'''

Around midday, the clouds briefly lifted, and for the first time I glimpsed the
jagged contour of the summit ridge. Gornaya Karusel is a much smaller ski area
than Rosa Khutor, but Sasha finds its varied terrain and tree skiing superior.
''Better for free riding,'' he said. Eventually, all four ski areas surrounding
Krasnaya Polyana will be linked by a single lift pass.

We took a few laps down a wide-open bowl, before stopping in at a log chalet for
lunch. The place was packed with Russians. I ordered a bowl of solyanka, a
hearty red soup, and a glass of mulled wine, and we chatted about the
differences between skiing in Russia and North America. Than and I had once
taught skiing in Crested Butte, Colo. Sasha has never been to the States.
''American people are very interesting to me,'' he said. ''If a bad skier has
fallen, nobody is just waiting around. All come to help! If I fall, I must stand
up myself. Because it's my experience. It is, I don't know, the school of
life.''

I looked out the window. Sleet had begun to fall, orienting my thoughts toward a
sauna. We decided to take a final run. Sasha was eager to show us a densely
forested area he called the Magic Forest that had ''many Christmas trees.'' From
the top of the lift, we traversed the slope, first passing by the entrance to a
bowl where a sign was posted in Russian and English: ''Driving outside of the
lines is forbidden.''

Sasha grinned. ''But if you do it,'' he said, ''no one will stop you.''

IF YOU GO

Rosa Khutor's website (en.rosaski.com) contains information about lift prices
and lodging.

The clean, three-star Tulip Inn (tulipinnrosakhutor.com; 7-862-243-0000) is,
like all hotels in the base area, just steps from the gondola and rental shop.
Rooms from 5,800 rubles ($185 at 32 rubles to the dollar).

Or try the Park Inn by Radisson (parkinn.com/hotel-rosakhutor; 7-862-243-1111),
which has a popular bar and Bavarian-style gastro pub. Hotels can help arrange
airport transportation, as well as issue lift tickets.

Skiing with a guide at Rosa Khutor is not necessary, but the experienced ''free
riders'' at Adventure Studio (snowsports.ru) know the Krasnaya Polyana region
well. Hiring a mountain guide costs 6,000 rubles a person per day, or 2,500
rubles a person for a group of three.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/22/travel/a-test-run-at-russias-olympic-hopeful.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Top, Manuel Pietropoli at the Snowboard World Cup Men's
Qualification Halfpipe Test Event at Rosa Khutor, last February
far right, Sasha Krasnov, a local ski guide, on the gondola, below, at Rosa
Khutor.
Above, from left, construction at the Olympic Caldron (at left) and the Fisht
Olympic Stadium
bar at the Park Inn, at Rosa Khutor, one of four new ski areas in Krasnaya
Polyana
snowboarders at Rosa Khutor, and reading a ski map there. Inset, right,
President Vladimir V. Putin, left, and Dmitri Kozak, deputy prime minister and
head of the Sochi 2014 Olympic preparatory commission, at Krasnaya Polyana, in
February. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY HANS KLAUS TECHT/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
ANDY ISAACSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
NATALIA KOLESNIKOVA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES
ANDY ISAACSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
SERGEI KARPUKHIN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (TR6
TR7) MAP (TR6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


