                             1080 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 12, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Draft of Security Plan Calls for a Muscular Japan

BYLINE: By MARTIN FACKLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 503 words


TOKYO -- Japan must strengthen its defense and seek a larger regional role as
the balance of power shifts with the rise of China and the decline of American
influence, according to a draft of a new national security strategy released
Wednesday.

The draft, written by a group of experts appointed by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe,
called for building even closer military ties with the United States, the
postwar guarantor of Japanese security that still has 50,000 military personnel
based in Japan. However, the paper also said that Japan must ''strengthen its
own capabilities and expand its own roles'' by bolstering its antimissile
defenses and its ability to defend the freedom of navigation in surrounding seas
--apparently a reference to China's growing naval presence in the region.

The new strategy did not call for a sudden buildup in forces, and it appeared to
be consistent with the gradual increase in Japan's willingness and ability to
defend itself in recent years, especially since a dispute over islands has
heated up with China. Still, it offered a glimpse of how far Japan has come from
a firmly pacifist nation that just two decades ago was still reluctant to admit
it had even a limited military.

Mr. Abe has vowed to give Japan an even stronger security posture, though he
still emphasizes that Japan's forces must remain purely defensive. Speaking to
the group of experts, Mr. Abe called the draft a ''historic document'' because
it is Japan's first attempt at creating a national security strategy, and it
comes as the country has created a new American-style national security council
to strengthen its response to the changing regional environment.

The draft cited China's rapid military expansion as well as North Korea's
growing nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities as major causes of this
shifting balance. It also specifically cited China's ''intrusions'' into waters
around disputed islands claimed by both nations and China's recent establishment
of an air defense identification zone as concerns for Japan's security.

At the same time, the draft called on Japan to ''work even harder to become a
major player in international society'' by building alliances with other nations
including Australia, South Korea and Southeast Asian countries. It also
recommended easing self-imposed restrictions on arms exports to allow Japan to
join the United States and others in jointly developing new weapons.

The document was released along with a draft of a new defense policy that calls
for Japan to strengthen its ability to defend its southwestern islands, which
would include the uninhabited islands in the East China Sea at the center of the
territorial dispute with China. While the defense policy draft contained few
specifics, Japanese defense officials have talked of acquiring American-made
drones to patrol the East China Sea and tilt-rotor Osprey aircraft to ferry its
troops to remote islands more quickly.

The cabinet is expected to approve both drafts next week, local news media
reported.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/12/world/asia/japanese-defense-panel-calls-for-ex
panded-regional-role.html

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


