                             1056 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 24, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Long Road Back

BYLINE: By WIL S. HYLTON

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 5028 words


We had been on the island for about an hour when we found the first skeleton. It
was a pile of yellow bones tucked inside a cardboard box. Mark Noah squatted
down for a look. He is a stocky man of 48, with a light buzz of blond hair and
the wind-beaten eyes of a lifelong outdoorsman. Since 2008, he has been
traveling to the tiny Pacific atoll of Tarawa to search for the remains of more
than 500 Marines who died there in World War II. Sometimes locals dig up their
bones and leave them in his storage locker.

Noah reached into the box and pushed aside a fragment of cranium to remove a
curved metal plate. ''Wow,'' he muttered. ''Clearly a World War II burial with
the helmet.'' He passed it to the man crouching next to him, Bill Belcher, and
added, ''It looks American.''

Belcher nodded. ''That's what I thought when I saw it.'' He laid the piece back
in the box and picked up two sections of jawbone with the teeth still attached.
They fit together into a complete lower mandible, which Belcher held close to
his glasses, squinting. Noah pulled another hunk of metal from the box. ''And
this is a hand grenade,'' he said. He shook his head and smiled. It was all
pretty normal on Tarawa.

This week marks the 70th anniversary of the Battle of Tarawa. It was a fight
that lasted only three days, but they were among the bloodiest in 20th-century
American history. By the time the battle ended, more than 1,100 U.S. Marines lay
dead on the sandy earth and churning water.

By themselves, the islands held little value to the Japanese or the American
government. They were situated about halfway between Pearl Harbor and the
Philippines and were barely large enough to hold an airfield. But they served as
an essential steppingstone across the Pacific: If American bombers wanted to
reach Japan, they would need an air base in the Mariana Islands; to capture the
Marianas, they would first need the Marshall Islands; and for the Marshalls,
they needed Tarawa. To fortify the atoll, the Japanese sent in 3,800 imperial
troops, along with 1,200 enslaved Korean laborers to be thrust onto the front
lines. They spent a year building concrete bunkers and planting massive cannons
along the beaches. The leader of the Japanese garrison, Rear Adm. Keiji
Shibazaki, predicted that it would take ''one million men, 100 years'' to seize
the islands.

American commanders selected the Second Marine Division for the job. In the fall
of 1943, they boarded a convoy of battleships and destroyers, which the
legendary war correspondent Robert Sherrod described as ''the largest force the
Pacific has seen.'' Sherrod climbed aboard. As they drew close to Tarawa, he
watched the ships unload 2,000 tons of explosive shells while American planes
laid another 900 tons of bombs across the islands. It was, Maj. Gen. Julian
Smith wrote, ''the greatest concentration of aerial bombardment and naval
gunfire in the history of warfare.'' Into this inferno, the Second Marines
disembarked. They descended into amphibious landing vehicles and raced toward
the beach, but the tide was out, and the water was too shallow for their boats.
The Marines found themselves stranded on reefs, hundreds of yards offshore,
wading through waist-high water as Japanese gunners mowed them down. Those lucky
enough to reach the shore crawled through a maze of corpses. ''No one who has
not been there,'' Sherrod wrote, ''can imagine the overwhelming, inhuman smell
of 5,000 dead who are piled and scattered in an area of less than one square
mile.''

After their victory, the Marines set about burying the dead. They wrapped the
bodies in ponchos and folded them into shallow graves. Then they moved on, and
military construction crews came in to raze the island flat. They expanded the
airfield and built a network of roads and offices. By the time an excavation
team arrived in 1946 to exhume and identify the dead -- part of a global
campaign to recognize the fallen -- no one could remember where they were.
Investigators spent three months searching, but they found only half the
Marines. Today, 471 of the Tarawa Marines are buried by name in American
cemeteries. Another 104 have been laid to rest in ''unknown'' graves at the
National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Hawaii.

And the rest -- perhaps as many as 520 Marines -- are still on, or near, Tarawa.

Mark Noah had come to find them, though he couldn't fully explain why. He is a
private citizen with no formal connection to Tarawa or the Marines, but over the
last several years, he has been consumed by a personal quest to locate the lost
graves.

Noah was born in 1965 in Taipei, the son of a Foreign Service worker. By the
time he turned 18, he had spent years in China, Korea, Finland, Thailand, the
Philippines and Russia, where he became deeply conscious of the lingering
effects of war. ''Thousands of maimed Russian World War II veterans lived out on
the streets,'' he said. ''A lot of the guys would still have their tunics on and
all their medals, missing an arm or both legs, and living in the street in the
middle of the winter in Moscow. And so I became very interested in the
history.''

Today Noah works as a commercial pilot, but his passion for history defines him.
In 2001, he bought and restored a 1945 Navy airplane called an SNJ-6. A couple
of years later, he bought another and began offering rides to veterans who once
flew them. Then he incorporated the operation under the name History Flight and
began to expand his fleet. While researching vintage planes online, he was
stunned to discover how many planes, and men, were still missing from the war.
Nearly one in five American losses had never been found. ''I had no idea,'' he
said, ''because if you look at the standard mainstream history, it's not in
there.'' Noah began to visit the National Archives in search of information
about the missing troops, and in 2007 came upon a postwar report from Tarawa. It
said that nearly half the Marines who died there had not been found. ''I almost
fell out of my chair,'' Noah said, ''because I knew that over 1,100 people had
died.''

Since then, Noah has traveled to Tarawa more than a dozen times. He has
canvassed the neighborhoods and alleys with ground-penetrating radar and
magnetometers, completed the first RTK GPS survey in the region and launched a
camera-mounted drone to produce a 62-foot-long aerial photograph. He has also
hired a small team of archaeologists and historians who join him on the islands,
along with a handful of local employees.

In the process, he has enraged parts of the U.S. military, including the man who
stood beside him now.

On the surface, Mark Noah and Bill Belcher seem to have much in common. Each is
physically imposing, wry, stubborn and occasionally prickly, with a penchant for
colorful language. But Belcher wasn't part of Noah's team, or even really a
friend. For 15 years, he has worked as a field archaeologist in the Joint
P.O.W./M.I.A. Accounting Command, or JPAC, the military unit that recovers the
remains of missing troops. And Noah's work on Tarawa raised complicated issues
for JPAC and Belcher. For months leading up to our October trip, the two men
were locked in a feud with lasting implications for M.I.A. recovery around the
world.

Noah first contacted JPAC in 2008. Over the course of a year he had assembled
more than a hundred archival photographs that showed the original burials on
Tarawa and had pieced together a theory about where the graves might be. But
JPAC archaeologists are famously resistant to outside help. Enthusiastic
civilians contact the unit routinely to offer information about sunken ships and
planes and graves. The trouble is that many of those volunteers turn out to be
little more than treasure hunters who have already pillaged the sites for
artifacts, like guns, watches and coins.

''I always have a very, very deep, deep level of skepticism about people
involved in this,'' Belcher told me. ''Particularly with World War II, because a
lot of people want it for notoriety. They want to feel important. And the
artifacts are actually worth quite a bit of money to collectors.''

When Noah delivered his initial Tarawa findings to JPAC, the unit largely
ignored him. ''They blew us off, and that was that,'' he said. Noah tried to
push back, issuing a news release about his project and reaching out to public
officials. A Chicago alderman who served in the Marines put him in touch with
Representative Dan Lipinski, and in 2010, under pressure from Lipinski, JPAC
sent a team Tarawa to investigate Noah's theories. But when the JPAC team dug
four sites and found nothing, each side blamed the other: JPAC insisted that
Noah's research was worthless; Noah blamed JPAC for digging in the wrong places.

Noah kept going back. He began to experiment with new technologies. He bought a
magnetometer to search for traces of metal underground, which might be a gun or
a dog tag. He brought a cadaver-sniffing dog to search for the odor of decay. He
took soil samples to study for subtle chemical clues. At one point in 2010, he
says, the JPAC leadership tried to stop his research. An immigration official
for Kiribati, the republic that includes Tarawa, emailed Noah that he would need
embassy clearance to return to the island. Noah contacted Lipinski, who reached
out to the State Department and, after nearly a year, was able to restore Noah's
access.

Noah had been in touch with the head of the veterans association for the Second
Marine Division, a retired colonel named Dave Brown. In the summer of 2011, they
flew to Hawaii to meet with the JPAC staff. It was a disaster. A lead
archaeologist in the unit, John Byrd, attacked Noah's methodology. ''I got about
two sentences into the first description, and Dr. Byrd was just crapping all
over everything,'' Noah said.

A month later, though, Noah received an unexpected call from Johnie Webb, one of
JPAC's senior leaders. Webb had been with the recovery unit since its beginning.
Over the years, he led missions, commanded the unit and, after his military
retirement, stayed on as a liaison with the families of missing men. Webb told
Noah he was intrigued by his work and willing to bend the rules. ''So he says,
'Could you coincidentally be on Tarawa on the 5th of October?' '' Noah recalled.
' ''Because I coincidentally might have some of our people out there.' ''

Noah spent four days on the islands with a JPAC analyst named Jay Silverstein,
who immediately sensed that Noah's work was serious. ''It was really
exceptional,'' Silverstein told me. ''Mark had put together a crack team. They
were innovative. They were open to new ideas. Tarawa is one of the most complex
battlefields we have, and Mark was using the right composite of scientific
members to piece together that puzzle.'' Back at JPAC, Silverstein began pushing
for a new recovery team to return to Tarawa and excavate Noah's target sites. He
encountered fierce resistance from some of the unit's archaeologists, but last
year, JPAC committed to sending another excavation to Tarawa. This time, the
lead archaeologist was Bill Belcher.

Belcher arrived on the island last fall with modest expectations. By the time he
left three weeks later, he had successfully excavated three sets of skeletal
remains that he believed to be Marines, from a neighborhood Noah calls Cemetery
25.

Then the relationship between Noah and Belcher fell apart. Belcher had promised
Noah that if JPAC returned to Tarawa for another dig, Noah could join them. But
early this year, Noah's contacts on Tarawa informed him that JPAC was already
there. Noah accused Belcher of lying, which Belcher denied vehemently by email,
leading to a vituperative exchange that culminated when Belcher told Noah never
to speak to him again.

For the next six months, Noah did not. Instead, he began to dig. Between
February and July, Noah and his team were on Tarawa almost continuously.
Finally, in August, Noah flew to Hawaii to reveal his results to Johnie Webb.
''I didn't even want him to come to JPAC, because I didn't want him to get
attacked again,'' Webb told me. Instead, Webb brought the commanding general of
the unit, Kelly McKeague, to meet Noah at a Chinese restaurant. Over lunch, Noah
revealed that he had begun to dig on his own. He had filled seven large cases of
material for JPAC -- including dog tags, boots, ponchos, helmets, ammunition
clips and the skeletal remains of at least 50 U.S. Marines.

Webb laughed when he recalled the conversation, but he said the prospect of
telling Belcher filled him with dread.

Belcher's response surprised him. ''I said: 'You know what? We can't stop him,'
'' Belcher recalled. '' 'Let's see what he's doing.' ''

Now Belcher and Noah were back on the islands, standing over a box of bones. We
piled them into the car and set off down the road. From the size of the cranium
and the shape of the grenade, both men were beginning to suspect that the
skeleton was not American but Japanese. But they wanted to find out where the
bones were found. Nearly everyone who lives on Tarawa has dug up bones at some
point. The water table is only a few feet deep, so nothing is buried deeply.
With so many skeletons being found and reburied, year after year, the bones can
get mixed up. A Japanese cranium could be intermingled with American remains.

We drove through a series of shacks built from sticks and logs. Most were only a
few feet square, with open sides and a slag of thatch on top to slow down the
rain. Seventy years ago, none of this was there. The construction crews that
razed the landscape and covered over the graves erected a number of stark
geometric cemeteries lined with white crosses -- but these were largely
symbolic. The unit that came to exhume the graves in 1946 quickly discovered
that most of the crosses weren't placed over actual graves. ''These 'cemeteries'
were placed without any relation to the actual burials,'' the leader of the '46
recovery team, First Lt. Ira Eisensmith, wrote in his report on Tarawa. Many of
the skeletons that Eisensmith and his team found were missing their hands and
feet. Noah, who has studied the postwar report, questions its accuracy. ''It's a
real C.Y.A. report,'' he said. ''It says that many of the Marines were buried
without their dog tags, and that's not true, because we've been recovering their
dog tags. And it says that many of the dog tags were illegible, yet that's not
true -- we've recovered many legible dog tags 70 years later.'' Noah suspects
that most of the Marines were intact when they were buried, and that
Eisensmith's team did incomplete excavations that left some of the remains in
the ground. ''I'm not one to make a big deal about it,'' Noah said, ''but the
people that did this recovery work did a terrible job.''

The conditions on Tarawa today only complicate the process further. Tarawa is
one of the most impoverished and overpopulated atolls in the Pacific. The main
island, Betio, has more than 20,000 residents, crammed into about half a square
mile, which is roughly the population density of Hong Kong. With this
overpopulation comes environmental crisis. Garbage is strewn across the beaches
and neighborhoods, along with human waste. Many islanders use the beach as a
toilet, which pollutes the aquifer and the sea. Outbreaks of typhoid, hepatitis
and tuberculosis, along with increasing incidents of leprosy, have struck in
recent years, making life for islanders grim and recovery work all the more
difficult.

Half a mile down the road, we turned into a dusty lot. This was the neighborhood
of a man named Kautebiri Kobuti, who leads Noah's crew on the islands. Kobuti
was in the yard taking a shower with a jug of water. He explained that the bones
in the cardboard box had been excavated by his friends. We drove to their house,
where four men stood around the edge of a sandy pit while a fifth worked the
bottom with a wood-handled shovel. Noah jumped into the pit and examined the
ground. After a moment, he stood up with a small bone balanced on a leaf. ''Just
a fish vertebra, right?'' he asked.

Belcher studied the bone. ''No,'' he said, ''that's a dog.''

Noah turned to Kobuti. ''There's more in here?''

Kobuti conferred with the men, who nodded vigorously.

''Can we scrape some of it away?'' Noah asked, hunching down to study something
lodged in the side of the pit. As he did, another man hurried from the house
with a pink grocery bag filled with bones. A large femur protruded from the top.

''O.K.,'' Belcher said, ''those are definitely human.''

It can take thousands of hours and millions of dollars to bring home bones from
a place like Tarawa, and even then the bones must be tested for DNA and matched
with a surviving relative -- all so that they can be buried again, closer to
home. The closure that this gesture provides to families is difficult for
outsiders to grasp, and only a handful of researchers have ever focused on the
M.I.A. experience.

One of the first to do so, in the early 1970s, was a doctoral student at the
University of Wisconsin named Pauline Boss. She was interested in the way that
families cope with uncertainty. Whether it's the sudden disappearance of a child
or the slow erasure of a parent by dementia, the grief process is complicated by
a disrupted narrative, because so much of grieving depends on the understanding
and acceptance of what has happened.

When Boss presented her ideas, which she would later call ''ambiguous loss,'' at
a conference in 1973, she was approached by a social scientist, Edna
Hunter-King, who had been working with the relatives of missing men from the
Vietnam War. ''She said, 'We have data on this, but no theory,' '' Boss
recalled, '' 'and you have a theory with no data.' ''

In the decades to come, they would develop a small literature on M.I.A.
families. What distinguished the missing soldier from other combat losses, they
found, was that the family was deprived of a clear explanation for their loss.
''When you have someone missing, it does something to the human psyche,'' Boss
said. ''There are no rituals for it. The rest of the community doesn't know what
to do. And grief therapy doesn't work.''

Boss was also interested in the way M.I.A. grief passes down through
generations. In many cases, a daughter, a son or a grandchild would become
fixated on the loss of a man she or he had never known.

Over the past five years, while working on a book about a missing B-24 bomber
from the Pacific war, I've met with dozens of M.I.A. families who have been
profoundly shaped by the disappearance of a relative they never met. Lisa
Phillips was born in 1963, but she grew up in the shadow of her uncle Joe, who
was captured by the Japanese in World War II and killed in a prison camp. A
military recovery team went to exhume his remains in 1947, but as they flew
across the Himalayas on their way home, their plane went down. The remains of
Phillips's uncle, and of the recovery team that found him, are still there.
Phillips said the loss has been part of her family ever since. ''Every holiday,
my grandmother would burst into tears,'' she said. ''She kept a room, his
bedroom, the way it was when he left.'' One of Phillips's aunts could not accept
that Joe was gone. Until the end of her life, she refused to move from her
Connecticut house, saying, ''I know he'll be home someday, and I want him to be
able to find me.'' Today Phillips is the head of a group known as World War II
Families for the Return of the Missing, which has encouraged the expansion of
JPAC's purview.

The modern recovery program, which includes JPAC and seven other offices spread
throughout the Department of Defense, has operated in roughly its current form
since 1973. For most of those years, the unit's focus has been on Vietnam.
That's because advocates for the Vietnam missing are organized and politically
savvy. But in recent years, M.I.A. families like Phillips's have pressured
Congress to widen the recovery mission. In 1994, legislators added the missing
from Korea; in 1999, they folded in the aviators and airmen who flew over New
Guinea in World War II; and in 2009, they added the rest of the World War II
missing. In the space of only a few years, JPAC's mandate ballooned from 1,647
personnel in the Vietnam area to some 83,000 M.I.A.'s around the globe.

World War II families see this as a matter of parity. They say there is no
reason the missing from one war should be recovered but not those from another,
because the legacy of loss persists in their families as well. ''It's been
carried down,'' Phillips said. ''Even my kids are like, 'You know, if something
happens to you, I still want to get Uncle Joe back.' ''

By 1998, Boss and Hunter-King had found so many M.I.A. families in which the
grief haunted a second or third generation that Hunter-King was invited to draft
a new chapter for the clinical handbook of multigenerational trauma, alongside
entries on the effects of slavery, nuclear annihilation and the Holocaust.
''Unlike the Holocaust,'' she wrote, ''mothers of M.I.A. children were not
suddenly uprooted from their homes and deprived of their possessions, countries
and cultures. They did not lose parents, siblings and husbands to programmed
incineration. . . . On the other hand, most children of Holocaust survivors have
not waited for over a quarter-century in a state of ambiguous grieving,
wondering whether their parent is dead or alive, as children of M.I.A.'s have
done.''

Many M.I.A. relatives are also burdened by a family story of how the missing man
might have survived -- perhaps he is lost, or has amnesia, or is being held
captive. The son of a missing Army Air Force flier once told me of the great
relief he felt at a meeting of M.I.A. families. ''You go to these meetings,'' he
said, ''and everybody has a story like mine. You know, somehow the guy survived.
He's still going to come home. You hear that from people who lost somebody in
the Pacific, in Europe, in Africa, all parts of the world. As soon as they start
talking, there's something along that line. It's a mistake. It's not right.
There's something funny about it. Every time.''

This form of hope can seem corrosive and difficult to comprehend. Even within
individual families, Boss explained, the persistence of survival stories can
lead to profound conflict. ''A family rift is almost predictable,'' she said.
''When you have no facts, no proof, then everybody makes up their own story --
and the stories that family members make up often do not agree.''

This phenomenon makes the JPAC recovery effort not so much a military mission as
a humanitarian cause. Deno Zazzetti was 13 when his brother died on Tarawa. The
news arrived on Christmas Eve, 1943. ''A Western Union kid drove up with his
bicycle, gave the telegram to my sister and took off,'' Zazzetti told me. ''My
sister yelled, and we found her on her knees.'' That moment, he said, marked a
breaking point in his life. ''My ma used to sing all the time. She never sang
again. She had pitch-black hair -- a year later, she was solid white.'' Today
Zazzetti keeps an empty plot beside his mother's grave. ''For me,'' he said,
''it would be the best thing that I could do in my lifetime, if I could get my
brother back to my mom.''

On Tarawa, Noah and Belcher wanted to sort through the bones, so we drove to a
concrete government building where Noah rents an office. The room is tiny, about
150 square feet and lined with the portraits of missing Marines. A skeleton
stands in the corner, by a bookshelf stacked with the white crosses that once
marked Marine graves.

Noah set the box of bones on a workbench; then he and Belcher stretched on
rubber gloves and began to sort through the pieces. Noah began with the cranium
fragment. ''Somebody already did the lifting-the-head ritual,'' he said,
referring to a custom that involves pulverizing and consuming a skull.

Belcher rummaged through a jumble of vertebrae and pulled out a nasal bone.
''They're Japanese,'' he said. ''We have a peaked nose, and Asians have a
relatively flat area. This nasal area is flat instead of peaked.''

The other evidence in the box -- helmet, bullets and the hand grenade -- also
looked to be Japanese, so Belcher and Noah began to pack everything into an
evidence bag. They would take this to the local police station, where Japanese
officials could pick it up. The custom in Japan is to incinerate the bones as
part of the national tradition.

Next, Noah pulled out a bag of American artifacts. His team recovered so many
Marine skeletons this summer, more than 7,000 bones, that they still had not
found time to sort through all the other artifacts. For 30 minutes, Noah and
Belcher pored over each item: a metal ring, the chin strap for a helmet, dozens
of coins and buttons and a pair of dice.

Noah approaches his work on Tarawa with little sign of emotion, and he spends
little time speaking to the descendants of the missing. One exception came this
summer, when he traveled to Indiana for the funeral of a Marine named Manley
Forrest Winkley, whose skeleton was one of three that Noah led JPAC to recover
last fall. Winkley stormed the north beach of the battlefield on the first day
of combat and was killed by a shot to the neck. When the JPAC team uncovered
him, three feet below a pigpen, he was still wrapped in his service poncho.

On Aug. 24, Winkley's family gathered around the coffin holding his remains in
Nashville, Ind., then drove 60 miles in procession to a veterans' cemetery. All
the way, the streets were lined with veterans, children, firefighters and church
groups who had come out to welcome home a Tarawa Marine. ''There were probably
about 4,000 people standing on the side of the road,'' Noah said. ''All these
little towns were shut down. It made me feel like we had helped to put some of
the America back in America.''

While Noah was in Indiana for the funeral, JPAC was under siege. All summer the
unit was inundated with criticism about its management and methods. A report in
July from the Government Accountability Office revealed the longstanding
friction between JPAC and another agency of the recovery program, the Defense
Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office, or DPMO. That same month, another
report surfaced in The Associated Press, disparaging the unit's historians. In
early August, two congressional committees began inquiries into the reports. And
in October, an NBC News story accused JPAC of holding ''phony ceremonies'' in
which previously recovered remains were unloaded by an honor guard in full
military dress.

Most people familiar with the recovery program knew these reports were thin. The
tension between JPAC and DPMO goes back years, and it is typical of any
interagency program. Likewise the report attacking JPAC historians was difficult
to take seriously -- it was commissioned by JPAC's laboratory staff, which
competes with the historians for influence and funding. Senator Claire
McCaskill, who is leading one of the congressional inquiries, told me the tone
of that report, filled with ad hominem attacks, made her instantly suspicious.
''It was bizarre,'' McCaskill said. ''It was a giant, childish mess.''

The story of the ''phony ceremonies'' was equally peculiar. It described a
purely symbolic ritual that takes place after each successful mission. Anyone
who had actually been on a mission knew that there was another ceremony, which
took place in the field, where the recovery team stands at attention as the
human remains are loaded onto a transport jet, then flies 10 or 15 hours around
the world, often arriving at JPAC headquarters after midnight. The idea that
someone at the symbolic ceremony in Hawaii might believe the honor guard in
dress uniform, carrying a flag-draped coffin, was actually a recovery team
returning from six weeks in the jungle was absurd.

The real problems facing JPAC were more serious and complex -- and they were
embodied on the Tarawa atoll. With more than 73,000 new cases from World War II,
many of them deep in the Pacific, on islands filled with homes and people and
racked with environmental damage, and with a testy public-private partnership
struggling to bring home what may prove to be the largest M.I.A. recovery in
American history, Tarawa was no longer just a distant string of islands. It had
become a symbol of the recovery program itself -- its history, its mission, its
problems and, maybe, some of the answers.

One day last month, I flew to Hawaii to meet with JPAC's senior leader, Johnie
Webb. I've known Webb for many years, and we met at a restaurant overlooking the
beach to speak frankly about the challenges facing the unit. Webb has come to
believe that outside groups like Noah's can do some recovery operations as well
as JPAC. The question was how to change the culture of JPAC so that those groups
would be welcome, without abandoning the unit's standards and oversight.
''Everybody's not going to be Mark,'' Webb said. ''Do we set up some type of
program, training, whatever you want to call it, and then we certify these
groups?''

Belcher, too, had come around on this point. He was planning to spend much of
November and December coordinating with a private operation in the Himalayas,
while a younger JPAC archaeologist would spend six weeks with Noah on Tarawa.

The bottom line, Webb told me, was that ''there's more work to do than we can
get done.''

On our last day on Tarawa, Belcher and Noah decided to dig together. We drove to
a tattered neighborhood with a small crew. The two men knelt on the ground to
frame a rectangular space with twine; then they grabbed shovels and began to cut
into the earth. They found diapers, chicken bones, a piece of rubber hose. As
the sun went down, Noah dug while Belcher leaned against a tree. ''Mark,'' he
said, ''I've got your next project.''

''What's that?'' Noah said.

''Hürtgen Forest.'' It was a battlefield in Germany where hundreds of Americans
went missing. Belcher did an excavation for JPAC a decade earlier and has been
pushing to go back ever since.

Noah's face lit up. ''I've already started on it,'' he said.

This article was adapted from ''Vanished: The Sixty-Year Search for the Missing
Men of World War II,'' just published by Riverhead Books.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/24/magazine/the-search-for-the-lost-marines-of-ta
rawa.html

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY FREDERIC LEWIS/HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY
IMAGES) (MM30-MM31)
1944: A cemetery for Marines killed in the battle for Tarawa, in the Pacific.
American servicemen played baseball nearby. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER STACKPOLE/TIME
& LIFE PICTURES/GETTY IMAGES) (MM33)
Formerly M.I.A. The recently unearthed remains, left, of Manley Forrest Winkley,
a Marine pictured above. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK NOAH/HISTORY FLIGHT
 LINDA WELTY.) (MM35)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


