                             1058 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 25, 2013 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Less Than American

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg.

LENGTH: 1186 words


Not so long ago, it seemed the debate over immigration reform was all about
borders. Politicians competed to offer the most draconian solutions -- higher
fences, longer fences, electrified fences, armies of guards, fleets of drones,
moats and crocodiles. Never mind that the Border Patrol had already more than
doubled in a decade. Never mind that many of those here illegally never hopped a
fence but simply overstayed a student or tourist visa. The nativist mythology
has us under siege from relentless hordes striding toward Arizona on, in the
fevered imagination of Tea Party Congressman Steve King, ''calves the size of
cantaloupes because they're hauling 75 pounds of marijuana across the desert.''
To pacify the border neurotics, authors of the bill that passed the Senate last
summer included $46.3 billion to militarize our southern flank.

Now, with the bill stranded in the House, it seems the immigration debate is all
about citizenship. To opponents, the idea of offering 11-plus million
undocumented immigrants a pathway to citizenship -- even a 13-year slog like the
one envisioned by the Senate bill -- is anathema, so politically toxic that the
measure's most prominent Republican sponsor, Senator Marco Rubio, pulled back as
if he'd put his hand on a lit stove. To proponents of comprehensive reform, or
at least to activists on the issue, citizenship is the prize, and nonnegotiable.

It's beginning to look as if advocates of fixing our broken immigration system
will face an unpleasant choice: no bill at all, or a bill that legalizes the
foreigners who are already here but does not offer most of them a chance to
become citizens. On Capitol Hill several lawmakers are quietly drafting
compromises that give the undocumented millions little hope of full membership
in America.

The first thing to note is that this is progress. The Republican mainstream view
has moved in the last year or so, from Mitt Romney's ''self-deportation'' to
something considerably less callous. Most Republicans in Congress now say they
can live with legalizing the undocumented as long as (a) we don't call it
amnesty and (b) we don't reward lawbreakers by bestowing the precious gift of
citizenship.

The second point that needs making -- and my Times colleague Julia Preston made
it last week -- is that while citizenship is the priority for pro-immigration
activists, to immigrants living here as a fearful underclass the aim is not so
clear cut. For many of them, the priority is to be made legal, to come out of
hiding and live their lives without the threat of deportation, without the risk
of exploitation by unscrupulous employers, without wondering whether your spouse
will make it home at night.

''The entire narrative behind comprehensive immigration reform has elevated the
path to citizenship as this must-have component of an acceptable bill,'' said
Oscar Chacon, executive director of the National Alliance of Latin American and
Caribbean Communities, a network of immigrant organizations that includes many
foreigners here without visas. ''What you hear from the undocumented is: 'We
like the idea of citizenship, but what really hurts us is that we are
vulnerable, that I can't easily get a job to feed my family, that I can't drive
a car without being at risk, that I want to be able to visit relatives back home
and come back safely.''

Just to be clear, I believe (and so does Oscar Chacon) that deliberately
creating a class of disenfranchised residents goes against the American grain.
There are few precedents for consigning whole categories of people to a
sub-citizen limbo, and they are not proud moments in our history. (See the
Fugitive Slave Act of 1793 and the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882.) It is clearly
in the public interest to have people become assimilated, taxpaying,
participating stakeholders in our democracy. Most Americans polled, including a
majority of Republicans, agree that those now in the country illegally should be
allowed to eventually apply for citizenship.

If House Speaker John Boehner is willing to brave the fury of his extreme flank
and put the matter to a vote, a path to citizenship stands a decent chance of
passing the House with a majority of Democrats and a minority of Republicans.
You might even think Republicans would want to get immigration settled and off
the table so they could begin wooing Hispanic voters on more favorable ground --
social issues, taxes, education. But among the people most immersed in this
issue, I can't find many who expect Boehner to suddenly become a statesman and
defy his fanatics. In part, let's be honest, that's because the Republican
stance is, ''We protect America from Obama.'' It is also in part because they
fear newly enfranchised Hispanics will become Democrats -- which the
Republicans, by opposing citizenship, make a self-fulfilling prophecy.

So it may well be that supporters of immigration reform have to choose between
half a loaf and none at all. Half a loaf might include a prospect of citizenship
for some undocumented immigrants -- the so-called Dreamers, who entered the
country as children, and those in the military -- but not the majority. If
that's the option, should Democrats swallow hard and take it?

Yes, and here's why.

First, even without a prospect of citizenship, legalization would make the
undocumented much safer from the family-wrecking heartbreak of deportation,
which has continued at record numbers under President Obama. It would free them
to press for better education for their children, to approach the police when
they are victims of crime, to challenge abusive employers, to seek medical care
without fear of exposure. Some advocates of citizenship-or-nothing suggest that
the president should simply use his prosecutorial discretion to stop
deportations altogether, as he has done for the Dreamers and undocumented
soldiers. But the public would view that as a grievous abuse of power, and
Congress might very well take away his authority. An executive order is no
substitute for a protection enshrined in the law.

Second, the legislation has other good things going for it. It puts a little
sense into our archaic legal immigration system, and establishes some meaningful
protection against future illegal immigration (like holding employers rigorously
accountable for assuring their workers have legal status, much more important
than fortifying the border.)

Third, this is not the end of the story. We elect a new Congress in 2014, and
another in 2016, and so on, and the electoral clout of Hispanics will continue
to grow. ''I'm a firm believer in the notion of incremental change,'' Chacon
told me. ''The best public policies -- look at gay rights -- have evolved, they
didn't happen all at once.''

And fourth, even if many undocumented workers never make it to citizenship, the
injustice will last for just one generation. Their children are citizens by
birth. Young Latinos are reaching voting age at the rate of about 50,000 per
month. I suspect many in that rising generation will remember, and punish, the
politicians who decided their parents should remain less than American.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/25/opinion/keller-less-than-american.html

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


