                             1086 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 18, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Judge's Ruling on N.S.A. Data Collection

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 420 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Judge Questions Legality of N.S.A. Phone Records'' (front page, Dec. 17):

Congratulations to Judge Richard J. Leon and to the American judicial system for
upholding constitutional protections in America. Also congratulations to Edward
J. Snowden, who is a national hero for exposing these Orwellian procedures.

Americans deserve the strongest protections under law for their privacy. The
National Security Agency is out of control, thanks to a virtual mandate during
the Bush administration to run riot over the public interest. We need to protect
our security, but not at the cost of establishing an intrusive surveillance
network in our nation. I sincerely hope that this is the beginning of the end
for a very dark period in our nation's history.

WILLIAM BEEMAN San Jose, Calif., Dec. 17, 2013

To the Editor:

The question most of us would like addressed is how to rationally use this
technological capacity to protect us without eroding or destroying our privacy.
I need to hear thoughtful, intelligent, careful discussions about how we find a
better balance between what is a real need to know what our enemies are doing
and our equally valuable right and need for privacy. That is not the job of a
judge, but of this country's leaders.

Like the use of drones and torture, the unfettered eavesdropping undercuts our
democratic values and traditions. We need to think, not shout and blame.

I am glad that Judge Richard J. Leon ruled as he did and hope that this ruling
will be a step toward the careful debate we need.

NORMA P. MUNN Charlotte, N.C., Dec. 17, 2013

To the Editor:

For me, the most interesting quote from the judge was that the government had
failed to cite ''a single instance in which analysis of the N.S.A.'s bulk
metadata collection actually stopped an imminent attack, or otherwise aided the
government in achieving any objective that was time-sensitive.''

I wish our homeland security establishment would starting applying a guideline
of judging actual effectiveness in stopping the threat to a review of what it
does.

Too many times I have seen programs adopted, or data collected, that have
accomplished absolutely nothing other than to give someone something to do,
while at the same time eroding bit by bit the privacy guaranteed to us by the
Constitution.

We need to get away from the Department of Homeland Security's current mentality
of ''more is always better.''

DAVID GODINEZ Kansas City, Mo., Dec. 17, 2013

The writer has worked as an airport passenger screener for a private company.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/18/opinion/a-judges-ruling-on-nsa-data-collection
.html

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


