                             1075 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 8, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Borderline Insanity At the Fence in Nogales

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE DOWNES

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL | SUNDAY OBSERVER; Pg.
10

LENGTH: 1034 words


The fence that separates Nogales, Ariz., from Nogales, Mexico, is a see-through
wall of vertical steel rods 15 to 18 feet high, set four inches apart in a deep
bed of concrete. It is a rusty ribbon that runs up and down dusty hills and
streets, cutting one city into two and jutting into the desert for a few miles
east and west.

An impenetrable barricade it is not. A climber with a rope can hop it in less
than half a minute. Smugglers with jackhammers tunnel under it. They throw drugs
and rocks over it. The fence is breached not just by sunlight and shadows, but
also the hooded gaze of drug-cartel lookouts, and by bullets.

As a monument to futility and legislative malpractice, however, it achieves
perfection.

Border Patrol agents in Nogales took me along the fence last month, by the
thickets and drainage gullies where migrants hide, past the abandoned houses and
downtown warehouses where smuggling tunnels pop up, beneath the high bluff on
the Mexican side where the agents said the Sinaloa drug cartel keeps a house,
called the Castle, manned by sentries who, falcon-like, see everything. Because
most of Mexico's Nogales looms higher than Arizona's, the Border Patrol is at a
geological disadvantage. This it counters with floodlights, camera towers,
ground sensors and boots on the ground.

Through night-vision binoculars, I watched two figures silhouetted on a rise
against the glow of lights from the Mexican side, crouching and running but
keeping their distance. It was impossible to know what they carried --
contraband or merely hopes for a better life.

It makes little difference to the Border Patrol. To defeat the fence, migrants
must hire guides, a business controlled by drug traffickers. Thus they become
linked to an international criminal conspiracy. Border agents say they don't
know whether the shadow they are chasing belongs to a desperate peasant or an
armed smuggler.

The border is sealed tighter than ever, the result of billions of dollars spent
with the prospect of billions more if immigration legislation passes Congress.
The fence is new, the technology up-to-date, the military hardware -- planes,
drones, all-terrain vehicles -- abundant. The Border Patrol is holding the line,
or trying to, at a huge cost. Illegal migration is down, but drugs in the United
States are still abundant and cheap, and cartels in Mexico are rich and
powerful, doing business on a global scale. On Nov. 13, agents in Nogales found
20,000 pounds of marijuana in a northbound semitrailer. It was a record bust for
the Arizona field office but did nothing to change the game.

Border agents describe their job as an unending battle of wits, a cat-mouse game
with the constant threat of violence. The Border Patrol's ranks have surged
since 2006, and so have concerns about poor training and abusive behavior by
agents, who have killed at least 15 people since 2010. On a sidewalk in Mexico's
Nogales, flowers and a cross mark the spot where an agent or agents shot through
the fence in October 2012 and killed a 16-year-old boy, José Antonio Elena
Rodriguez. They said he had been throwing rocks, though witnesses in Mexico
disputed this.

The agency last month reaffirmed its policy on deadly force, saying agents have
the right to shoot when their lives are in danger. I stood against the
bullet-riddled wall where José fell, and could not imagine throwing a rock that
far -- across a road, up a 25-foot embankment and then over the fence -- and
hurting anybody. José was hit by 11 shots, seven of them in the back. The case
is under investigation. If there is video of the shooting -- a surveillance
tower looms nearby -- the agency has not released it.

The Border Patrol says it has improved training and tactics to reduce lethal
incidents. But there is unavoidable cruelty and death even when agents do their
jobs professionally and well. The fence shunts migrants miles out into the
burning, freezing desert. There they die, trying to make their way to Tucson, or
to Interstate 19, or points beyond. The desert is littered with backpacks,
jackets, empty water jugs. Migrants are often abandoned by guides who have raped
and robbed them.

Border agents sometimes save migrants' lives. Luckier ones encounter people like
Shura Wallin, who lives in Green Valley, a retirement community south of Tucson.
She is a co-founder of a group of volunteers, all retired, who meet for coffee
on Tuesday mornings and then drive across the border to a shelter for newly
deported immigrants, who arrive penniless and hungry, with little idea of what
to do next. The volunteers bring socks and pants, hats and bandages. They help
the Catholic nuns and lay volunteers of the Kino Border Initiative serve beans,
squash, tortillas and coffee.

I met an old man from Nayarit at the crowded shelter. He wore straw sandals and
a filthy jacket, and his hopeless face told of abandonment. A nun led a cheerful
hand-waving, spirit-lifting exercise, and a priest gave a pep talk about dignity
and respect.

Ms. Wallin and her group sometimes walk in the arroyos and highway underpasses
on the Arizona side, searching for the stranded. ''Somos amigos,'' she cries,
we're friends. Sometimes they find a young person, alone and weeping. Sometimes
they find a corpse. Ms. Wallin, who is tiny and 72, should not have to be doing
this. ''You can read and you can study and you can talk, but until you see
things it doesn't become reality,'' Senator Charles Schumer of New York said
during a visit to Nogales in March, urging passage of immigration reform. As he
stood with three other senators on the American side, a Mexican woman a few
yards behind them scaled the fence and made a run for it.

Republicans in Congress have blocked reform and offered no solutions of their
own. They need to see how their refusal fosters insanity and menace on the
Southern border. When migrants have no hope of visas, the Border Patrol's job is
made harder, and the drug lords get richer. The United States and Mexico, two
friendly nations, sit side by side, with compatible labor markets, professing a
commitment to economic justice and respect for human rights. But in Nogales,
north and south of the fence, evidence of these things is scant.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/08/opinion/sunday/borderline-insanity-at-the-fenc
e-in-nogales.html

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The fence at the border, with a view of the houses of Nogales,
Ariz.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY PIOTR REDLINSKI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


