                             1095 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 27, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Shrine Visit, Leader Asserts Japan's Track From Pacifism

BYLINE: By HIROKO TABUCHI; Choe Sang-Hun contributed reporting from Seoul, South
Korea. Patrick Zuo contributed research from Beijing, and Makiko Inoue and
Hisako Ueno from Tokyo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1325 words


TOKYO -- Shinzo Abe's past year as prime minister has concentrated chiefly on
reviving Japan's long-ailing economy. Yet in Mr. Abe's mind, the country's
newfound economic prowess is a means to an end: to build a more powerful,
assertive Japan, complete with a full-fledged military, as well as pride in its
World War II-era past.

That larger agenda, which helped cut short Mr. Abe's first stint in office in
2006-7, has again come to the forefront in recent weeks, culminating in his
year-end visit Thursday to the Yasukuni Shrine, which honors the nation's war
dead, including several war criminals who were executed after Japan's defeat.
Past visits by Japanese politicians have angered China and South Korea, both of
which suffered greatly under Japan's empire-building efforts in the 20th
century.

The latest visit set off swift rebukes from officials in Beijing and Seoul, who
accused Mr. Abe of trying to obscure imperial Japan's atrocities. And in a rare
criticism of a close ally, the new American ambassador to Japan, Caroline
Kennedy, also expressed disappointment with Mr. Abe's government.

Mr. Abe has shown, however, that he is willing to take on big political risks to
steer the country away from its postwar pacifism. Last month, he ignored
blistering criticism from political opponents as well as the news media and
steamrollered through Parliament a law that would tighten government control
over state secrets. The law was presented by the government as a mechanism to
aid in the sharing of military intelligence with allies, and create an
American-style National Security Council.

Mr. Abe has also increased military spending for the first time in a decade, and
loosened self-imposed restrictions on exporting weapons. A new defense plan
calls for the acquisition of drones and amphibious assault vehicles to prepare
for the prospect of a prolonged rivalry with China.

And experts say that next year, Mr. Abe could start taking concrete steps to
reinterpret, and ultimately revise, Japan's 1947 pacifist Constitution,
something he has described as a life goal. Proposed changes could allow the
country to officially maintain a standing army for the first time since the war,
and take on a larger global security role.

''The past year has given Mr. Abe confidence to start flying his own colors,''
said Koji Murata, president of Doshisha University in Kyoto. ''He is signaling
to his supporters that he is a politician who will fight for his convictions.''

Mr. Abe's push is at once timely and risky. Regional anxiety over Beijing's own
rapid military buildup -- and the relative decline of American influence here as
Washington remains distracted by the Middle East -- has seemed to set the stage
for a more confident Japan. And tensions with China and South Korea have made a
skeptical public more willing to accept Mr. Abe's rightist agenda, including the
establishment of a more robust military.

But territorial disputes, as well as sharp disagreements over the legacy of the
war, also make for a dangerous backdrop to Japan's rise. Japanese and Chinese
patrol boats remain in a tense standoff near uninhabited islands in the East
China Sea claimed by both countries, prompting concern among some military
analysts that a miscalculation or accident could set off an armed confrontation.

Japan's relations with South Korea are at rock-bottom because of a separate
territorial dispute and disagreements over interpretations of history. Raised
hopes for a reconciliation after recent reports of a meeting involving vice
ministers from the two countries have been dashed by Mr. Abe's Yasukuni visit.

''Mr. Abe has poured even more fuel on the fire,'' said Tetsuya Takahashi, a
professor of philosophy at the University of Tokyo and author of a best-selling
book on the Yasukuni Shrine's role in Japanese politics. ''That does not bode
well for Japan's relations in Asia at all.''

Mr. Abe walks a fine line in part because the many facets of his agenda do not
sit well together. For one, good relations with China -- Tokyo's largest trading
partner -- are critical to Japan's ongoing economic recovery. Experts warn that
taking a belligerent stance toward Beijing could deal another blow to Japanese
business interests in China, and to Mr. Abe's economic agenda.

Nor do Mr. Abe's deeply revisionist views of history -- which he inherited from
his grandfather Nobusuke Kishi, who was jailed for war crimes before eventually
becoming prime minister -- inspire confidence that Tokyo can play a bigger
security role in Asia.

Washington has generally been keen for Japan to take on a more active military
presence in the region to counterbalance China's growing might. But rather than
become a stable ally, Tokyo has become another Asian problem for American
officials because of its quarrels with Beijing.

When Secretary of State John Kerry and Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel visited
Japan in October, they paid their respects at a different cemetery for Japan's
unnamed war dead, in an apparent effort to nudge Japanese leaders away from
visiting Yasukuni.

''In the end, Mr. Abe's historical views diverge sharply from America's,'' Mr.
Takahashi said. ''After all, Mr. Abe does not believe in the postwar order that
America established.''

Yet thanks to his early focus on the economy, Mr. Abe's ratings of around 50
percent are high by recent Japanese standards; he faces no credible opposition
and no nationwide elections are scheduled until 2016. His ruling Liberal
Democratic Party won a landslide victory in parliamentary elections in July,
giving it control over both chambers of Parliament, and the power to push
through legislation.

Mr. Abe has, at times, worked well with the Americans. For example, he was
personally involved in a long-stalled plan to move an American Marine base on
the island of Okinawa.

''He began by focusing on economic revival, and cementing his support, which was
wise,'' said Eiji Yoshida, a professor of law at Kansai University in Osaka.
''But he's been waiting and waiting for the moment he can move on to his true
agenda, and that moment is now.''

China has little room to maneuver after last month unilaterally declaring a new
air defense zone over the East China Sea islands, raising alarm across the
region. In a direct challenge to threats by China that it could take military
action against foreign aircraft entering the zone, the United States sent two
unarmed B-52 bombers through the airspace, after which China appeared to
backpedal from its threats.

''China has already played its card. There's little room for it to escalate
matters over Prime Minister Abe's visit,'' Mr. Murata of Doshisha University
said.

Some analysts say that Mr. Abe did his best to minimize the fallout from his
Yasukuni visit. He avoided worshiping there during the shrine's seasonal
religious festivals, or during politically or historically significant
anniversaries.

Many Japanese conservatives say the visit should not be so politically charged,
because it was simply meant to honor the 3.1 million military personnel and
civilians who perished in World War II.

Mr. Abe himself made that claim, saying he contemplated on the ''preciousness of
peace'' as he paid his respects at Yasukuni.

Few analysts, however, think that he will now turn his full focus back to the
economy. Instead, the new year is likely to mark new steps to change the
Constitution.

Mr. Abe has said he would first push to reinterpret the Constitution to allow
Japan to take action on behalf of allies under attack. But he has made no secret
that he would seek a wide-ranging revision of the document itself, allowing
Japan a national army.

''Perhaps the most important lesson of Abe's visit to Yasukuni is that despite
claims that Abe is focused on economic recovery above all else, the prime
minister does not believe that his mandate is limited to his economic
policies,'' said Tobias Harris, an expert on Japanese politics at Teneo
Intelligence, an advisory firm.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/27/world/asia/japanese-premier-visits-contentious
-war-shrine.html

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's visit to the Yasukuni Shrine in
Tokyo angered China and South Korea. Relations with both nations are already
strained. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TORU HANAI/REUTERS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


