                             1069 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 3, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Leader's Rise Came With New Attention to Dispute With Japan

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ; Chris Buckley contributed reporting from Hong Kong. Bree
Feng contributed research from Beijing, and Makiko Inoue and Hisako Ueno from
Tokyo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1058 words


BEIJING -- The new air defense zone declared by China appears to have been
approved by President Xi Jinping, the culmination of more than a year of
pressure by Beijing to weaken Japan's grip on disputed islands in the East China
Sea, and by extension to expand China's long-term access to the Western Pacific.

As Mr. Xi amassed power in the past year, he voiced increasing displeasure with
Japan, and in a curt, impromptu encounter in St. Petersburg, Russia, in
September with the hawkish prime minister, Shinzo Abe, Mr. Xi said Japan must
face ''history squarely,'' according to an account in China's state-run news
media.

Mr. Xi has rebuffed Mr. Abe's requests for a formal summit meeting, another sign
of Mr. Xi's firm stance on Japan.

Mr. Xi's position as leader of the Communist Party and chairman of the military
commission that runs China's armed forces made him the primary decision maker on
issues like the air defense zone, Chinese experts said. Over the past year, they
say, he has been particularly attentive to the East China Sea dispute.

Unlike some other Chinese leaders, Mr. Xi had little involvement with Japan as
he climbed the ranks of the Communist Party.

On a visit to Japan in 2009 as vice president, he was granted an audience with
the emperor, met numerous politicians and was treated to a gala dinner. In 2001,
when he was governor of Fujian Province, he toured the prefecture of Nagasaki
and visited Okinawa. He has spoken little of these trips, although as vice
president he did welcome the governors of Nagasaki and Shizuoka when they came
to Beijing, Japanese officials say.

Most likely he sees the country as a policy lever, said Rana Mitter, a historian
at Oxford University and the author of ''Forgotten Ally,'' an account of China's
struggle with militarist Japan from 1937 to 1945.

''He does not appear to have any direct experience with Japan or connection with
it through his family background,'' Mr. Mitter said. ''This is different from
some other politicians, for instance Bo Xilai, who courted Japanese business
quite strongly through his period as mayor of Dalian and later as commerce
minister.'' Mr. Bo is the disgraced Communist Party leader of the city of
Chongqing now serving a life sentence in prison.

The idea for the air defense identification zone had been circulating within the
Chinese military for some time before it reached Mr. Xi's level, said Jia
Qingguo, professor of international relations at Beijing University.

The military was acutely aware that other countries, including Japan and the
United States, had air defense zones but China did not, he said.

As the tensions mounted this year in the East China Sea, with Chinese and
Japanese planes flying in close quarters over the disputed islands -- known as
Diaoyu in China, and Senkaku in Japan -- Japan often complained that China's
planes were flying in the Japanese air defense zone.

The leadership reasoned that if Japan had an air defense zone for the past 40
years, China should have one, too, as a way of achieving parity, and as a tool
to eventually wrest the islands from Japan's control, Mr. Jia said.

But Tokyo's position on the islands is simply that there is no dispute, that the
islands belong to Japan and there is nothing more to discuss.

It is this Japanese position that Mr. Xi and his top military and foreign policy
advisers wanted to change.

China's top foreign policy makers believed that China's new air defense zone
overlapping with Japan's and covering the islands would be ''another way to
force Japan to recognize there is a dispute,'' and come to the negotiating
table, Mr. Jia and other experts said.

Even before Mr. Xi became general secretary of the Communist Party in November
2012, he was in charge of a small leading group of maritime affairs that had
principal responsibility for the problems in the East China Sea -- both in the
air and on the sea.

It was a period when the dispute over the islands had spilled onto the streets
of China, with government-sanctioned anti-Japanese protests, and Mr. Xi's quick
ascent to the policy making group on the islands signaled his plans to take
overall control of the issue.

After becoming general secretary of the Communist Party in November 2012, and
then assuming the presidency of the country in March, Mr. Xi toured important
military installations, including ports where China is building its blue water
navy -- another signal of his long-term interest in gaining unfettered access in
the Western Pacific.

Mr. Xi told a Politburo meeting this summer that China must become a ''maritime
strong power,'' according to Xinhua, the state-run news agency.

In late October, Mr. Xi called a conference of senior party leaders, including
the six other members of the Politburo Standing Committee and the Chinese
ambassador to Washington, Cui Tiankai, to discuss how China should maintain good
relations with its neighbors in Asia.

''The fundamental guiding policy for our country's diplomacy with its periphery
is to treat neighbors with friendship and as partners,'' Mr. Xi said.

But it was clear that Japan was not included in the friendly group of neighbors
-- those consisted chiefly of countries in Southeast Asia -- and a few days
later, the Chinese Ministry of Defense intensified its warnings to Japan over
the disputed islands.

A Defense Ministry spokesman, Geng Yansheng, said that China would consider it
''an act of war'' if Japan carried out its threat and shot down a Chinese drone
flying over the islands. ''We would have to take decisive measures to
counterattack,'' Mr. Geng said, the most warlike words from China in the dispute
so far.

A recent account in a Hong Kong-based magazine, Asia Weekly, which often carries
reliable reports on Beijing's foreign policy deliberations, described the
imposition of the air defense zone as a ''great sea-air strategic breakthrough
for China.'' The magazine said Mr. Xi finalized the decision four months ago.

The breakthrough the article referred to was the piercing of what China sees as
a boundary that stretches from the southernmost Japanese islands toward the east
coast of Taiwan and joining the South China Sea.

''China is no longer focusing just on Diaoyu Island, not only on the gas field
of the East China Sea median line, but this is a way of breaking through the
first island chain to reach the ocean,'' the account said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/03/world/asia/chinese-leaders-rise-came-with-new-
attention-to-dispute-with-japan.html

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Xi Jinping visited Tokyo in 2009 as China's vice president. As
president, he has rejected talk of a summit meeting with Japan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
YURIKO NAKAO/REUTERS) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


