                             1030 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 2, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Song and Script Taking One Space After Another

BYLINE: By BRIAN SEIBERT

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; DANCE REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 509 words


''Private Country,'' a hybrid work choreographed, composed, written and directed
by Tatyana Tenenbaum, creates a theatrical world of its own. But many features
of the landscape are familiar.

Ms. Tenenbaum's use of the voice recalls Robert Ashley and Meredith Monk. The
flat delivery of text, both odd and banal, echoes much downtown theater (like
that of Yoshiko Chuma, in whose works Ms. Tenenbaum has performed, or Richard
Maxwell). Wry nostalgia and thematic and scenic elements call to mind the films
of Wes Anderson, as much ''Moonrise Kingdom'' as ''The Royal Tenenbaums.''

''Private Country,'' which debuted at the Chocolate Factory on Wednesday,
sometimes feels submerged under those influences (among others), but it's also
alive with formal experimentation and glints of a fresh voice. The human voice
is at the core of Ms. Tenenbaum's investigations: the continuum between speech
and song, the relationships between vocal production and movement.

When the six performers -- who include Ms. Tenenbaum and her brother Ezra --
speak, they push intonation, elongating their vowels. When they sing, they upset
their bodily instruments, moving and shaking. The vocal music, often sung over a
drone, ranges from chant to chromatic oscillations and complex harmonies. The
choreography spans from purposely awkward theatrical blocking to poses, folk
dance, short contemporary-style repetitions and elaborate mime.

The performance is divided into three main parts, the first of which isolates
the siblings in the theater's basement. (The remaining sections take place
upstairs in the main space, amid fake birds by Ms. Tenenbaum's mother, Anne
Krauss.) Each section is centered on a duet, and much of the work's formal
excitement arises from the interaction or tension between the vocal arrangements
(antiphonal, dialogical, harmonized) and the physical ones. Ms. Tenenbaum plays
with people speaking and singing into each other's faces, or backs, or past each
other, or turning to the audience to soliloquize.

The words they say and sing are the kind of collage that tempts a critic to
construct a review solely out of quotations from the script (like ''I can fairly
say that not too much happens''). There are meanings and connections, private
and public, if you care to trace them, but the words are manipulated into
abstractions, sounds, swerves in tone that don't always land right.

Apart from the formal experimentation, what makes ''Private Country'' most
interesting is yet another influence: musical theater. Ms. Tenenbaum
intermittently focuses on the traditional motive for speech to become song, what
her text calls ''honest feeling.'' The work has a climax, in which the cast
floods the stage with harmonies and motion and motifs established earlier,
singing about a flood. The pure research that Ms. Tenenbaum presents in
''Private Country'' could be applied with great expressive power.

''Private Country'' continues through Saturday at the Chocolate Factory, 5-49
49th Avenue, Long Island City, Queens; 212-352-3101,
chocolatefactorytheater.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/02/arts/dance/tatyana-tenenbaums-private-country-
at-chocolate-factory.html

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Private Country: Talya Epstein in this Tatyana Tenenbaum piece
combining movement with original script at the Chocolate Factory. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


