                             1044 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 15, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

From Roman Gladiators to Marauding Goblins

BYLINE: By CHRIS SUELLENTROP and STEPHEN TOTILO

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 709 words


Here are quick looks at a few games available on the new video game consoles
from Sony and Microsoft.

PLAYSTATION 4

KILLZONE: SHADOW FALL For years, Sony has been trying to turn Killzone into a
sci-fi shooter series on the PlayStation that rivals Xbox properties like Halo
or Gears of War. This latest iteration is unlikely to pull that off. The game
does, however, include a novel use of the touch pad on the PlayStation 4
controller. Swiping in one of four directions -- up, down, left, right -- tells
your robotic drone ally which action you want it to perform on command: attack,
hack, shock or shield. (Rated M, for players 17 and older.)

KNACK Directed by Mark Cerny, the lead architect of the PlayStation 4, Knack is
supposed to be the console's family-friendly complement to Killzone: Shadow
Fall. It's sometimes funny and occasionally beautiful, and the game flirts with
perhaps the grayest morality in a bit of children's entertainment since Jim
Henson and Frank Oz directed ''The Dark Crystal'': The goblins who are attacking
human settlements aren't all bad, and the humans aren't all that good. Still,
while it's not graphically violent, it remains at heart a game about a magical
creature that destroys, and probably kills, a lot of people. The monster you
control appears to be made of hundreds of objects and swells in size as you
collect more. On normal difficulty, the game can be hard, making it feel
grueling and overlong. A cooperative mode is designed to make things easier.
(Rated E10+, for players 10 and older.)

RESOGUN By far the most compulsively playable of Sony's three exclusive games
for the PlayStation 4, Resogun is a shameless rip-off, a homage and a
reinvention of the 1980 arcade shooter Defender. As in that game, you control a
spaceship that tries to fend off an alien invasion -- colorfully abstract, in
this instance -- while rescuing the handful of remaining humans from
annihilation. But this time, the action scrolls around a cylinder rather than a
square plane. Resogun is designed by Housemarque, an independent Finnish
developer that reconceived the 1970s sci-fi shooter Asteroids as Super Stardust.
Resogun is a free download for subscribers to Sony's PlayStation Plus service,
which carries a $50 annual fee. (Rated E10+, for players 10 and older.) CHRIS
SUELLENTROP

XBOX ONE

RYSE: SON OF ROME This flagship game for the new Xbox pits the player as a Roman
soldier back in the time of Nero, catapults and legions of fighting men wearing
shining armor and red-plumed helmets. Ryse's hand-to-hand combat, bloody as it
is, rewards skilled, coolheaded play. The game is vivid and grisly, with
graphics befitting a new console and the kind of limb-chopping violence that
might send squeamish players toward friendlier Xbox One fare like the
body-controlled Kinect Sports Rivals or the fantasy adventure Crimson Dragon.
It's a credit to Microsoft that its lineup for Day 1 is so diverse. (Rated M,
for players 17 and older.)

FORZA MOTORSPORT 5 Video game artists still can't make realistic-looking people,
but every new console gets them awfully close to rendering photorealistic cars.
The new Forza makes another turn toward that goal, but it's a less visible trick
under the hood that could make this game special. The developers say that each
player's driving habits will be turned into an online Drivatar, a virtual driver
who will then show up and race in other people's games. And your races should
fill with others' Drivatars, too, making all the cars feel a little more as if
they're driven by people rather than a computer. (Rated E, for everyone.)

DEAD RISING 3 One way to demonstrate a video game console's power is to render a
crowd in one of its games. Old games didn't do crowds. Each character that
appears on the screen puts a little more strain on the hardware running the
simulation. If developers make the individuals in that crowd behave
intelligently, the strain increases more. If they fill the crowd with brain-dead
zombies, they've smartly cut a corner. Dead Rising 3 has the potential to show
the Xbox One's might by flooding televisions with hordes of zombies. They're
there to be killed all over again in something of a violent black comedy. (Rated
M, for players 17 and older.) STEPHEN TOTILO

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/15/arts/video-games/games-for-the-playstation-4-a
nd-xbox-one.html

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Killzone: Shadow Fall offers a novel use of the controller.
In Knack, a magical creature grows as a player amasses objects.
Resogun's action scrolls around a cylinder, not a square plane. (PHOTOGRAPHS
FROM SONY COMPUTER ENTERTAINMENT AMERICA)
Ryse: Son of Rome features grisly hand-to-hand combat.
Forza Motorsport 5 will record players' habits in ''Drivatars.''
 Dead Rising 3's graphics can accommodate a crowd of zombies. (PHOTOGRAPHS FROM
XBOX)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


