                             1066 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

My Man Bertie

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER BUCKLEY.

Christopher Buckley's book of essays, ''But Enough About You,'' will be
published in the spring.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1167 words


JEEVES AND THE WEDDING BELLSBy Sebastian Faulks

243 pp. St. Martin's Press. $25.99.

What, ho? A new Jeeves and Wooster novel? Steady on. Your faithful reviewer may
not be the brightest bulb in the old marquee, but dash it, isn't this anno dom
2013, and didn't ''the Master'' -- yclept Pelham Grenville Wodehouse (''Plum''
to his chums) -- shove off across the old Rio Styx back in 1975?

What's that you say? It's ''an homage''? Yes, there it is, right on the jacket.
By Sebastian Faulks. Isn't he that rather clever novel-writing chap, author of
whatsit, ''On Green Something . . . Tuna . . . Dolphin Street''! That's it. But
hold on -- this Faulks, didn't he also bung out a new James Bond novel called
''Devil May Care''? Versatile fellow. Must be the go-to johnny in the homage
department. Well, find a niche and fill it, I always say. Still, it's all a bit
much to spring on a lad with a morning head.

He does come off as a likable cove, this Faulks. There's an ''Author's Note'' --
I gather that's the prologue-bit where the author clears his throat and says:
''Well, gosh, here I am. Deuced tricky, this homaging business. Hope you like
it, but no refunds if you don't. Ha!'' He says it's intended as a tribute, he's
just a fan, understands what a minefield he was walking into. Didn't want to
''drift into parody,'' only trying to ''provide a nostalgic variation'' on the
''peerless originals.'' Etc. Hopes to introduce the old oeuvre to those what
haven't yet had the pleasure. Etc. As I say, likable. Not one of those
pec-thumping literary types -- I won't get into names -- who give the impression
you're bloody lucky they bothered to write the thing in the first place.

All right, down to the brass tacks. Bit of role-reversing going on here, what
with the good Bertram Wooster playing the part of gentleman's gentleman and the
redoubtable Jeeves posing as a lord. What's the world come to? Well you might
ask.

As you probably already knew, these Jeeves and Wooster plots are more
complicated than the new Affordable Care Act website. But the nub of it is that
Bertie's great friend Peregrine (Woody) Beeching is hook, line and stinker in
love with the daughter of Sir Henry Hackwood. The daughter-in-q is one Amelia, a
sweet young thing who misinterpreted a completely innocent gesture on Woody's
part and now the engagement's off -- unless Bertie and Jeeves come to the old
rescue, via the above-mentioned impostures.

Things get sticky as a Plum pudding -- if you catch my drift -- and not to mix
metaphors, but before you know it, Bertie's in the soup. Needless to say, Jeeves
saves the day. Don't mean to ruin the surprise, but I doubt you were expecting a
novel of this kidney to end up like ''Hamlet,'' say, with everything thoroughly
rotten in Denmark and everyone poisoned or pierc'd through and leaking
hemoglobin onto the Aubusson. Bloody foreigners.

This Faulks certainly knows his stuff when it comes to homaging, let me tell
you. Dashed if most of the time I didn't think I was reading the echt thing. I
don't know about you, but myself, the real joie in these J. & B. romans is the
way Wodehouse -- and his avatar-chappie, Faulks -- plays the old English
language like a clarinet. Here's Faulks's Bertie: ''My heart, already skipping
the odd one from the prolonged eye contact, now began to beat the sort of rhythm
you hear in the Congo before the missionary gets lobbed into the bouillon.''

Pure licorice stick, that, what? Bertram is, as you know, always in search of
sustenance, comestibles and viands, cucumber sandwiches, eggs and bac -- that
sort of thing -- to soothe the fevered brow so he can soldier on through
whatever catastrophe impends. He describes one establishment, in deepest,
darkest rustic Dorset, as ''a four-ale bar with a handful of lowbrowed sons of
toil who looked as though they might be related to one another in ways frowned
on by the Old Testament.'' Rather good, don't you think? ''The Hare and Hounds,
a hundred yards further up the road, at least had a saloon where the traveler
could feel he wasn't dropping in on some Saxon blood feud.''

Wodehouse cognoscenti (or as we say, cogs) will note the sly old Faulks has ever
so subtly altered one of the Master's signature Jeeves verbs. In the ur-texts,
Jeeves frequently ''shimmers'' into a room. Here, for reasons that will no doubt
occasion a raft of Ph.D. theses and some rather heated discussion at the Drones
Club, he more often ''shimmies.''

Not to pick nits, but the old eyebrows did arch ceiling-ward at the ref to the
Bermuda Triangle, though the context was, to be sure, quite delightful.
Georgiana Meadowes, the spiffing girl with whom Bertram has been enjoying a few
cozy tête-à-têtes on the Frog Riviera, is described as ''on the tall side, slim,
with darkish hair in waves and eyes about as deep as the Bermuda Triangle.''
Lovely, even if the hoary old Bermuda Triangle was first adduced in about 1960
and the action of the novel is set in 1926. But never mind.

By the way, did you note the embedded ref in the name Meadowes, above? Anyone?
Cogs will remember that was the name of Jeeves's predecessor in the story
''Jeeves Takes Charge'' -- the one the vigilant Bertram caught stealing his silk
socks.

During a rather prolonged cricket match in the middle of the book, there's a coy
bit when Woody says to Jeeves: ''I say, have you ever played professionally?
Wasn't there a Jeeves who played for Worcestershire?''

Jeeves replies: ''Warwickshire, sir. A distant relation. I believe he took four
wickets'' (whatever those are) ''for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord's
in 1914. Alas, it was to be his swan song.''

Old Faulksie is having a bit of fun here: For Jeeves's first appearance, in a
1915 issue of The Saturday Evening Post, the Master, a keen aficionado of the
bat and wicket, named his soon-to-be-immortal valet after a well-known cricket
player of the day.

Another pleasure to be had in these lively, mostly effervescent pages is
Jeeves's accustomed erudition, and Bertram's concomitant obtuseness. Bertie may
have attended Eton and Oxford, but all that sapience and learning seem to have
been so much water off the proverbial duck's back. On practically every page,
meanwhile, Jeeves lightly riffs on Milton, Chaucer, Keats, Tolstoy, or is seen
deep in a book by Kant or his favorite of all philosophers, Spinoza.

On Page 195, as the novel approaches its (somewhat neat but ingenious) finale,
Faulks generously allows Bertram a wee moment of triumph as he finally gets one
of Jeeves's literary allusions:

'' 'Don't tell me. It was . . . the poet Keats, wasn't it?'

'' 'It was indeed, sir. The lines supply the opening of an early work,
''Endymion.'' '

''We drove on in silence for a mile or so. 'I say, Jeeves, do you know, I think
that's the first time I've ever recognized one of your quotations.'

'' 'I know, sir. I found it most gratifying.' ''

As indeed will the reader of this worthy homage. On the condition -- please --
that it is not to be repeated, given its ever-so-happy ending.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/01/books/review/jeeves-and-the-wedding-bells-by-s
ebastian-faulks.html

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ROBERT G. FRESSON)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


