                             1031 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 2, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Republican Rivalry Simmers As Paths and Styles Diverge

BYLINE: By JONATHAN MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1353 words


DES MOINES -- Senator Ted Cruz calls his colleague Rand Paul a ''good friend.''
The two men are the stars of the Tea Party movement, propelled to Washington by
activist fervor and allied in their effort to restrain the reach of the federal
government.

But when Mr. Cruz went to New York City to meet with donors this summer, he
privately offered a different view of Mr. Paul: The Kentucky senator can never
be elected president, he told them, because he can never fully detach himself
from the strident libertarianism of his father, former Representative Ron Paul
of Texas.

Word of Mr. Cruz's remarks reached Mr. Paul's inner circle, touching off anger
and resentment.

And the incident further inflamed a rivalry that has been quietly building as
the Republican Party tries to grapple with the force and power of its Tea Party
wing. Both Mr. Cruz and Mr. Paul harbor presidential ambitions and view
themselves as representing a new, more energized movement of Republican
activists. But they are pursuing distinctly different paths as they try to rise,
diverging not just in style but in their approach to intraparty politics.

Mr. Cruz and his aides believe he is uniquely suited to galvanize conservatives,
pointing to his leadership of the effort to cut off funding for the Affordable
Care Act -- confrontational, pugnacious, disdainful of President Obama. Mr.
Cruz, 42 -- a Texan, a born-again Baptist and son of an evangelical preacher --
also connects naturally with Christian conservatives, many of whom have become
foot soldiers in the Tea Party and view Mr. Paul as too unorthodox on social
issues.

Mr. Paul's inner circle privately derides Mr. Cruz as ''the chief of the wacko
birds,'' echoing a phrase from Senator John McCain of Arizona. And, while
allowing Mr. Cruz to lead the charge on Obamacare, the Kentucky senator has
quietly been reaching out to more establishment forces within the Republican
Party, trying to prove to big donors and mainline Republican organizations that
he is more than a Tea Party figure or a rerun of his father's failed
candidacies.

In September, Mr. Paul mingled with New York financial titans at the Central
Park West penthouse of Woody Johnson, the Jets owner and Johnson & Johnson heir,
who hosted a Republican National Committee fund-raiser with a group of potential
2016 Republican contenders.

A few weeks later, at the Four Seasons in Washington, Mr. Paul appeared at a
closed-door American Crossroads foreign policy panel and then posed for pictures
with donors to the ''super PAC,'' which was co-founded by Karl Rove, a despised
figure among some Tea Party activists.

And while Mr. Paul first won office by taking on the anointed Senate candidate
of Kentucky's senior senator, Mitch McConnell, Mr. Paul is now helping Mr.
McConnell's re-election effort and joined him and other establishment
Republicans at a lobbyist-filled fund-raising retreat for the National
Republican Senatorial Committee last month in Sea Island, Ga.

The divergent strategies undertaken by Mr. Cruz and Mr. Paul not only put them
on a collision course should they both pursue presidential candidacies. They
also could help determine whether the Tea Party -- right now a muscular and
rebellious force within the Republican Party -- remains at war with the
establishment or is eventually more smoothly integrated into the party
apparatus.

Mr. Paul and those close to him are confident that his die-hard
libertarian-leaning supporters will not desert him, and that gives him freedom
to build bridges beyond that base.

''He's becoming a translator between the grass-roots conservatives and the
establishment,'' said Trygve Olson, a consultant who bridges the two wings. He
then added an implicit dig at other Republicans: ''He's actually demonstrating
leadership.''

Transcending the two worlds can be tricky: While Mr. Paul voted with Mr. Cruz on
the effort to defund the health care law -- pre-empting future primary attacks
from the right -- he also said publicly over the summer that he thought shutting
the government down was ''a dumb idea.'' Privately, he complained during the
shutdown that the effort was futile and was damaging the party.

Still, he is clearly the beneficiary of the comparison with Mr. Cruz:
Establishment Republicans are lining up to heap praise on Mr. Paul, using words
like ''grown'' and ''matured'' to describe him and the role he played during the
shutdown.

''This ordeal showed a side of Rand that I though was politically very smart in
terms of his tone and trying to distance himself from a strategy that clearly
didn't play well for us,'' Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina,
said in an interview.

The standoff over health care and the shutdown also highlighted the personal
differences between the two men and how they are viewed within the Senate: Mr.
Paul is more easygoing and speaks casually as he makes his points with fellow
senators. Mr. Cruz, his colleagues complain, often seems like he is lecturing
them -- or, as one put it, ''still on Hannity's show.'' While Mr. Paul was
overheard on a hot mike plotting strategy with Mr. McConnell, Mr. Cruz was
receiving tongue-lashings from his Republican colleagues at private
senators-only luncheons. Mr. Paul mixes with a range of senators at the weekly
Republican luncheons; Mr. Cruz tends to stick close to his fellow hard-liner
Senator Mike Lee of Utah.

Nowhere is the competition between the men more obvious than in the crucial
state of Iowa, where Mr. Paul was the most sought-after speaker in the state
earlier this year in the aftermath of his filibuster over the use of drone
strikes, but where Mr. Cruz is now surging after his starring role in the
shutdown battle. He was the headline speaker at the Iowa Republican Party dinner
late last month.

''Both of them are appealing to the same base, but there is no doubt that Cruz
is the one who now has got a full head of steam,'' said Bob Vander Plaats, who
leads an Iowa Christian conservative group.

Supporters of Mr. Paul are better organized, however, and building on Ron Paul's
campaign, they have essentially taken over the levers of the Iowa Republican
Party, earning the nickname ''Paulistinians'' in the state's Republican circles.
They tend to be libertarian-leaning and as passionate about limiting American
interventionism overseas as they are about domestic affairs.

But Mr. Paul is also determined to appeal among social conservatives now drawn
to Mr. Cruz.

Both appeared at a gathering of pastors in Des Moines this summer and spoke at
the Family Research Council's Values Voter summit meeting last month in
Washington. The day before that meeting, they addressed a private meeting of a
few dozen of the country's leading Christian conservatives. Attendees said that
Mr. Cruz, who was joined at the closed-door meeting by his pastor father, had
the more compelling presence, but that Mr. Paul's wife, Kelley, impressed the
group by ''talking in our kind of language,'' as one participant put it.

Mr. Paul clearly has more to prove than Mr. Cruz among evangelicals, who
remember his father's libertarianism and are suspicious of his positions, like
his support for reducing sentences on drug users and allowing the states to
decide whether to legalize same-sex marriage.

''I'd want clarification on those issues because it is a concern,'' said Tamara
Scott, the Iowa national Republican committeewoman, who has spent time with both
men.

Mr. Paul and his advisers are acutely aware of such unease and are taking steps
to address it. Most telling, perhaps was an exchange involving Mr. Paul, who was
raised an Episcopalian, at the end of a pastors' luncheon in May in Cedar
Rapids.

''One of the pastors said to Rand, 'We've beat all around this, I don't want to
beat all around this anymore, let's be real specific: Would you define yourself
as born again?' '' recalled David Lane, a Christian conservative organizer. ''He
said, 'I'm born again.' ''

Still, Mr. Lane underscored the advantage Mr. Cruz has with some evangelicals.
Asked about the Texas senator's faith, he responded, ''Cruz is obviously born
again and goes to First Baptist Houston.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/02/us/politics/republican-rivalry-simmers-as-path
s-and-styles-diverge.html

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Senator Rand Paul (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACQUELYN MARTIN/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)
Senator Ted Cruz (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM BOURG/REUTERS) (A1)
   Senators Ted Cruz, left, and Rand Paul waiting to speak at a rally in
September opposing funding for the Affordable Care Act. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DREW
ANGERER/GETTY IMAGES) (A16)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


