                             1042 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 10, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

John Ford, on Uncommon Ground

BYLINE: By DAVE KEHR

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; ON VIDEO; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1650 words


Turner Classic Movies, Columbia Pictures and the Film Foundation have pooled
their resources to create ''John Ford: The Columbia Films Collection,'' a most
welcome boxed set that brings together five films directed by that dean of
American filmmakers.

Three have not previously appeared on DVD in the United States: ''The Whole
Town's Talking,'' a Depression-era comedy with Jean Arthur and Edward G.
Robinson; ''Gideon's Day,'' a police procedural filmed in England in 1958, with
Jack Hawkins as the Scotland Yard inspector created by the novelist John
Creasey; and ''Two Rode Together,'' a major Ford western from 1961, with James
Stewart, Richard Widmark and Shirley Jones.

The other two films in the collection have long been out of print: ''The Long
Gray Line,'' the 1955 story of a long-serving West Point instructor (Tyrone
Power) and Ford's first film in CinemaScope, and ''The Last Hurrah,'' his 1958
adaptation of a best-selling novel by Edwin O'Connor, with Spencer Tracy as an
aging politician facing his last campaign.

Most of these movies are outliers in Ford's career, films that find him working
in genres or formats with which he wasn't usually associated. Even ''Two Rode
Together'' -- superficially the most Fordian film of the bunch, if only because
it is a western -- drifts off the beaten trail of the genre and touches on
elements of gothic horror.

''The Whole Town's Talking,'' from 1935, is a brisk, topical urban comedy that
allows the great Robinson to slip back and forth between the poles of his
performance range -- he plays both a shyly romantic office drone and a cold,
sadistic thug. You're automatically tempted to describe the film as Capraesque,
until you remember that Frank Capra had only established himself as a comedy
director a year earlier, with ''It Happened One Night.''

It might be more accurate to call ''Mr. Deeds Goes to Town'' Fordian. ''Deeds,''
released in 1936, cemented Capra's reputation for social comedy. But it was Ford
who uncovered Jean Arthur's gift for comedy; previously, she was an
undistinguished contract player. It was Ford who first cast her as a
tough-talking, professional woman in tailored suits.

It may be the westerns and war movies that are the foundation of his reputation
today, but throughout his long career -- over 140 films, though most of the
silent movies are lost -- Ford remained, on the surface at least, a remarkably
protean filmmaker. His sense of himself as an unflappable professional allowed
him to take on the most unlikely projects -- a vehicle for the child star
Shirley Temple, for example -- just as the strength of his vision and the power
of his technique could conform those unlikely projects into works of deep
personal import. (The Temple film, ''Wee Willie Winkie,'' was perhaps the first
of Ford's films to deal with a theme that would become central to his work after
World War II: the social structure of a military encampment.)

As well as ''The Whole Town's Talking'' turned out, the strong-willed Ford most
likely chafed under the command of Columbia's autocratic head of production,
Harry Cohn. Twenty years would pass until Ford would return to Columbia, and
then only because Columbia had inherited a property Ford very much wanted to
film -- the life story of Marty Maher, an Irish immigrant who arrived at West
Point as a civilian kitchen worker and remained for 50 years as a beloved
noncommissioned officer and swimming instructor (even though, at least according
to Ford's film, he didn't know how to swim).

''The Long Gray Line'' belongs to a cluster of films about marriage -- a subject
that rarely engaged Ford before -- that pops up in his filmography of the 1950s.
Contrasting the intimate union of a man and a woman with the social and
emotional cohesiveness of the closed military communities that had long
fascinated Ford, these movies conjugate marriage through many different forms --
as dying and dysfunctional (''Rio Grande,'' 1950), as a battle of equally
strong-willed partners (''The Quiet Man,'' 1952), as an artificial imposition of
monogamy on a natural world of spontaneous desire (''Mogambo,'' 1953), as a
relationship narrowed by dependence and enforced domesticity (''The Wings of
Eagles,'' 1957).

In ''The Long Gray Line,'' the protagonist's loyalties seem equally divided
between the institution he serves (West Point) and the woman he loves (another
Irish immigrant, played with uncharacteristic girlishness by the Amazonian
Maureen O'Hara). The film ends by imagining a perfect union of these two
apparently conflicting desires (as if Marty and his wife had become as permanent
a part of West Point as the obsolete but immovable cannons that protect its
perimeter) -- the personal blending with the institutional.

In this context, the underrated ''Gideon's Day'' -- seen here in color, although
Columbia had so little faith in it in 1958 that the studio released the film in
black-and-white prints as ''Gideon of Scotland Yard'' -- takes on a new
significance. As Inspector Gideon (Hawkins, to whom Ford has lent his own
trademark pipe) makes his way through a typically demanding day, he deals with
cases that pointedly concern differently allied couples -- including a Cockney
petty criminal (Cyril Cusack) and his protective wife (Maureen Potter), and a
corrupt member of his own staff (Derek Bond) who has betrayed his wife (Grizelda
Hervey) as well as his colleagues.

Throughout, Ford cuts back and forth between Gideon's office and his home, where
his loyal wife (the wistful Ford regular Anna Lee) and marriageable daughter
(Anna Massey, in her first movie role), proudly and patiently accept the
responsibilities that come with a life of public service (Scotland Yard having
become a branch of the United States Cavalry). In the late films, however, the
issue of marriage drops away, and Ford's heroes increasingly find themselves
isolated (like Spencer Tracy's widowed mayor in ''The Last Hurrah'') or cynical
and bluntly misanthropic.

''Two Rode Together'' finds its most intimate moment in an unbroken four-minute
shot in which a career officer (Richard Widmark) and a mercenary Indian trader
(James Stewart) exchange their views on women and independence. But this comic
sequence proves to be the lead-in to a nightmarish evocation of domestic life
gone wrong, as Widmark and Stewart enter an encampment of traumatized families,
each hoping that Stewart will be able to negotiate the release of a member held
captive by Comanches. The love of a husband for his wife or a mother for her
child proves to be pitifully inadequate in the face of the cultural divide that
has risen between them.

Ford's darkest and most bitter film, ''Two Rode Together'' opens into the mythic
perspective of ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance'' (1962), where the
shortcomings of human relations are subsumed by the greater march of
civilization -- a glorious lie masking an unbearable truth. Ford's questioning
of his fundamental principles continued through his final feature, ''7 Women,''
in 1966, never abandoning the restless intellect, formal mastery and
Shakespearean capacity for consuming and expressing the great and awful
complexity of human emotion that made this son of an immigrant Irish
saloonkeeper one of the greatest of all American artists. (Turner Classic Movies
Vault Collection; DVD, $54.99; shop.tcm.com; not rated)

DESPICABLE ME 2 Steve Carell returns as the voice of Felonious Gru, the
supervillain of the first ''Despicable Me'' (2010), now a devoted father who
partners with Lucy Wilde (Kristen Wiig), an agent of the Anti-Villain League, to
battle the renowned bad guy El Macho (Benjamin Bratt). Pierre Coffin and Chris
Renaud directed. ''Once again, the lesson that more is not necessarily better,
something rarely learned by blockbuster sequels, is forgotten,'' Stephen Holden
wrote in The New York Times in July. (Universal; Blu-ray, 3-D/Blu-ray/DVD combo,
$49.98; Blu-ray/DVD combo, $34.98; DVD, $29.98; PG)

MAN OF STEEL Zack Snyder (''Sucker Punch'') directed this latest attempt to
revive the ''Superman'' franchise, now with Henry Cavill as the superhero. With
Amy Adams, Michael Shannon, Diane Lane and Russell Crowe. ''At once frantically
overblown and beautifully filigreed, 'Man of Steel' will turn on everyone it
doesn't turn off,'' Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times in June. (Warner Home
Video; Blu-ray 3-D/Blu-ray/DVD combo, $44.95; Blu-ray/DVD combo, $35.99; DVD,
$28.98; PG-13)

THE WOLVERINE Hugh Jackman is back as the Marvel superhero with an
indestructible bone structure and retractable claws, now visiting Japan in
search of a cure for his immortality. James Mangold directed; with Rila
Fukushima, Famke Janssen and Hiroyuki Sanada. ''Instead of expounding a tedious
origin story or staging an epic battle for apocalyptic stakes, 'The Wolverine'
focuses on a specific and self-contained adventure in a richly imagined place,''
A. O. Scott wrote in The Times in July. (Fox; Blu-ray 3-D/Blu-ray/DVD combo,
$49.99; Blu-ray/DVD combo, $39.99; DVD, $29.98; PG-13)

BABY PEGGY: THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM Vera Iwerebor's documentary tells the story
of Diana Serra Cary, who was a major child star in the 1920s as ''Baby Peggy,''
and today is an energetic 96-year-old with seemingly total recall and a
thoughtful perspective on her life and films. Includes the 1924 feature
''Captain January,'' directed by Edward F. Cline. (Milestone; DVD, $24.95; not
rated)

CINERAMA HOLIDAY The second film (1955) to be released in the three-panel
Cinerama process, restored from the camera negative with its format recreated
via a curved simulation. Parallel stories, of an American couple touring Europe
and two Europeans in America, provide a fascinating midcentury portrait of the
Western world. Robert L. Bendick and Philippe de Lacy directed; the
reconstruction and remastering is by David Strohmaier. (Flicker Alley; Blu-ray
and DVD combo, $39.95; not rated)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/10/movies/homevideo/tcm-offers-john-ford-the-colu
mbia-films-collection.html

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: John Ford, left, with Anna Massey and Jack Hawkins on the set
of ''Gideon's Day'' (1958), one of five movies included in TCM's boxed set
''John Ford: The Columbia Films Collection.'' (AR15)
 John Ford on location at West Point for ''The Long Gray Line'' (1955), included
in ''John Ford: The Columbia Films Collection.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SPE ARCHIVES &
COLLECTIONS) (AR17)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


