                             1057 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 24, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Broken Copier, and Other Calamities

BYLINE: By KEN JAWOROWSKI

SECTION: Section NJ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; THEATER REVIEW | NEW JERSEY;
Pg. 14

LENGTH: 709 words


''You. Are not. Special.'' So Stan, a 50-ish office drone, informs his young
co-worker in a scene from ''middlemen'' at the New Jersey Repertory Company in
Long Branch. ''You are not important. I know, your parents told you differently,
but they were lying. If you were never born, if you had never existed at all,''
things would have turned out the same way, he says, acknowledging that the same
holds true for him.

It's a razor-sharp moment, brutal and harsh, delivered by an excellent actor on
a first-rate set. And in the end, such sections make this play all the more
disappointing when the whole proves less impressive than the sum of those parts.

The two-character ''middlemen'' follows Stan and that co-worker, Michael, as
they toil on projects, worry over their jobs and trade lukewarm gossip. There's
a major report due soon, and that has become the focus of their collective
energy.

While they labor, the script, by David Jenkins, emphasizes the banalities of the
workplace and the inherent blandness of corporate life. When these men get riled
up over minutiae -- the lack of milk for coffee, a malfunctioning copy machine
-- it's not lost on theatergoers that their own work lives may seem just as
mundane to outsiders.

''I always thought that I would feel like a man by this point,'' the 27-year-old
Michael says. ''You know, when I was a kid and thought about what I would be
like in the future. I always imagined myself being a lot more capable. People in
the movies that are my age always seem so adult. Do you feel like a man?''

Such observations help Stan and Michael to pass the time. But random remarks, no
matter how astute, can't overcome a thin plot and a shortage of genuine tension.
Other than allusions to a vague menace from a law-enforcement agency (it appears
the company may have been involved in financial shenanigans), there is not much
for an audience to grab hold of, to care about or even to get angry over. Unlike
that gold standard of office plays, David Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' Mr.
Jenkins's script has little forward thrust.

To be sure, some of the ambiguity is intentional -- there is a surreal
undertone, in the vein of Sartre's ''No Exit'' and, occasionally, Sam Shepard's
''True West.'' The story takes place over a single day and evening inside an
apparently deserted high-rise building. It's certainly possible that the two
employees are trapped in a kind of purgatory, or worse.

Yet the haziness feels more like a forced concept than an organic occurrence. Of
course, dramatic situations don't have to be pleasant, or even entirely
believable. But they must always be compelling for the viewer. That's not the
case for extended stretches of ''middlemen,'' despite its precisely written
lines. And in a play billed as a comedy, the laughs are often meager.

Still, even when the script disappoints, the production remains professional.
Duncan M. Rogers, as Stan, delivers a potent performance as a man being consumed
by self-doubt even as he projects a false air of confidence. David Friedlander,
as Michael, also ably embodies a character whose calm surface hides a troubled
soul. They're a finely matched pair, completely dedicated to their roles.

The actors, directed by Marc Geller, are well served by Jessica Parks's set. The
white, cheap-looking furniture and the functioning appliances and computers are
all detail-perfect, as are the memos (''Copier is for office use ONLY!'') that
are taped to the dingy walls.

It's not hard to see how the 90-minute ''middlemen'' would appeal to a theater
and its production team. On the page, the script is an easy read that touches on
a timely topic, economic anxiety, while the small cast and single set allow for
an inexpensive run. But plays aren't only for reading, and they aren't made
solely for production teams. First and foremost, they are meant to be up on a
stage, ready to engage an audience. This show seems too self-absorbed for that.

''middlemen,'' by David Jenkins, runs through Dec. 8 at the New Jersey Repertory
Company, 179 Broadway, Long Branch. For information: (732) 229-3166; njrep.org.

''middlemen,'' by David Jenkins, runs through Dec. 8 at the New Jersey Repertory
Company, 179 Broadway, Long Branch. For information: (732) 229-3166; njrep.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/24/nyregion/a-review-of-middlemen-at-the-new-jers
ey-repertory-company.html

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: David Friedlander, above left, as Michael and Duncan M. Rogers
as Stan struggle to meet a deadline to produce a major report in ''middlemen,''
a two-character play at the New Jersey Repertory Company.  (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARC
GELLER)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


