                             1099 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 30, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama's TV Picks: Anything Edgy, With Hints of Reality

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1090 words


WASHINGTON -- War, terrorism, economic struggle, mass shootings -- such is life
in the Oval Office for President Obama.

Yet in his few quiet moments, this president seeks not to escape to the
delicious back-stabbing of the ''Real Housewives'' or the frivolity of the
singing teenagers on ''Glee.'' By his own accounts, Mr. Obama is drawn in his
spare time to shows like HBO's ''Game of Thrones'' and ''Boardwalk Empire,'' the
kind of heavy, darkly rendered television that echoes the sadness and strife
that make up so much of his workday.

These days, when Mr. Obama retreats to the White House residence after a long
day on the other end of the colonnade, he is working his way through the DVD box
set of AMC's ''Breaking Bad,'' the award-winning TV drama about a drug-dealing
high school teacher. The show just ended after five seasons, but the president
is way behind and frequently reminds those around him not to give anything away.

Friends say Mr. Obama is also keenly awaiting the new season of the Netflix show
''House of Cards,'' which starkly depicts a dysfunctional Washington -- a theme
that must seem all too familiar. At a meeting of technology executives last
week, Mr. Obama jokingly lamented his own inability to maneuver the halls of
Congress in the way of Kevin Spacey's character, Frank Underwood.

''I wish things were that ruthlessly efficient,'' Mr. Obama was overheard saying
to Reed Hastings, the Netflix C.E.O., who invited the president to do a cameo on
the show. Mr. Obama joked of the sleazy, congressman-murderer Mr. Underwood,
''This guy's getting a lot of stuff done.''

It may be a fool's errand to psychoanalyze anyone -- let alone a sitting
president -- based only on the books he reads or the music he listens to, or the
television shows he watches.

Since leaving office, Bill Clinton has said he liked ''24,'' Fox's terrorism
cliffhanger, and -- you guessed it -- ABC's ''Scandal,'' a political thriller
set in Washington. Ronald Reagan, a former actor, once offered to appear on his
favorite show, the sitcom ''Family Ties.'' (His offer was rejected.) Franklin
Roosevelt was said to like Mickey Mouse cartoons in an era long before cable
made TV edgy. George W. Bush was said to not be a particular fan of television,
but made exceptions for A&E's ''Biography'' and a variety of sports programs.

But for Mr. Obama, ''Breaking Bad'' and ''House of Cards'' are hardly the
exceptions to what has become a clear pattern. Mr. Obama is also a devotee of
Showtime's ''Homeland,'' which offers an eerily familiar mirror to the
president's own foreign policy adventures: terrorism, Iranian nuclear
negotiations, drone strikes, and an intelligence agency struggling for
legitimacy with Congress and the American people.

And the list of heavies continues. Mr. Obama has told people he is a big fan of
''Game of Thrones,'' a brutal imagining of the wars in medieval Europe. He has
raved about ''Boardwalk Empire'' and ITV's ''Downton Abbey,'' two period dramas
that document the angst and difficulties that people faced during those times.
And he has worked his way through the DVDs of AMC's smoldering ''Mad Men''
series, telling friends that the character of Peggy Olson has given him insight
into what it must have been like for his strong-willed grandmother in a world
dominated by men.

Then there is HBO's ''The Wire,'' which Mr. Obama has repeatedly called one of
the ''greatest shows of all time.'' The drama depicted the poverty-stricken
projects in Baltimore and documented the drug war between worn-out cops and the
city's African-American residents. (The president's favorite character: Omar
Little, the stickup man who robs the drug dealers.)

David Simon, the show's creator, said in an interview that he wonders whether
Mr. Obama was drawn to the show because it dealt so directly with the issues of
social and economic strife.

'' 'The Wire' was one of the few shows that was about the other America,'' Mr.
Simon said. ''It was set in the inner city. The characters were of a class that
has been left behind economically and politically.''

That sounds, Mr. Simon noted, a lot like the America that Mr. Obama is keen to
transcend. In a speech earlier this month, Mr. Obama pledged the remainder of
his presidency to the fight against the kinds of persistent poverty that were
depicted in ''The Wire.''

''The idea that a child may never be able to escape that poverty because she
lacks a decent education or health care, or a community that views her future as
their own,'' Mr. Obama said, ''that should offend all of us and it should compel
us to action. We are a better country than this.''

Mr. Simon says he made his show ''from some of the same perspectives'' that the
president expressed in that speech. But he conceded that ''it's all speculation,
and it's not entirely fair'' to guess what the president is thinking.

''One person's escape or distraction is another person's burden,'' Mr. Simon
said of Mr. Obama's TV habits.

It is true that Mr. Obama has his own TV distractions that do not involve
serious subjects. He is a rabid sports fan, and friends and colleagues say he
enjoys ESPN's ''SportsCenter.'' He also once told TV Guide that he and his
family watch ABC's ''Modern Family'' and NBC's ''Parks and Recreation'' -- two
comedy shows that could never be accused of being deep, dark or edgy.

But Mr. Obama once admitted to People magazine that he is ''a little darker'' in
his TV habits than the rest of his family.

It may be ''Homeland'' that offers the most interesting insight into Mr. Obama's
downtime preferences. Like Fox's ''24'' before it, ''Homeland'' reveals the
hidden dangers in a complicated world. But ''Homeland'' is more subtle,
presenting choices that are rarely easy and never cost-free.

Mandy Patinkin, who plays Saul Berenson, the C.I.A. chief on ''Homeland,''
talked in a recent interview about what he called the ''exciting'' fact that Mr.
Obama watches the show.

''Our job is not to reflect, in my opinion, the real C.I.A. or Washington,'' Mr.
Patinkin said. ''Our job is to be the poetic response, the poetic reflection.''

Perhaps that is what television is for Mr. Obama: a poetic reflection. Or maybe
despite his day job, the president simply enjoys the cliffhanger tension of the
best dramas.

After meeting the president at the White House last year, Claire Danes, who
plays the C.I.A. officer Carrie Mathison in ''Homeland,'' expressed shock at
having a ''first fan.''

''I think we were all stunned -- and a little terrified by that idea,'' she
said. ''The president knows what we do?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/30/us/obamas-tv-picks-anything-edgy-with-hints-of
-reality.html

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Obama enjoys the dark, the scandalous and the brutal.
Clockwise from top left, the Netflix series ''House of Cards,'' set in a
dysfunctional Washington
''Homeland,'' Showtime's C.I.A. thriller
HBO's violent ''Game of Thrones''
and AMC's ''Breaking Bad,'' a tale of a drug-dealing teacher. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
MELINDA SUE GORDON FOR NETFLIX
KENT SMITH/SHOWTIME
FRANK OCKENFELS /AMC, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS
HELEN SLOAN/HBO) (A11)
 President Obama has raved about HBO's ''Boardwalk Empire,'' with Steve Buscemi.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MACALL B. POLAY/HBO) (A12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


