                             1048 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 18, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tapping Unseen Forces in the Dungeon

BYLINE: By SIOBHAN BURKE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; DANCE REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 513 words


The Underground Theater at the Abrons Arts Center often goes by affectionate
characterizations like ''dungeon'' and ''cave.'' Its subterranean aura, murky
lighting and pockmarked concrete walls ensure that whatever happens will seem a
little bit creepy. So it was a fitting location for Arturo Vidich's ''142241,''
a duet (or quartet, if you count the audience participants) that attempted, as a
news release put it, ''to tune in to the invisible worlds that influence this
world, if you believe in that sort of thing.''

If you didn't believe in that sort of thing at the beginning, you were probably
willing to entertain the notion by the end. Navigating a prehistoric-apocalyptic
landscape of jagged sound and light contraptions, Mr. Vidich and his second in
command, Maximilian Balduzzi, tapped into strange, unidentifiable frequencies:
sonic, visual, interpersonal. And yet, throughout their ritualistic exploits, it
was hard to shake the feeling that these were just two guys messing around,
albeit in terrifically unusual ways.

On Friday, the show began with a friendly, sandy-haired Mr. Vidich peeking his
head into the lobby, where ticket holders waited to enter the multitiered vault.
You had two seating options, he said: upstairs or downstairs. By sitting
downstairs, you agreed to participate if called upon.

The Vidich we encountered inside was a more foreboding creature: a kind of
oracle-warrior-beast wearing a horned balaclava, bulky sweater, belted jeans and
partial skirt. (Mr. Balduzzi, first seen wielding an electric torch, wore the
same.)

As wizardly with acoustic production (and gizmo construction) as he is with
improvisational movement, Mr. Vidich generated a rumbling, throbbing overture by
spinning a disc on a metal rod. If you're not a stagecraft-savvy person, one
great pleasure of ''142241'' is having no idea how things work. Where is that
drone coming from? How does this light seem like a crackling bonfire?

Mr. Vidich was most compelling when he ceded control. Silently approaching the
audience, he selected two people to join him onstage, a ceremonial process of
clasping their shoulders and touching the crown of his head to theirs. (He
rejected a few candidates before settling on the right ones.) At first, he
deftly manipulated them, backing them up against a wall. But as he escalated
into a physical frenzy, they came to his rescue, scrambling to catch him as he
toppled backward. Eventually, they let him come crashing down.

Mr. Balduzzi remained a lurking presence, save for a couple of sections,
including one involving a nonsensical, three-syllable incantation, sung forward
and backward over and over. (The title, perhaps, uttered in a brute language?)
Thrusting pies in Mr. Vidich's face, then dousing his head in a fish tank, he
sent his twin into an animalistic rage that ended the show. You almost felt
transported to a world beyond your own -- but not quite.

This was just the first stage, though. Mr. Vidich has plans for a video project,
essentially a rewound version of the live performance. It may be more convincing
in reverse.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/18/arts/dance/arturo-vidich-at-the-abrons-arts-ce
nter.html

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: 142241: Arturo Vidich employed novel contraptions in his
performance at the Abrons Arts Center. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


