                             1079 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 11, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Eggnog Allowed

BYLINE: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER and HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Dining In, Dining Out / Style Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2095 words


TO: HELENE

FROM: JENNIFER

My dearest Helene,

Over the decade that we have been work colleagues, our greatest collaborations
have not, admittedly, been journalistic. Sure, we've always had some
fiscal-crisis story to attend to -- me reporting from Capitol Hill, and you
ensconced over at the White House. But let's face it, our interests are often
more Drambuie than debt ceiling.

So as the holidays are upon us again, I feel the need to reach out. I can't
quite decide what I dread more: the canned holiday music at the grocery store,
the abundance of red or all those cloying glasses of eggnog handed to us at
office parties.

One of the most puzzling things about our drinking culture is that while we have
restored, revived and invented wonderful cocktails over the last decade, our
holiday drinks often remain woefully antiquated and disappointing. I don't want
eggnog unless it is exceptional. Phooey on the sauvignon blanc, which we all
should have retired at the beach last August, and peace out, please, to the
sherbet punch.

I don't think it has to be this way. We can do better as a people for our
holiday parties by embracing classic ingredients, seasonal citrus fruits and
holiday colors -- but ditching the clichés. We may be amateurs, but it doesn't
take much to throw together some great cocktails, and even a great cocktail
party.

Discuss.

TO: JENNIFER

FROM: HELENE

Hi, Steinhauer,

Yes, for the holidays, you really have to crank up the cocktails a notch. Nobody
looks good in red, but how about a red frozen vodka slushy? Red Roosters have
become one of my specialty holiday drinks, and people love them. First, no one
expects that you're going to give them a frozen drink at Christmas; it's usually
all mulled wine and hot spiked cider. But the Red Rooster is so deliciously icy
that it perks you right out of any holiday blues.

And you can make them days ahead. You mix vodka, orange juice concentrate and
cranberry-tangerine juice cocktail in a pitcher and freeze overnight (or
whenever -- I have left this stuff in my freezer for weeks; I usually freeze
them in those tall water carafes you can buy at Target). When it's time to
serve, just take the pitcher out and have a spoon ready to scrape the Red
Roosters into martini glasses; they will never freeze solid, thanks to the
vodka.

(I've also made them with white cranberry juice, during a blizzard, when
everyone on my snowed-in street was climbing the walls and in dire need of
cocktails. While it didn't look like snow in a glass, it looked a bit like
freezing rain.)

TO: HELENE

FROM: JENNIFER

Easy prep: a good point. Holiday cocktails should be special, but not too
complicated. A bartender gets sad and cranky with too many ingredients to work
with, and no one wants to wait in line for complex fare.

One of my best memories of an office party is of you, standing in as the
makeshift bartender, whipping up Campari-and-orange-juice cocktails, which
slowly but surely had the collective effect of making all of us like our
colleagues quite a bit more than we actually do. How did you come up with that
drink? And how easy is it to replicate on the fly?

When it comes to cocktails and work, I generally invent them in response to a
bad day. My personal favorite involves clementine oranges, one of the most
delightful contributions of the winter trees, and gin, snazzed up with some soda
water. And when things get dark and cold, I sometimes repair to the Tabard Inn
here in Washington for its decent selections of Italian reds, but I can be lured
by its signature cocktail, a blend of tequila, sherry and Drambuie, infused with
the December aromas of thyme and citrus.

TO: JENNIFER

FROM: HELENE

You asked about the Campari orange cocktails that I served a couple of years
ago, right at deadline, as I recall. Campari is so deeply underrated: I
discovered it more than a decade ago. The woman sitting next to me on a plane
ordered ''Campari on ice,'' so, trying to seem sophisticated, I did, too. It was
so bitter; I hated it. But a few months later, I was in Florence with some
friends in the Piazza della Signoria, and they ordered ''Campari orange.''

The orange juice was the key; the bitter Campari loves the sweet tartness of
orange juice. Now that I think of it, a proper Campari orange looks pretty and
holiday-festive, too. It's ridiculously easy to make. Just put ice cubes in a
glass, add orange juice and top with Campari. Adjust the liquor-to-O.J. ratio,
according to how new a person is to drinking Campari. The color can go from a
luscious pink, for the novice, to full-on red, for me.

But stop fooling around and move on to your gin-and-ginger cocktails. You know
what I'm talking about.

TO: HELENE

FROM: JENNIFER

Let me first say that one of the most underappreciated societal costs of the
''Sex and the City'' years was the needless elevation of vodka. Gin, in all of
its vegetal varieties, is a much better match for the mix-ins that can spice up
a holiday party. Add some Domaine de Canton (a ginger-flavored liqueur) or St.
Germain (made from elderberry flowers) and top with something sparkling, and you
have a better-than-gin-and-tonic surprise. In conclusion: more gin at parties,
please!

I'd also like to make a pitch here for Cynar and soda, with a nice slice of
orange, which is also very easy to mix and a great way to start a party, even if
that start includes listening to a colleague drone on about quantitative easing.

TO: JENNIFER

FROM: HELENE

You know I make that gin-and-ginger drink of yours all the time, right? You've
neglected to mention that it should come with a warning label: DRINK ONE GLASS
ONLY. I served it at the beginning of a dinner party last week, and while I
wasn't looking, one of my guests had helped himself to a second. Let's just say
that his dinner conversation sparkled.

But I beg to differ with you on this anti-vodka business. My all-time favorite
holiday drink is my patented grapefruit martini. Top-shelf vodka, fresh
grapefruit juice (it is worth coughing up the extra $5), shaker, ice. Shake and
strain into a chilled martini glass. Sip. Close your eyes and smile.

If the grapefruit juice is super-tart, you can add a packet of Equal (yes, I
know you're violently opposed to that) or some simple syrup. But if you squeeze
the grapefruits yourself, it will need no further embellishment. For a party,
you obviously won't be standing around squeezing grapefruits; hence, the trip to
the supermarket. Simply make a pitcher of the vodka-juice mix, and then as
people wander over to the bar, pour it into a shaker filled with ice and shake
it up. For extra festiveness, float some chilled bubbly on top.

I would offer to make this for the office Christmas party that's coming up, but
I don't want to spend the whole party behind the bar again. If I put the
pitchers out, will our work pals properly shake and strain the martinis
themselves? I don't like incompetent bartending, you know, and may start yelling
at people if they do it wrong.

Um, what is Cynar?

TO: HELENE

FROM: JENNIFER

I'm not your Google. (It's a bittersweet Italian digestive liqueur.)

As for bartending, indulge your need for control and have your own party, but
exert as little effort as possible. You can buy cheap glasses at Ikea or World
Market, or even rent them, although the truth is that renting glasses can be
almost as expensive as trekking to Ikea. Paper plates are a no, but clear
plastic ones work. And whimsical paper napkins are a must. If you can't cook,
find your bliss in salted snacks that will cause your guests to become more fun,
like sriracha peas or some melon wrapped in the most expensive pork you can
find. Or sauté button mushrooms in garlic and butter. In lieu of hiring a
bartender, stick to one cocktail that you've mixed ahead of time and that
requires only a shake; then put your over-21 nephew behind the bar. Dim the
lights, and you're set.

Have we forgotten anything? I made a quick call to Jim Meehan, a managing
partner of the East Village speakeasy PDT, who often coughs up with some good
drink recipes. He had a few thoughts.

''Craft beer is becoming much more popular right now, and people are becoming a
lot more fluent in it,'' Mr. Meehan said, and I have to agree. So I will make
colleagues bring their favorite 12-packs, and we may end up with some really fun
drinks; those in the know might pick Anchor Brewing's Christmas Ale, for
instance, and Stella Artois has a lovely hard apple cider this year. One of our
co-workers will bring crummy Korean beer, but there is nothing we can do about
that.

Also, let's celebrate punch, which has the advantage of being made in advance.
''Punches are simple,'' Mr. Meehan pointed out. ''There is this misconception
that it looks and tastes like something from college.'' A green tea punch, for
instance, takes advantage of rum's kick, and I love pomegranate juice mixed with
something sparkling and some other fruit juice of your choice for balance.

TO: JENNIFER

FROM: HELENE

So we've got punch, we've got great drink recipes, and I am sure we can balance
it all out with some dry rieslings and a nice Côtes du Rhône. Anything else?

TO: HELENE

FROM: JENNIFER

I'm really worried about the music.

Recipe: Red Rooster

48 ounces (about 3/4 of a 64-ounce container) Ocean Spray Cran-Tangerine Juice
Drink (see note)

6 ounces frozen orange juice concentrate, defrosted

2 cups vodka

1. In a 2 1/2-quart freezer-safe container, mix together all the ingredients.
Cover and freeze for at least 5 hours, or up to 1 week; the mixture will become
slushy but will not solidify.

2. To serve, spoon into martini glasses.

Yield: 80 ounces (20 4-ounce servings)

Recipe: Tabard Cocktail

1 1/2 ounces reposado tequila, preferably Milagro

1/2 ounce dry amontillado sherry, preferably Los Arcos from Lustau

1/2 ounce Drambuie liqueur

2 dashes Regan's bitters, or other orange bitters

Twist of orange peel, for garnish

Small sprig of fresh thyme, for garnish

1. In a cocktail shaker, combine the tequila, sherry, Drambuie and bitters.

2. Fill shaker with ice, shake well and strain mixture into a chilled cocktail
glass. Float the orange peel on top like a boat (adding ice to glass may help),
and place the thyme in the center.

Yield: 1 drink

Adapted from the Tabard Inn restaurant, Washington, D.C.

Recipe: Christmas Spritz

3 ounces well-chilled prosecco

3 ounces well-chilled pure pomegranate juice

Lime twist, for garnish

1. In a champagne flute, combine the prosecco and pomegranate juice. Garnish
with the lime twist.

Yield: 1 drink

Recipe: Bad Day at Work

1 cup sugar

1 1/2 ounces Bluecoat or other high-quality gin

4 ounces clementine orange juice (from about 3 to 5 clementines)

Generous splash of seltzer

1. Fill a tumbler with crushed ice and set aside.

2. Make simple syrup: In a small saucepan, mix the sugar with 1 cup water.
Simmer over low heat until sugar dissolves. Set aside to cool, about 5 minutes.

3. In a shaker, combine the gin and orange juice with 1 teaspoon simple syrup.
(Remaining syrup can be refrigerated for up to 1 week.) Shake well, and pour
into the tumbler. Top with a splash of seltzer, add a stirrer and serve.

Yield: 1 drink

Recipe: Green Tea Punch

22 ounces (2 3/4 cups) freshly brewed hot Sencha tea, preferably In Pursuit of
Tea brand

22 ounces (2 3/4 cups) freshly brewed hot Moroccan mint green tea, preferably
Stash brand

16 ounces (2 cups) Demerara sugar

20 ounces (2 1/2 cups, from about 10 large limes) freshly squeezed lime juice

50 ounces (6 1/4 cups) Banks 5 Island Rum (or substitute Appleton Estate
Reserve, Mount Gay Black Barrel, or Bacardi 8)

1 whole nutmeg, or pinch ground nutmeg, for garnish

1. In a large heatproof bowl, combine the hot teas and sugar. Stir until sugar
is dissolved. Add 4 cups ice, and stir until ice has dissolved and the tea is
cool. Add the lime juice and rum, and stir well.

2. Transfer to a large punch bowl, and add a large block of ice. To serve, ladle
into cups. Grate whole nutmeg or sprinkle ground nutmeg over top. Alternatively,
the mixture may be refrigerated until chilled and served in ice-filled cups;
garnish with nutmeg.

Yield: About 4 quarts (32 1/2-cup servings)

Recipe: Grapefruit-tini

1 cup sugar

4 ounces freshly squeezed grapefruit juice

2 ounces high-quality vodka

1 1/2 ounces prosecco

1. Make simple syrup: In a small saucepan, mix the sugar with 1 cup water.
Simmer over low heat until sugar dissolves. Set aside to cool, about 5 minutes.

2. In a large shaker, combine the grapefruit juice, vodka and 1 tablespoon
simple syrup. (Remaining syrup can be refrigerated for up to 1 week.) Add ice
cubes and shake well. Strain into martini glass, and float (do not mix) prosecco
in glass.

Yield: 1 drink

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/11/dining/diy-cocktail-party-theyll-drink-to-that
.html

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Cocktails like these can be simple and fun to serve -- and to
drink. Front row, from left, the Tabard Cocktail, with tequila, and the Bad Day
at Work, with gin and clementine. Back row, from left, the Christmas Spritz,
with prosecco and pomegranate
the frozen Red Rooster, with vodka
the Grapefruit-tini, starring prosecco and vodka
and Green Tea Punch, a rum concoction. (D1)
 PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (D4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


