                             1053 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 21, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bomb Attacks Kill Dozens in Baghdad

BYLINE: By DURAID ADNAN and ALAN COWELL; Duraid Adnan reported from Baghdad, and
Alan Cowell from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 737 words


BAGHDAD -- A wave of apparently coordinated bombings hit bakeries and public
markets in Baghdad on Wednesday, killing at least 42 people and wounding more
than 90, many of them as they rushed to shop during a break in heavy rainstorms,
according to the police, residents and medical officials.

The attacks, most of them car bombings, targeted Shiites and Sunnis, reflecting
the protracted sectarian violence that has spiked since the American withdrawal
in 2011 and raising concerns that Iraq is facing levels of strife not seen for
years.

One attack struck Shiite Muslims during religious observances for Muharram, the
first month of the Islamic calendar, as they prepared food for the poor,
witnesses said. That bombing, in the Karada neighborhood, killed seven people
and wounded 19, the police said.

Another bomb erupted near a bakery where people were buying bread for breakfast,
killing five and wounding 13, officials said. In Adhamiya, a mostly Sunni
neighborhood in northern Baghdad, a bomb in a parked car exploded near another
bakery, killing three people.

Other car bombs tore through five public markets in other Baghdad neighborhoods,
including Sadr City, a Shiite stronghold, killing 22 people.

In the evening, a bomb exploded in a cafe in the Shiite neighborhood of Baya
where young people gather to smoke hookahs, killing five youths and wounding 10
others, a police official said.

Augmenting the sense of lawlessness, gunmen killed Col. Sruit Hama, the head of
security for President Jalal Talabani, in the northern Kurdish city of
Sulaimaniya late Tuesday, security officials said. Mr. Talabani, 80, has been in
Germany for medical treatment since December after suffering a stroke. Colonel
Hama had been planning to fly there on Wednesday to join him.

In a separate episode in the western Baghdad neighborhood of Ghazaliya, Khasim
al-Mashhadany, a prominent Sunni cleric, was also shot to death, the officials
said.

The chaos left by the bombings was compounded by heavy rains and flooding that
forced the authorities to declare a public holiday and hampered ambulances
trying to reach the sites of the explosions.

The car bombs went off between 9 and 10:15 a.m., as families shopped between
storms.

''I just wanted to get breakfast for my kids,'' said Muhsin Muntadhar, 45, who
was wounded in his leg and back from an explosion near one of the bakeries. ''I
never did something bad in my life. What did we do to deserve this? I hope one
day I wake up from this nightmare.''

No group immediately claimed responsibility for the violence, though in the
past, the authorities have blamed Sunni militants linked to Al Qaeda for similar
attacks.

But some Iraqis trace the growing violence to the civil war in neighboring
Syria, which has intensified sectarian divisions between Sunnis supporting
rebels opposed to President Bashar al-Assad and Shiites backing his government.

In Iraq, major bombings have become almost routine, pushing the levels of
violence to the heights of five years ago, according to the United Nations, and
reinforcing fears of the kind of sectarian warfare that seized the country in
2006 and 2007.

The bloodletting has taken on broader regional overtones, with Shiite backers of
Mr. Assad -- notably Iran and its ally Hezbollah, the militant Lebanese group --
drawn into the conflict, while militant Sunnis, some linked to Al Qaeda, have
flocked to the rebel cause in Syria, declaring jihad, or holy war, against their
enemies.

Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, weakened during the final years of the American
occupation, has rejuvenated and even expanded into Syria.

On Tuesday, the regional repercussions intensified when twin bombings struck the
Iranian Embassy in Beirut, the Lebanese capital, killing 23 people, in what was
seen as a strike against Tehran's regional influence.

Earlier this month, Iraq's prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, traveled to
Washington to press President Obama for help in fighting Qaeda terrorists in his
country's lawless west.

Iraqi officials said the government was appealing for a range of aid, including
helicopter gunships and missiles, along with American intelligence and other
forms of counterterrorism support, like reconnaissance drones.

The latest bombings in Baghdad came just days after explosions targeting public
markets and security checkpoints killed 44 people across Iraq on Sunday,
including 20 in a northern Turkmen-dominated city, and wounded more than 100.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/21/world/middleeast/dozens-killed-in-wave-of-atta
cks-in-baghdad.html

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Baghdad residents at the site of one of several blasts in the
city  on Wednesday. Car bombs went off between 9 and 10:15 a.m. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AHMED SAAD/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


