                             1045 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 15, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

We Interrupt This Generation ...

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; THE TV
WATCH; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1177 words


Life was pre-empted on Nov. 22, 1963.

And television is intent on recapturing that moment of rapt, uninterrupted and
wholly unprecedented attention.

The extravaganza surrounding the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination
is a poignant last hurrah that could prove as glorious -- and futile -- as a
cavalry charge in the era of drone attacks. Modern television was born on the
day John F. Kennedy died.

The current outpouring of specials, documentaries and dramas is as much a
commemoration of the medium as it is of the man. Accordingly, the flashback to
1963 is prompting a generational power play: The mandarins of television are
grabbing the remote to assert, perhaps for the last time, their pig-in-python
prerogative.

Unfortunately, they rely on the one resource their successors are not in awe of
and barely notice.

Gen Xers and those who follow, millennials in particular, know Kennedy through
the mottled filters of history class, pop culture and kitsch. (A lot of what
they know came from references to Jackie's pillbox hat or the Gassy Knoll on
''The Simpsons.'')

They barely remember what television viewing used to be like. They don't need
their television sets any more than they need land lines. They download
selectively and can easily and even unthinkingly slalom around whatever CBS, PBS
or HBO is trying so hard to get them to see.

Yet the torrent of programming is inevitable, and not just because the Camelot
mystique lives on and sells magazine covers and even J. Crew sweaters. Those
days of watching tragedy unfold in real time were the unifying experience of the
baby boomers. The children of postwar plenty didn't endure the Depression or
fight World War II, and there is no other lodestone, not rock music, Vietnam, or
the sexual revolution -- that was as unanimously shared. Oddly enough, the
members of this huge and hugely important 20th-century cohort are defined not by
what they did, but where they were on Nov. 22.

Many of these specials, and there are dozens, are as preoccupied with the images
and bereavement of baby boomers as they are with the slain president.

''There are not many of us left who covered the assassination of John F.
Kennedy, but only those of us who were alive before that awful weekend can
really know how much it changed America,'' is how the CBS anchor Bob Schieffer,
who was a local reporter in Dallas in 1963, described his feelings on ''Face the
Nation'' in October. He added, ''It was the weekend America lost its
innocence.''

That sounds like classic ''me generation'' solipsism, the illusion that no other
group experienced so powerful a blow, but it is true that no other president
before Kennedy had as intimate and immediate a connection to the public. He
wasn't the first president to go on television, but he was the first television
president. People didn't just feel they knew Kennedy personally, they thought
that he knew them right back.

''The president saw me,'' Linda Rodriguez, who was 13 and waved at the passing
presidential limousine in Dallas, says in ''JFK: The Final Hours,'' a National
Geographic Channel documentary. ''I know he connected with other people,'' she
says, crying at the memory. ''But that moment was mine, and it was so
personal.''

The actor Bill Paxton is the narrator, mostly because he, too, is a Texan who,
as a child, was in the crowd of well-wishers that morning. Neither Mr. Paxton
nor other bystanders can explain what happened; they can only describe how
shattered they felt. They serve as stand-ins for millions of other Americans --
including network anchors and executives -- who also felt they shared one brief
shining moment with that president.

''A week of reflection,'' is how ABC is describing its seven-day vigil dedicated
to the anniversary. CBS and NBC have their own saturation coverage coming, while
PBS and history-minded cable networks are reviving even remaindered bits of
Kennedy lore. The Smithsonian Channel has an entire documentary devoted to
Richard Pavlick, a would-be suicide bomber who failed to kill the
president-elect in December 1960.

Perhaps the oddest offering is ''JFK Assassination: The Definitive Guide,''
Friday on the History Channel. It's not a guide to what happened; it's a luridly
narrated survey of what 5,000 Americans think really happened (29 percent
surveyed believe Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone), including minutiae (73 percent
did not know that multiple tests have shown that Oswald's rifle could have made
the shots). The guide seems less a civics lesson than a hotel review on
Tripadvisor.com.

Fifty years on, Americans are still shocked by how Kennedy died, but there are
few illusions left about how he lived.

''Killing Kennedy,'' on the National Geographic Channel, is a case in point: a
made-for-television drama about Kennedy and Oswald, based on the book by Bill
O'Reilly and Martin Dugard, and starring Rob Lowe as Jack Kennedy. This
interpretation is also quite revealing, though less about grief than acceptance.
It is a succinct, not unsympathetic capsule history of Kennedy's public triumphs
and private transgressions. The Cuban missile crisis is there, and so is Judith
Exner, as are nude swimming parties in the White House pool and Dr. Feelgood.
The History channel in 2011 commissioned and then dropped a similarly
unvarnished mini-series, ''The Kennedys,'' that starred Greg Kinnear; it was
eventually shown on Reelz. There was no similar controversy over ''Killing
Kennedy.''

Journalism nowadays is held in almost as low public esteem as politics, but on
this anniversary, the reporters who covered the assassination are held up as
heroes. ''JFK: One PM Central Standard Time,'' on PBS is a loving portrait of
the CBS anchor Walter Cronkite, narrated by the actor George Clooney, which also
includes dramatic re-enactments of UPI and CBS reporters grappling with the
breaking story. The NBC anchor Brian Williams, who was 4 at the time, solemnly
says of Cronkite, ''On that day, he was our dad.''

The dread of imminent extinction has emboldened baby boomers to place themselves
more centrally into the tragedy. That wasn't as common 25 years ago. HBO is
reshowing a 1988 documentary, ''JFK: In His Own Words,'' made for that
anniversary. Like other tributes from the period, it is notable now for how
little there is of anyone besides Kennedy -- no present-day actor-narrators,
witnesses, ballistic experts or conspiracy theorists -- just the president's
voice and glamorous images from Choate, Palm Beach, Hyannis and the Oval Office.
It is touching, respectful and tactful in a way that today only a Kennedy family
member would expect.

The tributes conclude that never again will there be anything quite like the
Kennedy presidency. They are also haunted by the end of TV as it was watched
then, and for so long after.

''There was a signal moment in our cultural history,'' Lawrence Wright, the
author of ''The Looming Tower: Al Qaeda and the Road to 9/11,'' says in ''The
Assassination of President Kennedy,'' on CNN. ''Suddenly, it occurred to us that
the right thing to do is turn on television.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/15/arts/television/we-interrupt-this-generation.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: John F. Kennedy, the first real TV president,  preparing for an
appearance in 1963. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


