                             1032 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 2, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

China: Group Accused in Attack

BYLINE: By AUSTIN RAMZY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; SINOSPHERE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 502 words


China's domestic security chief said a terrorist organization was behind this
week's attack at Beijing's Tiananmen gate that left five people dead and 40
injured.

Speaking at a meeting in Uzbekistan, the official, Meng Jianzhu, said the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement was a ''behind-the-scenes instigator'' of the assault
Monday.

''The terrorist incident in Beijing was an organized, premeditated activity,''
he told Phoenix Television, a Hong Kong-based broadcaster. ''The
behind-the-scenes instigator is the East Turkestan Islamic Movement that is
entrenched in central and west Asia.''

Mr. Meng, who was participating in a meeting of the antiterrorism body of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a grouping of China, Russia and four central
Asian states, offered no further details on how investigators made that link.
The Beijing police said they found a banner printed with ''religious extremist
messages'' on the vehicle that crashed into a stone bridge and was ignited by
the three occupants who died in the fire.

The three people in the vehicle were all believed to be ethnic Uighurs, as were
five suspects who were arrested hours after the incident. Uighurs are a
predominantly Muslim ethnic group, and some have resisted China's authority over
the Xinjiang region they call home and have protested outside influence on their
language, culture and religion. Such opposition has at times turned violent, and
Chinese security officials have often pointed to the involvement of terrorist
organizations, particularly the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, or E.T.I.M.

The group, which seeks an independent Uighur state, was labeled a terrorist
organization by the United States in 2002. That move was criticized by some
scholars who said there was little evidence the group existed and suggested the
move was intended to ease Chinese opposition to plans by the United States to
invade Iraq.

Chinese officials have since linked E.T.I.M. to a 2008 attack on the border
police in the Xinjiang city of Kashgar. The group claimed responsibility for a
series of 2011 attacks in Xinjiang, and last year, China named six people
suspected of being E.T.I.M. members and said they were operating in Asia. A
C.I.A. drone strike last year in Pakistan killed Emeti Yakuf, who had been
identified as a senior leader of the group.

Overseas Uighur rights groups have questioned the Chinese government's
assertions about Uighur terrorism and the Tiananmen attack, saying they are
impossible to verify given the authorities' restrictions on independent
reporting.

''The Chinese government will not hesitate to concoct a version of the incident
in Beijing, so as to further impose repressive measures,'' Rebiya Kadeer, a
Uighur exile in the United States, said in a statement sent to reporters. Many
Uighur advocates fear an aggressive security response will lead to further
stigmatization of a group that already faces significant bias in Chinese
society.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://sinosphere.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/11/01/china-says-terror-group-behind-ti
ananmen-attack/

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


