                             1036 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Even in Bright Hues, Color It Beige

BYLINE: By JOHN PEARLEY HUFFMAN

SECTION: Section AU; Column 0; Automobiles; BEHIND THE WHEEL | 2013 NISSAN
SENTRA; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1137 words


If the redesigned 2013 Sentra has hit its target, what was Nissan aiming at?

The car does everything its competitors in the compact sedan class do, but it
doesn't do anything better than any of them.

It's styled to mimic its bigger brother, the curvy new Altima, but somehow
manages to look frumpy anyway. And while it seems ruggedly built, there's no
surface the driver touches that feels as if it's of superior quality.

The new Sentra is relentlessly and comprehensively average.

Average was perhaps enough when the Sentra faced only halfhearted American
competition, Korean cars were awful and the only real alternatives were the
generic Toyota Corolla and Honda's perennially excellent Civic.

Today, though, Ford's Focus is great, Chevrolet has stepped way up with the
Cruze, and Hyundai and Kia have developed solid compact cars to go with their
extended warranties and keen pricing.

And if you really want a small car that drives well, you skip over Honda and
Toyota altogether and go out and get a Mazda 3.

Unlike many so-called redesigns, which are actually updates of existing models,
this Sentra is built on new vehicle architecture that, Nissan says, is 150
pounds lighter than the outgoing model's while also marginally larger than the
car that came before. There's nothing radical about this new platform -- like
virtually every compact sedan, it is a front-drive car with a MacPherson strut
front suspension and a simple torsion-beam axle in the back -- but its newness
does have advantages.

Besides the weight loss, this new Sentra is noticeably stiffer than the previous
car. And when a door is slammed shut, there's a slightly tinny thump instead of
a profoundly tinny twang.

The wheelbase now stretches out 106.3 inches, which is 0.6 inch longer than the
2012 model's, but also 1.2 inches longer than the Honda Civic sedan's and
exactly the same as the redesigned 2014 Toyota Corolla's.

So, not surprisingly, Nissan's claim of 37.4 inches of rear legroom is exactly
1.2 inches greater than what Honda states for the Civic. Still, Toyota asserts
that the Corolla's rear legroom stretches out another four inches beyond that,
to 41.4 inches. Go figure.

Even more surprising, Nissan says the larger Altima midsize sedan, with a
wheelbase of 109.3 inches, has only 36.1 inches of rear legroom. So, again, go
figure.

But the new platform has also allowed Nissan to lower the beltline, which runs
across the base of the windows. This means there's more glass along the sides,
and this produces an airier cabin that seems roomier. And the cockpit is, while
short of luxurious in the top-of-the-line SL trim grade that I drove,
attractive. The seats are squishy and not particularly supportive, but they look
good.

The dash looks something like a wave that builds from the right to the left
where it crests over the instrumentation. And those instruments exist on a
single plane, are easily read and glow with a particular brilliance at night.
Like many of today's cars, the Sentra SL now starts with the push of a button
that glows orange in anticipation when the key fob is detected nearby.

Like every manufacturer, Nissan is obsessed with integrating its onboard
entertainment systems with whatever digital doodad the driver carries on board.
The system in the Sentra nicely plucked music out of my iPhone 4S via Bluetooth,
nicely displayed the songs it was playing on the available 5.8-inch touch screen
in the center of the dash and sounded great. And if the touch screen is too much
of a reach, there are redundant audio controls on the steering wheel.

Naturally Pandora, satellite radio and every known communications system more
modern than the semaphore can be plumbed into the system.

There's even a feature that allows voice control over text messaging with some
phones, which I wasn't able to test only because no one texts me. Everyone I
know prefers to yell in my face. The available navigation system -- a $650
option -- works well and displays in 3-D graphics if so desired. That's cheap
compared with, say, the $1,500 premium that Honda asks for a Civic with a
navigation system. But it's still expensive compared with the $180 that Best Buy
normally charges for a Garmin 2555LMT -- and was on sale last week for $160.

If the SL is too indulgent, there are five less ritzy trim levels. Prices start
at $16,800 for the Sentra S stripper model, proceed up to the mainstream SV at
$18,200, and the SL hits $20,550 before options. The tested SL carried a
navigation system and premium package that knocked the price to $22,250. Adding
leather seats would cost another $1,030.

Powering all Sentras is a 1.8-liter double-overhead-cam 4-cylinder engine with
continuously variable timing on the intake and exhaust valves. Rated at a modest
130 horsepower, the engine comes hooked to a standard 6-speed manual
transmission in the Sentra S. All other Sentras come with a continuously
variable transmission without the discrete gears of a conventional automatic.

Nissan has embraced C.V.T.'s more enthusiastically than any other carmaker, and
these have steadily become better through the years. But while the C.V.T. in the
Sentra is among the best that Nissan has built, when the accelerator pedal is
thumped to the floor it still lets the engine rev up to near its torque peak of
3,600 r.p.m. and stay there as the car accelerates. That still results in an
irritating drone and not much speed.

Edmunds.com measured the Sentra accelerating to 60 m.p.h. in a leisurely 9.4
seconds and trotting through the quarter-mile in 17.4 seconds at 79.8 mph.

Under part-throttle acceleration -- where most people drive most of the time --
the C.V.T. is relatively easygoing. And partly because the gearbox is simple and
efficient, the Sentra carries a solid federal economy rating of 30 m.p.g. in the
city and 39 on the highway.

But considering how crisply the 6-speed automatics in cars like the Focus and
Hyundai Elantra perform, the Sentra's C.V.T. feels wilted.

That same unmoored feel is present in the electrically assisted power steering.
The 17-inch tires on aluminum wheels suggest a solid footprint on the road, but
there's never any sense of that connection. In compensation, the Sentra does
ride well and handles itself with dignity (and minimal initial impact harshness)
over most bumps.

Ultimately, the Sentra seems unambitious; as if it were engineered as a place
holder instead of as a robust competitor in its market segment. It's hard to see
where the Sentra's advantages lie.

The Sentra has been around since 1982, and this new car represents its seventh
generation. Perhaps the only remarkable thing about the Sentra is how consistent
its character has been through those 32 years. Like all those other Sentras --
with the notable exception of the 1991-4 SE-R -- this one is simple,
straightforward, unassuming and boring.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/automobiles/autoreviews/even-in-bright-hues-co
lor-it-beige.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The new Sentra, which looks like a shrunken Altima, rides on an
all-new vehicle platform. (AU1)
 The Sentra's interior is airier than the previous model's and seems roomier.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY NISSAN NORTH AMERICA) (AU4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


