                             1040 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 6, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Militant Group Faces Unusual Discontent

BYLINE: By AZAM AHMED; Sangar Rahimi and Farooq Jan Mangal contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1285 words


KHOST, Afghanistan -- For more than a generation, the remote mountains of Khost
and Paktia in eastern Afghanistan have been Haqqani country.

It was here that Jalaluddin Haqqani forged his militant network and his fame in
a holy war against Soviet invaders, a fight still spoken of in reverential
tones. And it was here that he could always count on manpower and support in a
later campaign to bloody Western military forces after they drove his allies,
the Taliban, from power in 2001.

But murmurs of discontent have broken out on the Haqqanis' home turf. As the
Haqqanis themselves -- Jalaluddin and Sirajuddin, his son, who now leads the
group -- shelter across the border in Pakistan, support has turned to resentment
in some corners.

Most startlingly, leaders of Mr. Haqqani's native Zadran tribe in Khost Province
say they have formally broken with the feared militant network.

''The tribe now understands who Mr. Haqqani works for,'' said Faisal Rahim, a
former Haqqani commander and head of the Zadran Tribal Council, referring to
Pakistan's support for the network. ''His war is not a holy war. It's a war for
dollars, for Pakistani rupees and for power.''

By all accounts, the Haqqani network remains a potent source of concern for
American military commanders and counterterrorism experts. It has kept up its
barrage of attacks on Kabul and its global fund-raising campaign. But the
changing attitudes among some in Afghanistan show how much the years of war have
changed the social landscape -- and, particularly, how deep the distrust of
foreign influence runs among Afghans, even when it comes to favorite sons.

The shift has come gradually over the past few years, as fighters loyal to the
Haqqanis have killed an increasing number of the tribe's elders for refusing to
afford them food and shelter, according to tribal authorities, former Haqqani
commanders and Afghan officials. In September, an insurgent killed another
Zadran elder as he prayed in a mosque in Khost City.

But even as Haqqani fighters have kept up their intimidation of the population,
there has been an almost eerie drop in overall violence in Khost.

Violent episodes have fallen by nearly one-half since 2011. The main road
leading into Khost, once rife with rockets and bombs, is suddenly passable. In
the absence of steady attacks, the government is trying to develop, albeit
slowly.

Some believe the Haqqanis are so confident of their grip on the region that they
feel they can afford to mostly abandon it for now. Others say the group has
become more focused on Kabul, the ultimate prize in the battle for influence,
and on franchising its planning expertise to other insurgent groups across the
country.

A recent visit to the region revealed a complex portrait of local feelings
toward the Haqqanis.

The true effect of the network's official break with the Zadran tribe is hard to
gauge, as the Haqqanis retain loyalty in the surrounding area and even within
parts of the tribe. And any measure of the group's ability to keep moving
munitions and fighters through the remote mountain passes of the Zadran Valley
is difficult to come by, because the area is inaccessible to outsiders.

The network has come to resemble a mob in recent years, counterterrorism experts
say, with a wide range of funding sources -- from basic donations to businesses
in the Persian Gulf states -- and a sharp sense of how to protect its interests.

But the foreign support, particularly within Pakistan, has come at a cost among
Afghans in Khost and Paktia. Many view Pakistan as a sovereign enemy, and the
Pakistani security forces' implicit support for the Haqqanis has tested the
loyalty of some people here.

''The Haqqanis are not allowing schools, clinics, roads or civil services, so
why would people support him?'' Mohammad Ali Zadran, a member of the Zadran
tribe and the head of the Tribal Council Liaison Office, said in an interview in
Khost, the provincial capital. ''We are no longer that older generation who
followed him blindly.''

Mr. Zadran paused, then shared another, perhaps more prevalent feeling here: a
sense of disappointment in the Haqqanis that is tempered by the group's
historical importance. A stunning mosque that Jalaluddin Haqqani built near the
center of Khost City after he seized it from the Soviet-backed government in
1991 stands as a testament to his influence and accomplishments here.

''Not long ago, Mr. Haqqani was a hero because he defeated the Communists,'' Mr.
Zadran said. ''Now he is an insurgent and a terrorist. We don't know who made
him a hero back then or a terrorist now.''

In the years since the group moved its headquarters to Pakistan, Sirajuddin, Mr.
Haqqani's son, has taken operational control. The younger Haqqani has kept up a
fierce militant campaign against American forces and the United States' allies
in the Afghan government, but he does not command the loyalty and admiration
that his father does.

''Siraj is neither a scholar nor a tribal leader,'' said Hanif Shah, who was a
top Haqqani commander during the anti-Soviet fight. ''People only respect him
because of his father.''

Mr. Shah is now the chairman of the provincial peace council, but he still
refers to Jalaluddin Haqqani as ''sahib,'' a title of respect he used while
serving under Mr. Haqqani's command.

''More than 13,000 people voted for me, and I admit it was not because of my own
credibility,'' Mr. Shah said from his provincial offices. ''It was because of my
time with Haqqani sahib.''

Years of drone strikes and concerted campaigns by American Special Operations
forces have put pressure on the midlevel Haqqani leaders who operate in
Afghanistan, officials and local residents say. Strikes in Pakistan -- including
the recent killing of Sangeen Zadran, a high-ranking Haqqani commander -- have
also been effective.

But many here suggest that patience on the part of the Haqqanis, not the
American military offensives, is behind the drop in violence in the district
centers of Khost and neighboring Paktia Province over the past two years. And
militant attacks, by the Haqqani network and other groups, have certainly not
ceased altogether.

In Gardez, the provincial capital of Paktia, the bazaar teemed with shoppers
seeking rich melons, leather sandals and other goods as the smell of fried bread
and sweets filled the air. Men with long, curly hair and traditional Afghan hats
sauntered through the wide avenues with assault rifles draped over their
shoulders, oblivious to the police presence.

Seated in his office above the Gardez bazaar, Abdul Hadi Hamas bemoaned the
security situation.

''The government is weak and not strong enough to protect the population,'' said
Dr. Hamas, the former head of the city's cultural society and a local
commentator.

As if on cue, a huge boom shook the building, rattling the contents of the
cramped office. After a brief pause, there was another, and three rifle shots
popped nearby.

''See?'' Dr. Hamas said, jumping out of his seat. ''If this is what's happening
in the provincial capital, you can imagine what is happening in the districts.''

But even as residents here view the militants with fear, most express greater
distrust of the American forces. How is it, they ask, that the United States,
with its vast resources and military might, cannot defeat the Taliban and groups
like the Haqqanis?

Even among pro-government Afghans, conspiracy theories abound. Many suspect that
the militants and the Americans are in cahoots to justify a continued coalition
presence here, despite the thousands of lives lost and billions of dollars
spent.

''If we both live long enough, we will see Haqqani sahib and the Americans shake
hands,'' said Mr. Shah, the chairman of the provincial peace council.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/06/world/asia/afghan-militant-group-faces-unusual
-discontent.html

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Tribal leaders in Khost Province, Afghanistan, where the Zadran
tribe is split on whether to continue supporting the long-revered Haqqanis.
 The Zadran Valley of eastern Afghanistan, which has been a historical
stronghold of the Haqqani network. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRISTOPH BANGERT FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES) MAPS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


