                             100 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 23, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Questions on Drone Strike Find Only Silence

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH and SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1053 words


WASHINGTON -- Standing on the marble floor just outside the House chamber,
Faisal bin Ali Jaber looked lost in the human river of hard-charging lobbyists,
members of Congress and staffers. It is not every day that a victim of American
drone strikes travels 7,000 miles to Washington to look for answers.

Now he stood face to face with Representative Adam B. Schiff -- a California
Democrat who had carved out 20 minutes between two votes on natural gas policy
-- to tell his story: how he watched in horror last year as drone-fired missiles
incinerated his nephew and brother-in-law in a remote Yemeni village.

Neither of the victims was a member of Al Qaeda. In fact, the opposite was true.
They were meeting with three Qaeda members in hopes of changing the militants'
views.

''It really puts a human face on the term 'collateral damage,' '' said Mr.
Schiff, looking awed after listening to Mr. Jaber.

A gaunt civil engineer with a white mustache, Mr. Jaber spent the past week
struggling to pierce the veil of secrecy and anonymity over the Obama
administration's drone strike program, which targets militants in the
hinterlands of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Yemen. He did not have much luck.

He met at length with a half-dozen members of Congress, as well as officials
from the National Security Council and the State Department. Everywhere, he
received heartfelt condolences. But no one has been able to explain why his
relatives were killed, or why the administration is not willing to acknowledge
its mistake.

It was an error with unusual resonance. Mr. Jaber's brother-in-law was a cleric
who had spoken out against Al Qaeda shortly before the drone killed him. The
nephew was a local policeman who had gone along in part to offer protection. The
strike, in August 2012, drew widespread indignation in Yemen, and was documented
in The New York Times and later by human rights groups, along with a number of
other strikes that accidentally killed innocent people.

A Yemeni counterterrorism official called Mr. Jaber hours after the strike to
apologize for the mistake. Mr. Jaber wrote an open letter to President Obama,
but received no answer. The same is true of a Pakistani family who lost a
grandmother in a drone strike and visited Washington briefly late last month, in
what appears to be the first such visit to Congress.

In May, Mr. Obama responded to rising criticism of the targeted killing program
and acknowledged in a speech at the National Defense University in Washington
that some innocent people had been killed. The president promised greater
transparency, but the administration still refuses to discuss specific strikes
or to apologize or pay compensation for strikes that went wrong. When American
officials have offered estimates of civilian casualties in drone strikes, their
numbers have been far lower than those given by research groups and journalists.

Mr. Jaber's visit -- and that of the Pakistani family -- comes as a
congressional effort is building to force the administration's hand. Early this
month, the Senate Intelligence Committee added to the annual intelligence policy
bill a requirement for an annual report giving the number of ''combatants'' and
''noncombatant civilians'' killed or injured in the previous year in drone
strikes outside conventional wars. The report would give only total numbers, not
details of each strike or the names of those killed.

Mr. Schiff, who met Mr. Jaber on Wednesday, plans to sponsor a similar bill in
the House.

Mr. Jaber's visit was sponsored by the peace group Code Pink, which organized an
accompanying protest in front of the White House last week, and Reprieve, a
human rights group based in London.

Unlike some of the activists who embraced him and apologized to him wherever he
went, Mr. Jaber strikes a very humble and unassuming attitude about his family's
tragedy. He says he does not presume to pass judgment on the drone strike
program itself, but wants acknowledgment and an apology.

''I learned two things,'' he said when asked to sum up his week in Washington.
''First, the American people and their organizations are very kind and well
meaning, and the Congress members also were very sympathetic. But on the other
side, there are politicians who seem to be trying to keep everything secret.''

Mr. Jaber offers a harrowing account of the drone strike. It was the day after
his son's wedding in his native village, Khashamir, and he was eating dinner at
home with several relatives when they heard a whirring from the sky. Looking out
the window, he and his relatives saw a flash, and then heard a series of
terrific crashes, ''as if the whole mountain had exploded.'' The village erupted
in panic.

Mr. Jaber's daughter, who was very close to the strike, was so traumatized that
she did not get out of bed for three weeks, he said. The mother of one of the
dead men went into a coma after she heard the news and died a month later.

When Mr. Jaber arrived on the scene that night, less than a mile from his house,
he found bits of charred human flesh spread on the ground, he said. It was not
until two hours later, through the accounts of witnesses, that the identities of
the dead men and what had happened to them became clear.

Mr. Jaber's brother-in-law, the imam, had been approached earlier that evening
by three Qaeda militants who were angry about a speech the imam had delivered
condemning terrorism. The imam reluctantly agreed to talk to the men, but just
in case he was accompanied by Mr. Jaber's nephew, the policeman. The volley of
missiles killed all five men.

Like most Yemenis, Mr. Jaber deplores the influence of Al Qaeda in his country,
which is one of the world's poorest. He fears that the drone strikes are
fostering greater militancy and anger at America. But above all, he finds the
administration's silence baffling.

At one point during his week in Washington, Mr. Jaber got a tour of the National
Mall and other landmarks with another Yemeni who had been flown over for the
visit, a young woman named Entesar al-Qadhi. Both of them said they were
overwhelmed by the dignity and calm of the Mall, so different from the crowds
and poverty of Yemen.

''They have such a beautiful country here, such a beautiful city,'' Ms. Qadhi
said as she strolled along. ''Why do they need to go chasing someone with bombs
in the desert?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/23/world/middleeast/a-yemenis-long-trip-to-seek-a
nswers-about-a-drone-strike.html

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Faisal bin Ali Jaber, a Yemeni who lost relatives in a drone
strike, visited Washington this week. (A1)
 Faisal bin Ali Jaber, center, with Medea Benjamin of Code Pink, left, and Baraa
Shiban, who investigates drone strikes. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY  T. J. KIRKPATRICK FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


