                             1091 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 25, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

He Can Balance a Checkbook, but Not His Imagination

BYLINE: By A. O. SCOTT

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MOVIE REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 911 words


As imagined by Ben Stiller, Walter Mitty is a man out of step with his time. An
archetypal daydreamer introduced to the public by James Thurber as a henpecked
suburban husband and later impersonated on screen by Danny Kaye as a
misunderstood, starry-eyed sweetheart with a lovely singing voice, Walter has
evolved into a modern office drone with an unusually active fantasy life. He is
also, in some respects, the opposite of just about every other comic hero in
American movies today, including many played by Mr. Stiller. And ''The Secret
Life of Walter Mitty,'' directed by Mr. Stiller (who takes the title role), has
a dreamy, melancholy tone quite different from what you might expect to find in
a big-budget holiday comedy.

In a world dominated by overgrown boy-men with runaway ids, Walter suffers from
a highly unusual affliction: an excess of maturity. The first thing we see him
doing is balancing his checkbook with a ballpoint pen. Though we might be
tempted, at first, to suppose that his highly developed sense of responsibility
is the result of a compulsive personality, we soon learn that it arises from
personal tragedy. As a teenager, Walter lost his father, and ever since then he
has worked to support his mother (Shirley MacLaine) and sister (Kathryn Hahn)
and to hold onto a sense of security in an uncertain universe. Workplace bullies
might make fun of him, mocking his nerdy clothes and self-effacing manner, but
from the start this Walter is, for the audience, a magnet for our sympathy. Not
Thurber's feckless Everyman or Kaye's holy fool, but a sad, decent guy in need
of protection and love.

Walter's wild bouts of invention -- he pictures himself leaping through the
window of a burning building, tearing through the streets of Manhattan on a wild
action-movie chase and doing other superhero-type stuff -- represent some of the
adventure he has sacrificed in a life of duty and drudgery. Employed in the
photography department at Life magazine, he has a crush on a co-worker named
Cheryl (Kristen Wiig, with her natural silliness in check and an adorable habit
of crinkling up her nose) and a big problem with the new bosses, a squad of
bearded, skinny-suited tech jerks led by Adam Scott.

A relic of the analog world, Walter is in danger of being downsized out of a job
as the magazine prepares its final print edition. His desperate efforts to
locate a missing negative -- and a mysterious photographer played by Sean Penn
-- lead him on a caper much wilder than anything he had dreamed up. Following
cryptic clues (which Cheryl helps him decode), he travels to Iceland,
Afghanistan and other far-flung places, and the movie becomes a lavish, surreal
travelogue, blending digital effects with stunning landscape montages.

It also, somewhat more riskily, tries to fold the kind of playful, wide-eyed
high spirits familiar from the ''Night at the Museum'' movies into what is in
effect a midlife melodrama. This is Walter Mitty by way of Marty, the soulful
Bronx butcher played by Ernest Borgnine in the 1955 film that won the Oscar for
best picture. Walter's most notable trait is the one that everyone else
undervalues or takes for granted: his goodness. Walter is a low-key suitor, and
Cheryl is drawn to him for his thoughtfulness and quiet sense of humor rather
than for the alpha-male derring-do he secretly possesses. In one funny, poignant
scene, he executes a series of impressive skateboard moves -- real, not
imaginary -- while her back is turned. But showing off like that would be out of
character in any case.

Or maybe not entirely. Though it is a celebration of modesty, there is also
quite a lot of vanity in ''The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.'' (And quite a lot
of corporate propaganda too, for Papa John's Pizza, Cinnabon and eHarmony, the
online dating site represented by the irreverent, just-a-regular-guy-like-you
presence of Patton Oswalt.) Mr. Stiller (working from a screenplay by Steven
Conrad) is not content to be the hero of the story; he turns Walter into an
almost-martyr and a would-be saint, a mystical self-help guru whose journey of
self-discovery makes him better than everyone else, though of course he is too
enlightened to say so.

There is a contradiction here: An ordinary fellow should not have to be quite so
special to win our admiration. And this version of Walter Mitty undermines some
of the democratic whimsy that has made his story such an appealing and durable
modern myth. He used to be one of us: a self-deluded dreamer charmed by his
unruly creative powers, a willing prisoner of his appetite for escapism. But now
our identification gives way to envy, and he is another one of those enchanted
people the rest of us can only dream of becoming.

''The Secret Life of Walter Mitty'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). A
bit of crude humor and some rough action.

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty

Opens on Wednesday.

Directed by Ben Stiller; written by Steven Conrad, based on the short story by
James Thurber; director of photography, Stuart Dryburgh; edited by Greg Hayden;
music by Theodore Shapiro; production design by Jeff Mann; costumes by Sarah
Edwards; produced by Mr. Stiller, Samuel Goldwyn Jr., John Goldwyn and Stuart
Cornfeld; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 54 minutes.

WITH: Ben Stiller (Walter Mitty), Kristen Wiig (Cheryl), Shirley MacLaine
(Edna), Adam Scott (Ted Hendricks), Kathryn Hahn (Odessa), Sean Penn (Sean
O'Connell) and Patton Oswalt (Todd Maher).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/25/movies/the-secret-life-of-walter-mitty-stars-b
en-stiller.html

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Secret Life of Walter Mitty: Ben Stiller in this adaptation
of Thurber's short story. (PHOTOGRAPH BY 20TH CENTURY FOX) (C1)
 Ben Stiller and Kristen Wiig in ''The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.'' Mr.
Stiller directed the film and plays the title character. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILSON
WEBB/20TH CENTURY FOX) (C16)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


