                             1062 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 28, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Flexing Autonomy, Pakistani Premier Picks Outsider to Lead Army

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD and DECLAN WALSH; Salman Masood reported from
Islamabad, and Declan Walsh from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 824 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- In the most crucial appointment of his new term, Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif on Wednesday chose a relative outsider, Lt. Gen. Raheel
Sharif, to lead Pakistan's powerful army.

With the choice, the prime minister seemed to be skirting the line of
confrontation with a military establishment that ousted him in 1999 but did not
overtly cross it.

General Sharif, who is not related to the prime minister, was the third in line
for the post by seniority and comes from a noted military family, keeping with
Mr. Sharif's promise to take experience and tradition into account for the
appointment. But in other ways the prime minister seemed to be flexing his
independence from a military command that until recent years had run roughshod
over civilian governments.

Notably, General Sharif was not the favored candidate of his predecessor, Gen.
Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, a power player who is resigning this week after a
tumultuous six-year stint at the top of the military. General Sharif had not
held any clear first-tier commands, nor had he served in the influential
Military Operations Directorate or come up through an intelligence background --
all points on General Kayani's résumé.

Instead, Mr. Sharif shunted General Kayani's favorite, Lt. Gen. Rashad Mahmood,
into the position of chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff -- a nominally more
powerful job that in reality is subordinate to the army chief.

Mr. Sharif thinks General Sharif ''is more pliable than Rashad and not as close
to Kayani,'' said a senior American defense official, speaking on the condition
of anonymity.

Like the prime minister, General Sharif comes from the eastern city of Lahore,
which is the heartland of military influence in Pakistan. He comes from a family
that is ''more interested in the profession and less in politics,'' said Talat
Masood, a retired lieutenant general and a respected defense analyst. ''Sharif
is soldierly and professionally very sound. And, because of his background, the
prime minister seemed to have greater confidence in him.''

Accordingly, some Pakistani analysts saw the choice as evidence that Mr. Sharif
was looking for someone slightly more biddable. But that kind of gamesmanship
has come back to bite him before. During Mr. Sharif's previous stint in power in
the late 1990s, he passed over more senior generals to choose Gen. Pervez
Musharraf as army chief -- the man who would later depose and replace him in the
1999 coup.

In an institution where legacy and heritage are prized, General Sharif, a
57-year-old infantry officer, does hold many credentials looked for in the army
commander post.

His brother, Shabbir Sharif, is a decorated war hero who died in Pakistan's 1971
war against India, a connection that many Pakistani news outlets prominently
noted in their profiles of General Sharif.

Until now, he was in charge of the army's training program, carrying out changes
ordered by General Kayani to improve the army's counterinsurgency capabilities
as it faces a growing threat from Islamist insurgents based in the tribal belt,
particularly the Pakistani Taliban.

General Sharif inherits an army that, though it is still Pakistan's most
powerful institution, has seen its once unassailable authority somewhat eroded
in recent years.

The continuing onslaught of attacks from the Pakistani Taliban in recent years
has become such a clear challenge that the country's leaders, including General
Kayani, have recently sought to open peace talks with the group rather than
calling for a new military offensive. And a series of diplomatic and
intelligence crises involving the United States, as well as changes in society
like a more assertive news media and judiciary, have brought questions about the
military's role that would have been unthinkable a generation ago.

The army is still revered by most Pakistanis, however. And under General Kayani,
the military gained a new point of respect: Despite years of turmoil and
conflict with the civilian government led by President Asif Ali Zardari, the
generals chose to bide their time and allow a fully democratic transition rather
than taking control themselves.

The question now is whether General Kayani's changes to the military culture
that have rendered the prospect of a military coup a secondary risk will
continue under General Sharif. Given the prime minister's seeming comfort with
the choice, and the opinion of senior military analysts, most saw continued
restraint to be the most likely result.

Other challenges remain.

The American military withdrawal from Afghanistan next door as well as the
continued and deeply unpopular C.I.A. drone strike campaign within Pakistani
territory have kept apprehensions high among Pakistani officials. Despite
often-strained relations, the Obama administration has continued to seek
Pakistani military and intelligence cooperation on those issues, presenting a
difficult balancing act for the country's military leadership.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/28/world/asia/pakistan-names-new-army-chief.html

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Lt. Gen. Raheel Sharif was appointed  by the prime minister  to
lead Pakistan's army. (PHOTOGRAPH BY QAMAR PERVEZ/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


