                             1076 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Smarts and Feelings, Vying for Attention

BYLINE: By CHARLES ISHERWOOD

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1189 words


''The (Curious Case of the) Watson Intelligence'' probably seemed like a real
dazzler when it was in the mind of its author, the playwright Madeleine George.
But like many newfangled inventions that seem spectacular in blueprint form --
good luck with those creepy-looking drones, Amazon! -- the play now chugging
across the stage at Playwrights Horizons too often sputters and stalls, falling
victim to its own grand ambitions.

Perhaps a little more time in beta testing might have smoothed out the kinks in
this time-skipping, multitiered drama turning on three stories concerning men
(or machines) named Watson. Ms. George's intricately conceived but talky drama
comes to life only when she allows her characters to elbow aside the fancy
machinery of the plot and open their hearts.

The play's three strands are spread across three centuries. Things begin
promisingly in the current one, as Eliza (Amanda Quaid) shares a quiet evening
at home with her boon companion, Watson (John Ellison Conlee), who trades
supportive talk with her as Eliza complains about the husband she's just left,
Frank Merrick (David Costabile), who won't stop leaving voice mail messages on
her phone. Watson, I should add, is not a man but a robot, the latest creation
of Eliza, who has just started a new company devoted to advances in artificial
intelligence intended to benefit the underprivileged. (Good luck with that, too,
Eliza.)

Mr. Conlee, who gives the evening's standout performance -- a brilliant one --
in four different roles, responds to Eliza's questions in a perfectly calibrated
voice: soothing and yet entirely devoid of human personality. Nevertheless,
Eliza speaks admiringly of his interpersonal skills: ''You're just such a
satisfying conversationalist. You always have an answer for everything.'' His
Siri-ish response: ''I only want to help in any way that I can.''

They are settling in to watch the last night of the ''Jeopardy!'' competition in
2011 in which an IBM computer named Watson bested the best of that game show's
trivia experts. Eliza is worried that her own Watson -- who was also developed
at IBM, where Eliza used to work -- will be jealous. Fortunately, he has not
advanced to the point of understanding this concept.

Eliza's ex certainly has. He's running in the current election to become city
auditor on a too-much-government program. But he can't get his own computer to
function, so calls in a tech specialist, a laid-back fellow named Watson.
(Warning: confusion ahead.) Improbably, Merrick also enlists that Watson to spy
on his ex, a job that becomes more complicated when Watson (the human) and Eliza
fall in love.

Back in the 19th century, Dr. Watson, the famous helper of Sherlock Holmes,
receives a visit from another Eliza. (The three actors portray characters of the
same names in all the various plots.) She's concerned about some strange
punctures on her arm, and the stranger behavior of her husband, an industrialist
and ''mechanical visionary'' (another Merrick) whose peculiar behavior involves
jealous rages and odd machines. Watson sets out to get to the bottom of this
mystery.

The play's third, more minimally developed strand, involves the momentous day on
which Alexander Graham Bell placed the first telephone call to his assistant,
Thomas A. Watson. On a 1931 radio program overseen by a producer named Eliza,
Watson is interviewed about that historic breakthrough.

As may easily be gleaned from this sketchy (trust me) description of the play's
curlicued plot, Ms. George appears to be among the worshipers at the shrine of
Tom Stoppard, the playwright who laid down the template for intellectually heady
examinations of the patterns that recur in history, and how ideas shape human
behavior, and vice versa (in plays from ''Jumpers'' to ''Arcadia'' to ''The
Coast of Utopia'').

Buried within the sagging, overwritten scenes in ''Watson Intelligence'' are
some authentically insightful reflections on the frequently unsatisfactory
nature of human relationships. Both the Merrick of the 19th century and the
Merrick of the 21st are frustrated to the point of irritation (or madness) by
the mysteries of the female heart.

And the Eliza of the 21st, the most fully developed character, appears
frustrated that technology speeds forward, improving itself minute by minute,
while human beings remain the same faulty, needy, lonely creatures, baffled as
ever by the push and pull of love. ''You're the only one I want to be around,''
she says to Watson, in a scene in which she expresses (at length) both her need
for, and fear of, commitment, ''and I have a really hard time being with you.''

Under the direction of Leigh Silverman, the actors distinguish their various
characters capably, with their creditable British accents getting an ample
workout in the scenes depicting the complications in the 19th-century
Eliza-Merrick-Watson triangle, which are among the play's most unnecessarily
wordy. (Playwrights often tend to overindulge their ability to fake upper-crust
Brit-speak, in my experience.)

Ms. Quaid brings grounded feeling to her primary character, the contemporary
Eliza, even when her behavior seems motivated more by the fancy convolutions of
the plot than by the impulses of her personality. Mr. Costabile's characters are
on the crackpottier side, and he imbues them with a fervid intensity. But it's
Mr. Conlee who has the choicest smorgasbord of roles, which allow him to display
a wide range of feelings, both human and humanoid.

In the one instance in which two of the plots overlap, the Eliza of today
suddenly appears to interface, as it were, with Watson, the friend and
collaborator of Bell's. He offers her friendly advice about the necessity of
connection that cuts to the heart of the play's layered meanings eloquently, and
Mr. Conlee delivers it with an elegant wistfulness.

''It's our fate to be bound up with one another, isn't it, he muses. ''We are
all born insufficient, and must look to others to supplement our strength. That
is not weakness, it is the first condition of human life.'' Struck by a metaphor
at hand, he continues: ''Why, the very success of the telephone is evidence of
this need. If we did not rely upon each other so deeply, our nation would not
now be strung like a vast, glittering web with eight million miles of connecting
wire.''

These reflections, coming late in the play, bring this otherwise incidental
character to stirring life, and, more important, clarify the themes Ms. George
has already spent much time laboring to elucidate.

The (Curious Case of the) Watson Intelligence

By Madeleine George; directed by Leigh Silverman; sets by Louisa Thompson;
costumes by Anita Yavich; lighting by Mark Barton; sound by Matt Tierney;
original music by Peter Stopschinski; production stage manager, David H. Lurie.
Presented by Playwrights Horizons, Tim Sanford, artistic director; Leslie
Marcus, managing director. At Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42nd Street,
Clinton, 212-279-4200, playwrightshorizons.org. Through Dec. 29. Running time 2
hours and 20 minutes.

WITH: David Costabile (Merrick), Amanda Quaid (Eliza) and John Ellison Conlee
(Watson).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/10/theater/reviews/the-curious-case-of-the-watson
-intelligence.html

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The actors in ''The (Curious Case of the) Watson Intelligence''
take on multiple roles. John Ellison Conlee, for one, is joined by, clockwise
from top left, Amanda Quaid
David Costabile (standing)
 and Ms. Quaid twice again, at Playwrights Horizons. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARA
KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C6)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


