                             104 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 27, 2014 Friday 1:24 AM EST

How the use of drones may haunt the U.S.;
U.S. use may come back to haunt us.

BYLINE: Eugene Robinson

LENGTH: 788 words


In our growing reliance on armed drones as instruments of war, how slippery is
the slope we're sliding on? Imagine that Vladimir Putin began using drones to
kill Ukrainians who opposed Russia's annexation of Crimea. If Putin claimed the
targets were "members of anti-Russian terrorist groups," what credibility would
the United States have to condemn such strikes?

This scenario is outlined in a chilling report released Thursday by a bipartisan
panel of military experts. The use of drones against al-Qaeda and its
affiliates, begun by the George W. Bush administration and greatly expanded by
President Obama, risks becoming "a long-term killing program based on secret
rationales," the report warns.

In the hypothetical Ukraine example, the world would demand proof that the
individuals killed were indeed terrorists. The report notes that "Russia could
simply repeat the words used by U.S. officials defending U.S. targeted killings,
asserting that it could not provide any evidence without disclosing sources and
methods."

The report was commissioned by the Stimson Center, a Washington think tank, and
written by a panel that no one would consider a bunch of woolly-headed
pacifists. Co-chairs of the group are retired Gen. John Abizaid, the former head
of U.S. Central Command, and Rosa Brooks, a Georgetown University law professor.
Included are former defense and intelligence officials from both Republican and
Democratic administrations.

"We are concerned that the Obama administration's heavy reliance on targeted
killings as a pillar of U.S. counterterrorism strategy rests on questionable
assumptions, and risks increasing instability and escalating conflicts," the
report concludes. "While tactical strikes may have helped keep the homeland free
of major terrorist attacks, existing evidence indicates that both Sunni and
Shiite Islamic extremist groups have grown in scope, lethality and influence."

In other words, we may be creating terrorists as quickly as we eliminate them.
There is no indication, the report says, that drone strikes have "advanced
long-term U.S. security interests."

The panel rejected the view, expressed by many critics, that drone strikes
"cause disproportionate civilian casualties or turn killing into a 'video-game.'
" They do, however, enable U.S. policies that otherwise would be unlikely or
impossible - especially "the cross-border use of lethal force against targeted
individuals in an unprecedented and expanding way."

This ability to kill a specific person in a country with which the United States
is not at war - such as Yemen, Somalia or Pakistan - raises strategic, legal and
ethical questions, the report says.

One issue is the meaning of national sovereignty in the age of drone warfare.
The United States says it has the right to conduct drone strikes against
terrorists in countries whose governments are "unwilling or unable" to take
action on their own. If the Obama administration has this right, does the Putin
regime have it too? The Iranian government?

"The increasing use of lethal [drones] may create a slippery slope leading to
continual or wider wars," the report says. Drones "may lower the bar to enter a
conflict, without increasing the likelihood of a satisfactory outcome" - as may
well happen, I would note, in the current Iraq crisis: It would be relatively
easy to start blasting targets with missiles fired from drones, but to what end?

Meanwhile, since the United States has no monopoly on drone technology, other
countries are likely to begin using the weapons in a similar way. It's hard for
me to see this as an encouraging development.

The report criticizes the Obama administration for "the continuing lack of
transparency relating to U.S. targeted killings." Even more troubling, perhaps,
is that even if you assume U.S. officials are acting in good faith, "it would be
difficult to conclude that U.S. targeted strikes are consistent with core
rule-of-law norms."

The report adds: "From the perspective of many around the world, the United
States currently appears to claim, in effect, the legal right to kill any person
it determines is a member of al-Qaeda or its associated forces, in any state on
Earth, at any time, based on secret criteria and secret evidence, evaluated in a
secret process by unknown and largely anonymous individuals."

Resentment of U.S. military power is hardly unprecedented. The real problem is
that the Obama administration is establishing precedents for the use of drones
that may come back to haunt us.

"Do as I say, not as I do" is fine when you're talking about aircraft carriers.
But dozens of nations are mastering the use of drones. What will the world be
like if everyone uses them the way we do?

eugenerobinson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


