                             1077 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Sweet Caress of Cyberspace

BYLINE: By FRANK BRUNI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 794 words


For a while I worried that my father was having a thing with his GPS.

He seldom referred to the navigational instrument, which issued instructions in
a feminine monotone, as ''it.'' He said ''she'' and ''her.'' He got a kick out
of predicting exactly when she'd pipe up and what her advice would be, and he
alternately complimented himself on his obedience and crowed over his defiance.

''She's not going to like this,'' he'd trumpet as he played the rebel, going
straight instead of left.

''Recalculating,'' she'd sigh, and he'd laugh mischievously.

I thought of them when I saw ''Her,'' a new movie that opens in major cities
next week.

Joaquin Phoenix stars as a man in love with the operating system for his
smartphone-esque device, a sexy Siri that -- or should I say who? -- tells him
not only when he has mail but what a terrific male he is, and does this in
Scarlett Johansson's come-hither coo. There was much fuss recently over the
decision that Johansson was ineligible for the Golden Globes: Should a
disembodied voice's contribution be regarded as any less real than a visible,
palpable person's? The debate echoed questions in the movie itself, which was
written and directed by Spike Jonze and was just named the best picture of 2013
by both the National Board of Review and (in a tie with ''Gravity'') the Los
Angeles Film Critics Association.

''Her'' is sure to be a talker. Set perhaps a few decades from now, when Los
Angeles has sprouted so many skyscrapers that it resembles Shanghai, the story
is in one sense absurdist. Man and operating system spend a warm day at the
beach. Man and operating system spend a hot night in bed.

But it simultaneously feels like the logical extrapolation of the way we log in
now, and it's an all-you-can-eat allegory buffet. Choose your metaphor or
cautionary tale -- about the seductions of cyberspace; about how physically
disconnected we are; about the shifting terms of intimacy -- and it's here in
abundance, first and second and third helpings of it.

I savored a few themes in particular. One is the Internet's extreme indulgence
of the seemingly innate human impulse to contrive a habitat that's entirely
unthreatening, an ego-stroking ecosystem, a sensibility-controlled comfort zone.

You want an endless stream of irony? You can have an endless stream of irony.
You want unfettered invective about the politicians you've decided to hate? Set
your bookmarks and social-media feeds accordingly. You can frolic endlessly in
foregone conclusions. You can revel in the anecdotes that affirm your cynicism
or articulate your fantasies, gullibly believing what's actually performance
art, like a young television producer's tweet-by-tweet account of his smackdown
of an annoying fellow passenger on a Thanksgiving flight. He was briefly a hero,
his valor gone viral, until he revealed that he'd made the whole thing up.

In ''Her,'' the very nature of Johansson's operating system is to adapt to and
evolve from her interactions with Phoenix. She's a projection of his needs. She
blooms in accordance with his wants (and has an aurally explosive orgasm on
cue). He needn't doubt himself, compromise or color outside the lines. ''Her''
takes what's happening in American politics and so much of American culture and
transfers it to the realm of romance.

It's a parable of narcissism in the digital world, which lets you sprint to the
foreground of everything, giving you an audience or the illusion of one. To
monitor Facebook or Twitter right after Nelson Mandela's death last week was to
be struck by how many people weren't so much passing along the news as laying
claim to it: Here's what I thought of him. Here's when I intersected with him.
Here's the personal reverberation.

But ''Her'' also traces the flip side of the coin -- that with our amassed
knowledge and scientific accomplishments, we may be succeeding in rendering
ourselves obsolete. Around the same time that I saw the movie, Jeff Bezos
sketched out his plans for delivery by drone. The Times published a front-page
account of Google's grand designs for robots in manufacturing and shipping. And
a video producer I know returned from a shoot at a food production plant shocked
that she hadn't laid eyes on many people. Just a small posse of engineers and a
slew of machines.

Economists have sounded the alarm about what this could mean for employment and
the distribution of wealth. It falls to artists to contemplate what this could
mean for psyches and souls, and ''Her'' imagines a society in which human beings
are so thoroughly marginalized that they're being edited out of courtship and
companionship, because they're superfluous, messy. It's a love story as horror
story. If we no longer need anyone in the passenger seat, do we need anyone at
all?

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/10/opinion/bruni-the-sweet-caress-of-cyberspace.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


