                             1033 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sunday Dialogue: Obama's Use of His Power

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1774 words


Readers discuss the president's style and accomplishments.

To the Editor:

As someone who voted for Barack Obama twice, I have long been perplexed and
disheartened by his seeming inability to use the powers of the presidency. This
lack of leadership has enabled a coterie of Republican zealots to control the
political agenda of the nation.

This is shocking, since Mr. Obama need only study the legacies of two Democratic
giants, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson, to see how much can be
accomplished by vigorous presidential leadership.

Both Roosevelt and Johnson were masters of politics. They knew how to exercise
power because they knew the art of the game: cutting deals, horse-trading,
flattery, threats and understanding the needs -- and strengths and weaknesses --
of friends and foes alike. The New Deal legislation, civil rights and voting
rights laws, and the enactment of Medicare were accomplished because Roosevelt
and Johnson understood the nature of presidential power and used it decisively.

Unfortunately, Mr. Obama seems strangely detached from the political process. He
rarely meets with legislators -- even those in his own party. He shuns the hard
bargaining, wheeling and dealing, and compromise that are the essence of
politics. He even delegated the No. 1 priority of his presidency, the Affordable
Care Act, to Congress and the pharmaceutical and insurance companies to work out
the details.

On issues such as gun control, immigration and health care, Mr. Obama's speeches
often call for the ''unleashing'' of technology and America's best and brightest
individuals, but his soaring rhetoric soon crashes to earth. His foreign policy
stances, particularly regarding the Middle East, have shown him to be
indecisive, vacillating and backpedaling -- damaging his and the nation's
credibility.

The president's leadership style is one of disengagement, disdain for the
political fray and an aloofness that borders on arrogance. He seems to think
that if a policy is self-evident to him, then it follows that everyone else
should see it the same way. Unfortunately, the real world doesn't work that way.

STEVEN MORRIS East Hampton, N.Y., Oct. 28, 2013

Readers React

Politics is like theater. You are known by the part you pick and how well you
play that role. Obama the candidate was Mark Antony, an ideal blend of fiery
rhetoric and an ability to move crowds. However, Obama the president chose to
play Henry Higgins, trying to civilize the rowdy kids in Congress by lecturing
to them. Mark Antony could win elections, but Henry Higgins cannot govern.

It is true that no president has had to go through the heckling and bullying
that Mr. Obama has from the Tea Party. But a good leader knows he has two
options. He can find ways to endear himself to the opposition -- Presidents
Clinton and Reagan were good at it. Or he can get down and dirty and fight. Mr.
Obama has neither skill. He insists on bringing the Marquess of Queensberry
rules to a street fight and complains that the other side is not playing nice.

The current Congress is not one you play nice with. Mr. Obama needs to learn
that and do what Bill Clinton did. Talk directly to the people. He needs to
articulate his vision and persuade the men and women of this country, not
Congress.

This country needs Obama the campaigner back in order to rescue Obama the
president.

SUKUMAR VIJAYARAGHAVAN Denver, Oct. 30, 2013

Mr. Morris's frustration with our current politics is palpable, and I hear many
Democrats expressing similar sentiments. However understandable, their
complaints are based on misapprehensions of history and of political realities.
Mr. Morris's comparisons with Presidents Roosevelt and Johnson are not apt: New
Deal legislation was enabled by Democrats' control of both houses of Congress.
Democrats also controlled both houses of Congress under L.B.J. Were this the
case today, the administration's legislative achievements would obviously be far
greater.

Further, many Republican politicians will do anything to promote claims that
President Obama is a failure and to foil his legislative goals. Their shutting
down government to try to overturn legislation that was itself based on
Republican health care models and principles is only the latest example.

Moreover, despite Republicans' obstructionism, including unprecedented numbers
of Senate filibusters, the administration's achievements are substantial. This
president has achieved more on health care reform than any of his predecessors.
If immigration reform also passes, historians are likely to judge his
administration quite successful. As for gun control, effective presidents do not
fight losing battles.

Finally, as was never the case with a previous president, Republicans' antipathy
toward Mr. Obama is largely based on racial resentment that is not amenable to
compromise and negotiation. We would be blind to ignore this elephant in the
room.

DANIEL LIEBERFELD Pittsburgh, Oct. 30, 2013

The writer is an associate professor in the Graduate Center for Social and
Public Policy at Duquesne University.

Mr. Morris, I suspect, was hoping for the revenge of the liberals after the
abuses of the Bush-Cheney years. However, the last thing this nation wanted or
needed was another political animal with an ideological agenda. Moderates want
exactly what President Obama has provided -- moderation and a break from the
unending ideological assaults.

Mr. Obama's disengagement has allowed him to remain above the fray, an admirable
place to be when the conduct of governance has descended to the level of
juvenile delinquency. He may not be doing the best that could be done with the
mess he inherited, but he could be doing far worse.

LORI MILLER Cordova, Tenn., Oct. 30, 2013

There are many of us who share Mr. Morris's viewpoint and frustration. Like many
voters back in 2008, I was desperate for a message of hope after the disastrous
Bush administration but ignored a glaring problem with Mr. Obama's résumé: his
voting record as a state legislator and his lack of experience and
accomplishments in the Senate. He operates as president like his state
legislative voting record -- ''present'' but disengaged.

STEVE HUNTER Seattle, Oct. 30, 2013

Mr. Morris most eloquently dissects President Obama's floundering leadership
style that has so frustrated many of his supporters. But I disagree with his
critique of Mr. Obama's ''seeming inability to use the powers of the
presidency.''

Mr. Obama's use of unilateral executive national security powers -- from
expanded National Security Agency surveillance to drone strike kill lists to an
extreme interpretation of the state secrets doctrine -- are well known, and
would make a George W. Bush administration lawyer blush.

But the Obama administration's use of unilateral executive powers has gone
beyond national security (where it has a long tradition) into the area of
domestic legislation (where it does not). Mr. Obama has regularly circumvented
the legislative branch by issuing executive orders on domestic legislation
related to immigration, welfare, the environment and health care.

Mr. Obama's desire to move past an obstructionist Congress is certainly
understandable. But his heavy reliance on unilateral executive action -- due at
least in part to the leadership deficiencies noted by Mr. Morris -- has created
a damaging precedent to the constitutional system of checks and balances that
will endure long after he leaves office.

STUART GOTTLIEB New York, Oct. 30, 2013

The writer teaches international affairs and public policy at Columbia.

The scolding tone of Mr. Morris's critique seems to imply a view that one's
personality is malleable. Does he really think that if President Obama suddenly
started acting as if he were Roosevelt or Johnson, Republican legislators would
fall in line?

I rather like the dignity of a leader who meets contemptible behavior with the
contempt it deserves. I also like the caution of a president who, recognizing
his country's diminishing influence in the world, refrains from brandishing his
sword in reckless and dangerous ways.

VICTOR A. ALTSHUL New Haven, Oct. 30, 2013

As someone who voted against Mr. Obama twice, I have also been unhappy with his
political style as president. Mr. Obama won the presidency with small majorities
of the popular vote (52.9 percent in 2008 and 51.1 percent in 2012). He has not
seemed to understand that nearly half of the voters did not support his
election, and that their opinions matter.

The rare occasions when he meets or even talks to Republican leaders are
front-page news. When he talks in public about Republican leaders, his contempt
for them is frequently obvious.

For the first two years of his presidency, he hung back while Democratic
majorities in the House and Senate rammed through bloated, complex and poorly
drafted bills like the Affordable Care Act and Dodd-Frank, poisoning relations
with Republicans. Once that brief period of Democratic supremacy was over and
Republicans regained the power to block legislation after winning a House
majority, it is not surprising that he has found it very difficult to get
anything through Congress.

JAMES G. RUSSELL Alexandria, Va., Oct. 30, 2013

The Writer Responds

The political turmoil of the past four years has generated strong opinions on
all sides of the political spectrum.

Mr. Gottlieb raises an interesting point. Mr. Obama seems to have no trouble
exercising presidential power when he can circumvent the political arena or deal
with abstract matters, but when it comes to the nitty-gritty of day-to-day
politics he has shown himself to be a poor political operator.

While Professor Lieberfeld notes that Mr. Obama has been subjected to some of
the most nonsensical and vicious attacks in recent memory, his analysis has a
curious omission. In the 2008 election Democrats swept both houses of Congress
in addition to the presidency, which gave Mr. Obama a golden, and
filibuster-proof, opportunity to take decisive action to lift the nation out of
its worst economic debacle since the 1930s.

Instead he invested all of his political capital in an incomprehensible health
care plan, which resulted in an inadequate stimulus package and no legislative
blitz that could have captured the imagination of the American people.

I am not calling for ''an ideological agenda'' or ''the revenge of the
liberals.'' In fact, although a social liberal, I happen to be a Republican who
voted for the president twice because he seemed to me to offer the best for
America. I have been disappointed by his failure to take on the extremists who
want to eviscerate the social compact.

STEVEN MORRIS East Hampton, N.Y., Oct. 31, 2013

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/opinion/sunday/sunday-dialogue-obamas-use-of-h
is-power.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY JI LEE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


