                             1050 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 18, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Revolution Will Have Live Music

BYLINE: By COLIN MOYNIHAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 777 words


Among the shouts and chants from a picket line on the Upper East Side on a
recent evening were a few sounds of a less discordant nature: the thump of a
bass drum, the toot of a trombone, the melodious drone of a clarinet.

For nearly a decade, members of a collective called the Rude Mechanical
Orchestra have provided the unlikely musical accompaniment to various rebellious
street events in New York City and beyond.

The group, which is named in part after characters in ''A Midsummer Night's
Dream,'' was formed in 2004 to take part in a march in Washington organized by
the National Organization for Women. Since then, it has performed during antiwar
demonstrations, rallies protesting gentrification and parades celebrating the
community gardens of the Lower East Side.

The band, whose 30-odd revolving members dress in green and black, usually
donates its services. One exception came in 2008 when it accompanied the
indie-rockers Matt and Kim at the McCarren Park Pool in Brooklyn. The proceeds
enabled them to buy a biofuel bus that transported the musicians and their
instruments to St. Paul, Minn., where they joined protests during the Republican
National Convention.

The band's repertoire includes Balkan marching tunes, Brazilian sambas and
klezmer dirges. Some compositions sound as though they could be played during
the halftime of a college football game, but for their unapologetically
polemical edge. Commonly performed songs include ''The Internationale,'' ''The
Smash-a-Bank Polka'' and ''Which Side Are You On?,'' which was popularized by
Pete Seeger and is performed with a syncopated swing.

''We are interested in the idea of using music strategically to challenge
power,'' said Sarah Blust, a bass drummer and original member of the group. ''We
try to play music that harmonizes our mission and our politics.''

The musicians are often accompanied by a dance troupe called Tactical Spectacle.
Decisions are made by consensus, and band membership policy forbids
discrimination, even on the basis of musical ability. Orchestra members describe
themselves on their website as ''a motley mix of rusty players that hadn't
picked up a horn since high school and longtime street bandistas.'' One band
member, Matthew Arnold, said that the musicians saw themselves ''as a political
project that supports other organizations working for social justice.'' Other
members said that the orchestra had formed close ties with advocacy groups like
Make the Road by Walking and Picture the Homeless.

''They show the truest form of solidarity,'' said Matt Plummer, a member of 99
Pickets, a group that organizes labor protests. ''There's no agenda beyond
supporting the struggle they amplify.''

As about three dozen people protested work conditions at Dylan's Candy Bar on
East 60th Street in Manhattan last month, the band played on. A trombone was
joined by a trumpet and a bass horn. A snare drum rat-a-tatted next to a
majorette brandishing a green and gold flag.

People emerging from a subway station paused to gaze. And Flor Ramirez tapped
her foot. ''I'm Caribbean, so I really like the drums,'' said Ms. Ramirez, who
had not joined the picket but said she was there to support it. ''The horns are
pretty good, too.''

Janna Pea, of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, said the
orchestra had buoyed the spirits of Dylan's workers who were seeking, among
other things, hourly pay that matched the $13.99 price for a pound of bulk candy
at the store, which is owned by Dylan Lauren, Ralph Lauren's daughter.

A spokeswoman for Dylan's, Lauren Kenyon, said that according to a company
official, salaries were based on merit and the pay structure was ''in line with
comparable companies of our size.''

At times, the authorities have taken note of the role played by marching bands.
A police report prepared before the 2004 Republican National Convention in New
York said that ''increases in beat are used to indicate an attack,'' an
assertion that Ms. Blust called ''pretty ridiculous.'' One of the biggest mass
arrests of the convention included members of the Rude Mechanical Orchestra and
the Infernal Noise Brigade, a band from Seattle, who led a march through streets
near Union Square.

After the candy store protest, the musicians continued to play as they marched
south on Third Avenue. At 42nd Street the group turned west and approached
another labor rally, outside a restaurant, where about 50 people were gathered.
As the orchestra came into view, the waiting crowd cheered.

''This band brings their own level of energy,'' said Lino Diaz, one of those who
applauded the arrival. ''People are going to be grabbing fliers and dancing down
the street.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/18/nyregion/the-revolution-will-have-live-music.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Rude Mechanical Orchestra performing last month at a
protest of labor policies at Dylan's Candy Bar in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MICHAEL NAGLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


