                             1046 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 16, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who's Sorry Now?

BYLINE: By GAIL COLLINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 790 words


Barack Obama's loyal supporters are heavy of heart. Perhaps their chief source
of comfort is that the Obamacare mess hit the headlines at about the same time
as the crack-smoking mayor of Toronto. At least the president didn't claim he
was drunk when he wrote the health care bill.

Obama, obviously not a guy who enjoys self-abasement, has been on an apology
tour. He sat down with NBC News and said he was sorry that people whose health
insurance plans were canceled ''are finding themselves in this situation, based
on assurances they got from me.''

While far from emotionally satisfying, this did rise a tad above the classic
blame-the-victim apology. (See football player Richie Incognito on his racist
phone call to a black teammate: ''... I'd apologize to his family. They took it
as malicious. I never meant it that way.'')

The chaos surrounding the rollout of health care reform is a terrible blow to
people who've been standing behind the president through thin and thin. They had
already come to grips with the fact that the guy who once taught constitutional
law wasn't going to protect their privacy from government snoops. That their old
peace candidate really loved the idea of shooting people down with drones. That
he was probably never going to be able to deliver on serious immigration reform,
or gun control or even expanded preschool.

But there was still affordable health care, a goal that had been eluding
presidents since Teddy Roosevelt, which had required so many breathtaking leaps
of political faith to pass and protect. One achievement so big it was pretty
much enough.

And then the website didn't work and longstanding promises were broken and the
whole thing was turning into a joke on the Country Music Association Awards.

''I think it's fair to say that the rollout has been rough so far,'' the
president said at the start of his press conference on Thursday.

I think it's fair to say that is an understatement.

Obama also acknowledged that when Americans had problems with the website
''that's on us, not on them.'' Later, when he began taking questions from
reporters and got into full-throttle apology mode, he offered up six versions of
''That's on us,'' along with more wordy variations. (''... Ultimately, I'm the
president of the United States and they expect me to do something about it.'')

Taking responsibility is extremely popular in these circumstances. It makes you
appear to be strong while stating the obvious. If all of Washington had not been
eaten by zombies at the beginning of the movie ''World War Z,'' the president
could easily have gone on TV and told the nation: ''Undead mutants are flooding
the planet. Our troops are hitting them with everything we've got, but they're
still coming. In the end, that's on me.''

The public is so inured to responsibility-taking by executives under fire that
it's little more than a polite reflex, like ''thank you for your service.''
George W. Bush took responsibility for the Katrina foul-ups, for heaven sake.

Presidents have generally been bad about apologies. See: Richard Nixon
resigning. (''I would say only that if some of my judgments were wrong, and some
were wrong, they were made in what I believed at the time to be the best
interest of the nation.'') Bill Clinton was more forthcoming when he apologized
for lying about Monica Lewinsky. (''I misled people, including even my wife.'')
But he had a little help from a grand jury.

George W. Bush still hasn't said he's sorry for getting us into Iraq, although,
in his book ''Decision Points,'' W. did express deep, deep regret that there
weren't any weapons of mass destruction, because it threw a shadow over what he
still sees as a really excellent undertaking.

(Second point of comfort on the Obamacare rollout: Not as bad as the war in
Iraq.)

We haven't seen a whole lot of truly satisfying apologies on a high level; it's
been more than half a century since a British official who lied about an
adulterous fling showed how sorry he was by going off to clean toilets for the
poor. The best we can generally hope for is a specific explanation of how the
politician in question screwed up, and how he's going to make it right.

At his press conference, the president noted -- kind of bragged, really -- that
the Obama campaign had been spot-on when it came to information technology. Then
he complained that the way the federal government purchases I.T. ''is
cumbersome, complicated and outdated.''

Since he already knew ''that the federal government has not been good at this
stuff in the past,'' Obama continued, his crack advisers should have prepared to
go around that problem ''two years ago'' when planning for the rollout began.

Yes!

''... But that doesn't help us now. We've got to move forward.''

Sigh.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/16/opinion/collins-whos-sorry-now.html

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


