                             1006 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 2, 2014 Sunday 8:14 PM EST

THE TANK (symbol of U.S. military might) IS NOT BULLETPROOF

BYLINE: Marjorie Censer

SECTION: ; Pg. G01

LENGTH: 1858 words


hen an armored vehicle pulled down the statue of Saddam Hussein in an iconic
moment of the Iraq War, it triggered a wave of pride here at the BAE Systems
plant where that rig was built. The Marines who rolled to glory in it even
showed up to pay their regards to the factory workers. ¶ That bond between the
machinists and tradesmen supporting the war effort at home and those fighting on
the front lines has held tight for generations - as long as the tank has served
as a symbol of military might. ¶ Now that representation of U.S. power is
rolling into another sort of morass: the emotional debates playing out as
Congress, the military and the defense industry adapt to stark new realities in
modern warfare and in the nation's finances. ¶ As its orders dwindle, the BAE
Systems plant is shrinking, too. The company is slowly trimming workers and
closing buildings. ¶ In York, there's "sadness that somebody that has worked
here 35 years and is close to retirement is getting laid off," said Alice
Conner, a manufacturing executive at the factory. "There's also some frustration
from

management and my engineering staff as we see the skills erode, because we know
one day we're going to be asked to bring these back, and it's going to be very
difficult."

The manufacturing of tanks - powerful but cumbersome - is no longer essential,
the military says. In modern warfare, forces must deploy quickly and "project
power over great distances." Submarines and long-range bombers are needed.
Weapons such as drones - nimble and tactical - are the future.

Tanks are something of a relic.

The Army has about 5,000 of them sitting idle or awaiting an upgrade. For the
BAE Systems employees in York, keeping the armored vehicle in service means
keeping a job. And jobs, after all, are what their representatives in Congress
are working to protect in their home districts.

The Army is just one party to this decision. While the military sets its
strategic priorities, it's Congress that allocates money for any purchases. And
the defense industry, which ultimately produces the weapons, seeks to influence
both the military and Congress.

"The Army's responsibility is to do what's best for the taxpayer," said Heidi
Shyu, the top Army buying official. "The CEO of the corporation['s
responsibility] is to do what's best in terms of shareholders."

The Army is pushing ahead on a path that could result in at least partial
closure of the two U.S. facilities producing these vehicles - buoyed by a new
study on the state of the combat vehicle industry due for release next month.

But its plans could be derailed by a Congress unwilling to yield and an industry
with a powerful lobby. They argue that letting these lines idle or close would
mean letting skills and technology honed over decades go to waste.

The Pentagon has "really made a turn in that they are now trying to solve
million-dollar problems without billion-dollar solutions, but Congress keeps
redirecting them," said Brett Lambert, who oversaw the Pentagon's industrial
base policy until last year. "This is a zero-sum game. For every dollar the
Pentagon spends on something we don't need . . . it is a dollar we can't spend
on something we do need."

A boom, then decline

For decades, BAE Systems's facility in York has cranked out the Hercules, the
Paladin and - most notably and most recently - the Bradley Fighting Vehicle, a
75,000-pound mainstay of the military's traditional weapons, a kind of armored
vehicle that can hold up to 10 men, move at nearly 40 miles per hour and fire a
cannon, machine gun and missiles.

(Although the Bradley looks like a tank, it is not technically considered one by
the military.)

The factory got its start in the early 1960s, when Bowen McLaughlin York bought
a local farm. The construction contractor's new business was military vehicle
overhaul.

Business boomed for a time - but slowed in the mid-1980s. Eventually, BMY
combined with another defense outfit to form United Defense, which consolidated
its business into the York site. In 1997, private-equity firm the Carlyle Group
bought United Defense and eventually took it public. In 2005, the company was
sold to BAE for just shy of $4 billion.

In recent years, the contractor hasn't built new Bradleys but is running old
versions through a refurbishment program. In 2008, 2,500 BAE workers at the York
plant were pushing out about seven upgraded Bradley Fighting Vehicles a day.

Mel Nace Jr., operations manager at the plant, grew up in its shadow. In the
1970s, he rode his minibike around the BAE Systems factory, at one point even
jumping the fence to take a spin on the test track used to put the Army vehicles
through their paces.

After vocational school, he got a job at the factory in 1979 working in the
machine shop. With tuition help, he went to college and received his associate's
and bachelor's degrees as well as an MBA - all while working full-time and
raising two sons with his wife.

In 2008, Nace was promoted to plant manager. That year was one of the site's
busiest as it moved to refurbish vehicles that were sent to Iraq and Afghanistan
and returned pummeled, sometimes with coffee cups welded to the roof.

"We basically had to hire 600 touch labor employees in a 12-month period," he
said. "We had to recruit, hire, train and acclimate all of those people."

Not only was the plant rolling out Bradley vehicles, but it was planning
production of the next generation of fighting vehicle. BAE had been tasked with
building some of the combat vehicles included in the Army's expansive Future
Combat Systems program, envisioned as a sprawling arsenal of drones, vehicles
and robots all connected by a powerful network.

The York facility was readying for the boost, even installing - at an $8 million
price tag - a hulking high-speed, high-precision machine able to mill, cut and
thread almost any material, from steel to aluminum to alloys. The company had
hired younger employees, bringing the age of its average plant employee down to
44, seeking to build a workforce to take over once older employees retired.

BAE - and the York facility - suffered a major blow when the Army canceled the
Future Combat Systems program. The vehicles portion of the program, which was to
be shared between BAE and General Dynamics, would have cost more than $87
billion, according to Defense Secretary Robert Gates.

Since then, the military has backed off vehicle refurbishment, too. The York
operation has cut about half of its employees, the average age of plant workers
has surged to 54 and lines are sitting idle at the facility, tucked into a swath
of farmland. In December, BAE started another round of layoffs.

The home to the fighting vehicle has been a low, squat building - with tools in
their places and signs reminding those on the floor to don hearing protection. A
large "Partnering for the Soldier" banner was on display. Much of the Bradley
equipment is being moved into another building as BAE consolidates.

"The reality of it is we've already started shutting down," Conner, the
manufacturing executive, said.

If BAE does not get any new Bradley funding - or win new work from commercial
firms or foreign governments, it will close the line in 2015.

General Dynamics, which runs its tank-building program out of small-town Lima,
Ohio, is facing a similar dilemma.

Just like the Bradley plant, the Abrams factory bustled over the past decade. At
its peak in early 2009, the plant, which is owned by the government but operated
by General Dynamics, was pushing 21 / 2 refurbished tanks out the door each day.

For the first time in its history, it diversified, producing not just upgraded
Abrams tanks but also Stryker vehicles and a prototype of an expeditionary
fighting vehicle (able to travel by sea and by land), which was built for the
Marine Corps but later canceled.

In 2004, the plant started spending millions to upgrade its systems, bracing to
build not only the Marine Corps vehicle but also the ones planned for the Army's
Future Combat Systems effort.

The factory added a $15.5 million machining line - replacing a system installed
in the 1980s - that essentially cuts steel and aluminum hulls so that they are
ready to be pieced together, much like a person would expect an Ikea desk to be
ready for assembly.

But today the facility is down to about 500 employees from a peak of 1,220.
Following union rules, it has laid off the newest employees and has worked its
way back to those hired in 2005, said Keith Deters, director of plant
operations.

Moving forward

Military officials say they've given careful thought to their strategy and they
simply can't afford to pay for more upgraded tanks.

Gen. Raymond Odierno, the Army's chief of staff, made its case before Congress
in 2012.

"We don't need the tanks," he said. "Our tank fleet is 21 / 2 years old average
now. We're in good shape, and these are additional tanks that we don't need."

The Army has been emboldened by the new study, which considered whether
suppliers who are key to building combat vehicles could be replaced.

The study, which was run by consulting firm A.T. Kearney and took more than five
months, found only a small number of companies that are vulnerable to closure
and could not easily be replaced.

Shyu, the Army acquisition official, said the military expects that vehicle
makers and suppliers will look to other customers and kinds of work.

"There's obviously difficult decisions that every single service has to make
somewhere along the line," Shyu said. "We have to figure out what's good
enough."

But the Army has run up against congressional opposition. To keep these lines
running, Congress has allocated well more than the Army requested for the
programs - an extra $181 million for Abrams in fiscal 2013 and about $140
million more for Bradley.

Legislators say they don't want the money they've invested in building up the
country's vehicle-making capability to go to waste. The several hundred million
dollars it would cost seems to them a small amount relative to the billions
spent on defense annually.

The industry, too, has pushed Congress to support its work. Last year, BAE
convened its suppliers - it has 586 across 44 states - in Washington to storm
the Hill, chatting up representatives about the jobs they provide and pushing
for Congress to help the Bradley program.

Critics say the companies are trying to fight off what should be inevitable: a
wind-down of a product that the country doesn't need.

"It looks like they're protecting profits and using scare tactics about jobs,"
said Angela Canterbury of the Project on Government Oversight. "It is really
making us less safe when we're throwing money that's hard to come by at programs
that don't meet what should be our current national security strategy."

marjorie.censer@washpost.com

The military

Budgets are tight, it says, and  limited resources are better used to build for
modern warfare.

The defense industry

Executives say shutting down production lines, even briefly, would cripple their
capabilities. CongressSome lawmakers, wary of losing jobs in their districts,
have fought to keep these lines running.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


