                             109 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 9:18 PM EST

The FAA is letting Hollywood use drones - and more exemptions are on the way.

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 726 words


The Federal Aviation Administration has taken a big step forward on drones: It's
now allowing some filmmakers to operate robotic flying cameras on commercial
movie and TV sets.

Thursday's decision marks the first time the agency has granted a commercial
entity an exemption from the rules that prohibit drones from flying in U.S.
airspace without a special certificate. The civil drone industry has been
pressuring the FAA to relax that ban and to develop new regulations designed to
safely integrate unmanned vehicles into the nation's air traffic system. While
we're still waiting for those formal rules, the FAA is now saying that making
movies with drones, or TV shows, or advertisements, or anything else you might
do on a closed production set, is legal - so long as you can prove it's safe.

"There has been a lot of interest around this technology lately," said
Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx, "and I have determined that using
unmanned aircraft for this purpose does not pose a risk to national airspace
users."

Here's everything we know about the announcement, and what this means for the
future of drone regulation.

Six film and TV production companies, represented by the Motion Picture
Association of America, asked the FAA in May for a special ruling. They were
later joined by a seventh company, but the FAA is still weighing that last
application.

In their petitions, the production companies explained how they'd go about
making their operations safe. They offered to require their pilots to have
private pilot certificates. They also said they'd keep the drones within the
closed area of the set and within the operator's line of sight at all times.

The FAA accepted those conditions and stipulated other requirements. For
example, the drones won't be able to fly higher than 400 feet and won't be able
to operate at night, though FAA director Michael Huerta told reporters Thursday
that the agency might revisit the curfew upon getting more safety data.

In exchange, the companies won't have to follow some regulations pertaining to
maintenance and equipment. They also won't be subject to a requirement that
forces aircraft operators to store manuals on board - which, on a drone, would
be difficult to do.

Actually, there are a number of popular films already on the market that
involved drone footage. Among them: "Star Trek: Into Darkness," "The Hunger
Games," "The Dark Knight Rises" and a host of others. But until now, directors
have had to go to international locations to film those shots legally.

It makes total sense why the film industry would be first to receive an
exemption. The industry already has experience shooting movies with aircraft and

 maintains plenty of safety procedures for doing so. And using drones may
actually boost safety on the set, compared to shooting film from a helicopter or
other large, flying metal object.

Yes. The FAA is considering 40 other petitions for commercial exemptions on a
case-by-case basis.

"This is not a one-off thing just to help calm frustrated people in the
industry," said Jesse Kallman, the head of regulatory affairs at Airware and a
former FAA engineer. "This is something that will continue. There will be
applications approved in areas like agriculture ... surveying and mapping."

The agency is still working on its official rules, the first of which was
supposed to be unveiled in August. But the FAA missed that deadline. It's not
expected to release a rule on small drones (those weighing less than 55 pounds)
until early next year, and rules won't be finalized for another year after that.

That's why, in the meantime, the FAA is giving out individual exceptions in
response to specific petitions. But that's no substitute for formal regulations,
said Melissa Rudinger of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association.

"We do need rules in place," said Rudinger, "because the FAA can't possibly keep
up with demand if it has to keep issuing authorizations on a case-by-case basis.
They need regulations so they don't have to do that."

Certainly. And it won't be just small companies, either. Amazon has already
asked the FAA for permission to test its delivery drones at its own facilities
in the United States. With tech giants like Facebook and Google also exploring
drone-based technologies, it's probably just a matter of time before these firms
ask the FAA for an exemption, too.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


