                             1041 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 8, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Local Place for a Global Neighborhood

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; ART REVIEW;
Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1709 words


The United Nations of voices we encounter on Manhattan's streets is global but
transient: Visitors from abroad come to town and they look, they shop, they
leave.

By contrast, the same range of accents we hear in Queens is global but local:
People land from everywhere and stay, in one of the most ethnically diverse
patches of residential real estate in the nation.

Given that mix today, it makes symbolic sense, at least, that for four years,
from 1946 to 1950, the United Nations General Assembly had its first
headquarters in Queens, in a low, pale slab of a building designed to be New
York City's Pavilion for the 1939 World's Fair. Set on an edge of what is now
called Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, with the Grand Central Parkway streaming
by, it proved itself a versatile premises, suited equally to athletics and
aesthetics. For many years, half the building was a skating rink. The other
half, beginning in 1972, was home to the Queens Museum of Art.

Several months ago, the museum closed fully to complete a two-year, $69 million
renovation that mostly took place while the museum remained open.

On Saturday it reopens, much changed. Its interior is now twice as large. By
absorbing the former skating rink, it has gained about 50,000 square feet, which
translates into extra galleries, studios for resident artists, storage room for
a growing collection and -- the pièce-de-résistance -- a high-ceiling, sky-lit
atrium that has the feel, in line with this museum's democratizing spirit, of a
community commons.

Until now, the museum turned its back on the parkway with a solid wall, but no
more. The new design, by the Grimshaw architectural firm, includes big sheets of
glass on both sides of the building, so you can see right through. Along with
transparency comes a semi-logical layout. Over many years of visiting, I never
really got my bearings; the floor plan seemed to jump around. Now, even with
more ground to cover, I already sort of know my way.

The cost for the whole ambitious, expanding, revivifying job may sound like a
lot for a smallish museum. But to add some perspective, the Metropolitan Museum
is spending almost as much just to gussy up its Fifth Avenue plaza.

Along with the additions, the Queens Museum has also let something go: The words
''of Art'' are no longer part of its name. The institution's executive director,
Tom Finkelpearl, explained the rebranding in a news release. In his view,
so-called outer-borough museums are faced with two basic options: Either shoot
for a bridge-and-tunnel-phobic Manhattan audience or use the same energy to
interact more with the immediate community, which is what they were meant to do.

For the Queens Museum, the choice was clear. Given the cosmopolitan breadth of
its home population, and the lively history of the building itself -- it also
was the New York City Pavilion for the city's second World's Fair, in 1964 --
Queens consciousness was the way to go, and so it has.

Long-favored features from the past have been retained. The giant,
infinitesimally detailed relief-map panorama of New York City, commissioned by
Robert Moses for the 1964 fair, is where it has always been, embedded in the
building's center like a captive spaceship, twinkling with lights. For the
reopening, the museum has added some new elements to the old by surrounding the
panorama with a suite of handsome, time-lapse photographs of the recent
expansion in progress, taken by Jeff Chien-Hsing Liao, a young artist born in
Taiwan and based in Queens.

Elsewhere, a new open-storage display brings some 900 vintage World's Fair
souvenirs out of attics, desk drawers, shoeboxes and the museum's archive for
perusal. They vary in size from admission buttons to a full-scale plaster cast
of Michelangelo's ''Pietà.'' The actual Pietà was the high-art highlight of the
1964 fair, shipped from the Vatican and seen by hundreds of thousands of
conveyer-belt-riding viewers.

Some people call this stuff material culture, some call it junk. Whatever you
call it, it's history: loaded evidence of a time, a place and an era-defining
event that happened miles away from big-deal Manhattan.

Finally, the museum's Neustadt Collection of Tiffany Glass, once upstairs, has
main-stage visibility in one of the six new galleries that surround the atrium.
With 20 stained-glass lamps aglow, the display is like an Art Nouveau version of
Chartres.

And who knew that the Tiffany Studios were once located a mere stone's throw
away, in Corona? Or that some of its most interesting designs were created by a
phalanx of female workers known as Tiffany Girls?

The Queens Museum has a track record for making history as well as showing it.
It has always given pride of place to contemporary art, often to work that few
Manhattan museums noticed before Queens led the way. In the 1990s, Cai
Guo-Qiang's first United States museum solo show was there. And there were ''Out
of India: Contemporary Art of the South Asian Diaspora'' and ''Global
Conceptualism: Points of Origin, 1950-1980s.'' New York might not have paid much
attention to such shows, but the international art world did, and they helped
shape the increasingly cosmopolitan direction that art was taking.

The museum has assembled no fewer than four contemporary exhibitions for the
reopening, two of them, in different ways, Queens specific and hard to judge as
of this writing.

An installation called ''The People's United Nations (pUN),'' by the Mexican
artist Pedro Reyes, inaugurates the new atrium. The obvious reference is to the
fledgling General Assembly meetings here, which promised much and embittered
many. The decisions to divide Palestine and to separate North and South Korea
were made here.

Mr. Reyes clearly intends his work as wry rebuke. Beneath an outsize, doctored
version of the United Nations seal, he has placed miniature drones in the shape
of doves and clocks made from twisted firearms. On Nov. 23 and 24, he will
convene a mock-Assembly session, during which 193 New Yorkers from the 193
states that make up the United Nations will gather for a kind of boot-camp
immersion in conflict-resolution techniques. The idea is to tackle serious
issues in the disarming spirit of play, an approach I've become suspicious of.
We'll see.

The museum's signature biennial show, the Queens International, is back, the
2013 edition put together, for the first time, by two curators: Hitomi Iwasaki,
the resident director of exhibitions, and Meiya Cheng, co-founder of the Taipei
Contemporary Art Center in Taiwan. The biennial has been built around artists
who live and work in the borough, but this time includes participants from
Taiwan, which has a large immigrant population in Queens.

Like Mr. Reyes's piece, the show has crucial performance components, which will
unfold over time, so a one-off look gives only a partial sense of the whole.
Still, there's a lot in place to see, and some artists -- Nobutaka Aozaki, Kevin
Beasley, Chou Yu-Cheng, Siobhan Landry, Arthur Ou -- stand out.

At the same time, it may be a sign of art's current global-melting-pot state
that clear distinctions between work made in New York and work made anywhere
else can be hard to detect. This suggests that avenues of international
communication are strong, which is good. It also suggests that diversity has
become generic, which is a problem.

A third show, ''Citizens of the World: Cuba in Queens,'' is, despite its title,
less about a Cuban presence in the borough than about the significance of a
particular selection of Cuban art in the museum. All the work is on loan from
the collection of Shelley and Donald Rubin, for whom the gallery is named. The
Rubins, who founded a museum of Asian art in Chelsea, are among the very few
large-dollar donors who routinely write checks for art institutions beyond the
Manhattan mainstream. In a heartening quid pro quo roundelay, the Queens Museum
benefits from the Rubins' largess, the Rubins get to air their collection in a
museum, and we get to see a kind of alert, passionate art that the Met, MoMA and
the Whitney continue to pass right over.

Out of all the inaugural bounty, though, the largest and most moving component
is the exhibition called ''The Shatterer,'' the solo museum debut of the artist
Peter Schumann. Mr. Schumann came to New York from Germany and founded the Bread
and Puppet Theater, blending populist political happening and medieval mystery
play, on the streets of the Lower East Side.

That was in 1963, 50 years ago, a time when America was at war with itself and
the world, and most of Manhattan was still -- as it is not now -- working-class
immigrant turf. In the 1970s, Mr. Schumann moved to Vermont, where he has
stayed, his social vision undiminished, working collaboratively in theater and
producing his own art.

The Queens show, organized by Jonathan Berger and Larissa Harris, demonstrates
how thoroughly Bread and Puppet is Mr. Schumann's creation. Its down-value look
and activist ethos are evident in everything, from the black house-paint mural
he has brushed across one of the museum's new white walls to the hand-printed,
hand-bound books he has placed in the gallery that he designates as both chapel
and library. Every inch of this room is covered with figures and words: saints
and ogres, exhortations and condemnations, art for one and for all, straight
from the hand, right to the moral core.

The Queens Museum is a good place for it.

Mr. Finkelpearl's interests have long centered on participatory, activist art --
art as a form of instruction. He recently published a book on the subject,
''What We Made: Conversations on Art and Social Cooperation.'' Much of his
museum's programming revolves around this idea. It makes sense that he has known
and loved Mr. Schumann's art for many years; that's why it's here.

And where else would it go? At once poetic and preachy, modest and obsessive,
satirical and spiritual, it's probably too unfashionably ''alternative'' for
anyplace else. But given the condition of passive, formalist dullness that has
stalled art in New York, alternatives of all kinds are what we need. These days,
at the end of the No. 7 train to Queens, you'll find at least one.

The Queens Museum reopens Saturday in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park;
718-592-9700, queensmuseum.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/08/arts/design/the-expanded-queens-museum-reopens
.html

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Queens Museum, top, is now expanded, and more transparent and
colorful than when it was built for the 1939 World's Fair, above. This art
museum reopens on Saturday. (C25)
A mural by Peter Schumann, using black house paint, top, is part of his solo
exhibition, ''The Shatterer,'' in the atrium of the renovated Queens Museum.
Also on display are the museum's Neustadt Collection of Tiffany Glass, left, and
the relief-map panorama of New York City made for the 1964 World's Fair. (C30)
Lampshades, a work bench and images of the Tiffany studios in the Queens
Museum's Neustadt Collection.
Peter Schumann's ''The Shatterer'' is one of three exhibitions on view for the
reopening of the museum. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BYRON SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
FOR THE PEOPLE, STILL: The former ice rink that in 1946 took up half of the
Queens Museum building has been transformed into an atrium, where ''The People's
United Nations (pUN)'' by Pedro Reyes has been installed.
WELCOMING THE WORLD: In 1946, the museum building, on the site of the 1939
World's Fair, was chosen to be the interim home of the United Nations General
Assembly. The renovations by the Grimshaw architects add large windows opening
to the Grand Central Parkway. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ASSOCIATED PRESS
BYRON SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
REACHING OUT: In 1975, the museum showed the work of Fairfield Porter, who
produced realist work in the midst of the Abstract Expressionists. In 2013, the
Queens International includes work from Taiwan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT
WALKER/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 BYRON SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C32)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


