                             1043 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 12, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Heartache To a Beat, Or Several

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 557 words


Inexorable beats and looming heartache fill the songs of Polica, a band from
Minneapolis that performed at Webster Hall on Friday night. Its music opens up
wide spaces to expose tidings of desire, separation, longing, bitterness and
resolve: breakup songs that absolve no one.

Polica -- which means ''policy'' in Polish -- emerged from Gayngs, a soft-rock
collective founded by the songwriter and producer Ryan Olson. Polica's lead
singer and lyricist, Channy Leaneagh, was a backup vocalist in Gayngs and
started writing songs with Mr. Olson. He composes the music and supplies the
electronic core of Polica's songs -- synthesizer parts and programmed beats --
but doesn't perform with the band. Onstage, the group is Ms. Leaneagh, singing
and running the electronics, and the rhythm section of Chris Bierden on bass and
two drummers, Drew Christopherson and Ben Ivascu.

There's often just a sustained synthesizer note between the rhythm section's R&B
muscle and Ms. Leaneagh's high, plaintive voice, providing a desolate soundscape
in which she sings lines like ''What a fool I've been/To beg you again and
again/To believe me that I want you.''

Polica's slower songs, in minor keys with tolling bass lines, can echo
Portishead; each band also has its own song titled ''Wandering Star.'' But Ms.
Leaneagh is a very different frontwoman from Portishead's Beth Gibbons; she
dances and gesticulates with nervous energy. And in Polica's music, the tension
behind the melancholy surfaces, explosively, far more often.

It was clear onstage -- less so than on Polica's two albums -- that the two
drummers rarely play in unison. In each song, they've orchestrated a dialogue of
half and double speeds, of stolid backbeats behind rushing cymbals, of seismic
crescendos that converge from two directions into a furious shared rumble, only
to drop suddenly away.

On Polica's albums, Ms. Leaneagh's voice is often processed through effects that
make her nearly unintelligible: a lot of Auto-Tune on the band's debut album,
''Give You the Ghost,'' and other processes on its new album, ''Shulamith''
(both released by Mom & Pop). The band had some arty rationales for doing so,
but the resulting mixes make the songs more remote than they should be.

Live, the combination of ache and back-to-the-wall tenacity in Ms. Leaneagh's
voice comes through as clearly as it should; it made perfect sense for Polica to
perform Lesley Gore's ''You Don't Own Me'' among its encores. Stripped of its
old electronic clutter, ''Wandering Star'' -- which Ms. Leaneagh performed
simply as a duo with Mr. Bierden's bass -- sounded as sad and solitary as what
its lyrics describe: ''Now the world turns without me.''

Near the end of the set, Ms. Leaneagh suddenly announced, ''I'm having, like,
one of the worst shows of my life.'' But she had sung with purity and finesse,
and the audience disagreed, loudly.

The opening act, Marijuana Deathsquads, one-upped Polica on the percussion: It
had not two, but three, drummers clobbering away behind punky extended drones
that cross-pollinated the Minimalistic synth-punk of Suicide, the rants of Rage
Against the Machine and, for no obvious reason, a crooner who occasionally
slowed things down for Auto-Tuned questions like ''How about a little romance?''
The songs predicted apocalypse; the drums, in a strategic barrage, enacted it.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/12/arts/music/polica-from-minneapolis-comes-to-we
bster-hall.html

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Polica: Channy Leaneagh of this  Minneapolis indie group
performing at Webster Hall. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


