                             1029 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 2, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Surge in Iraqi Violence Reunites Two Leaders

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER; Michael R. Gordon and Eric Schmitt contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 964 words


WASHINGTON -- With violence spiking again in Iraq, fomenting fears of widening
instability in the region, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki pressed President
Obama on Friday for American help in fighting Qaeda terrorists in his country's
lawless west.

Mr. Maliki said the Iraqi government was ''mobilizing our people in order to
fight Al Qaeda because it's good for Iraq and the Middle East.'' Speaking after
a meeting with the president in the Oval Office, Mr. Maliki said he and Mr.
Obama had ''similar ideas'' on counterterrorism priorities, though he did not
offer details on any requests for military equipment or other aid.

Other Iraqi officials said the government was appealing for a range of aid,
including Apache helicopter gunships and Hellfire missiles, as well as more
American intelligence and other forms of counterterrorism support, like
reconnaissance drones that would be operated by Americans.

''Unfortunately, Al Qaeda has still been active and has grown more active
recently,'' Mr. Obama acknowledged, adding, ''We had a lot of discussion about
how we can work together to push back against that terrorist organization that
operates not only in Iraq but also poses a threat to the entire region and to
the United States.''

Mr. Maliki's visit was his first to the White House since December 2011, and the
changes since that last trip were stark.

At the end of 2011, the United States was withdrawing the last of its soldiers
after nearly nine years of war, and he and Mr. Obama were inaugurating a new
relationship. Now, coordinated bombings regularly rip through Iraqi cities as
sectarian tensions increase and Mr. Maliki's government battles a resurgent Al
Qaeda in Iraq, which American officials say is building camps, training
facilities and staging areas in western Iraq.

The political and security setbacks have put both leaders in an awkward
position. Mr. Obama, who two years ago hailed the reduction in violence and
praised Mr. Maliki for leading ''Iraq's most inclusive government yet,'' is
eager to focus on other priorities. Mr. Maliki, who pushed for the American
withdrawal and has tried to keep his distance from Washington, finds himself
having to ask the president for help.

The changed circumstances were evident in the White House's decision to forgo a
joint news conference like the one it held the last time Mr. Maliki visited.
Instead, the two leaders made only brief remarks in the Oval Office.

''It's hard for the administration to make any claims that things have gone well
inside Iraq,'' said Brian Katulis, a senior fellow and expert on Iraq at the
Center for American Progress. ''But the blame for that falls largely on Iraq's
leadership.''

Still, Mr. Katulis said the administration recognized it would need to keep a
focus on Iraq, not least because the rise of Al Qaeda in western Iraq could
worsen the civil war in Syria, with terrorists moving back and forth across the
porous border between the countries.

''There's recognition that if Syria continues on current trends, you're going to
need to be more involved in Iraq,'' he said.

Mr. Obama said he and Mr. Maliki spent much of their meeting discussing Syria,
and the two seemed more in sync on strategies there than in 2011. Both endorsed
the diplomatic effort aimed at finding a political transition in Syria. Two
years ago, Mr. Maliki refused to back Mr. Obama's call for sanctions and for
Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, to step down.

A joint statement issued after the meeting on Friday said Iraqi officials had
presented a new five-year, $357 billion plan to revitalize their energy
industry, which involves building new pipelines. The plan is extraordinarily
ambitious, and given that Iraq's entire government budget in 2012 was $100
billion, it left some analysts shaking their heads.

''I don't know where they're coming up with the money,'' said Ramzy Mardini, an
adjunct fellow at the Iraq Institute for Strategic Studies in Beirut, Lebanon.
''The pipelines they want to build would go through regions where they don't
have adequate security.''

The Iraqi request for aid is coming at time when Qaeda forces are outgunning
Iraqi troops.

''Some of these Al Qaeda networks that are coming in from Syria and that are
based in Iraq now really have heavy weapons,'' a senior administration official
told reporters in a conference call on Wednesday.

''Iraqi helicopter pilots that we have trained have been killed by heavy
machine-gun weaponry,'' said the official, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity to characterize the private diplomatic exchanges. ''And so they're
trying to take this threat -- take on this threat -- with equipment that isn't
really geared toward doing it effectively.''

American intelligence and counterterrorism officials say they have mapped the
locations and origins of new terrorist networks and are sharing that information
with the Iraqis. But Mr. Maliki has sent contradictory signals in response to
American offers in the past two years to enhance intelligence-sharing operations
or to send targeting analysts.

Analysts also said Mr. Maliki continued to emphasize big-ticket items, like F-16
fighter jets, that are better suited to lending his government symbolic power in
the region than to rooting out Qaeda camps.

Outside the White House, several hundred supporters of the Iranian dissident
group the Mujahedeen Khalq, known as M.E.K., rallied to protest a Sept. 1 attack
by gunmen on Camp Ashraf, north of Baghdad, that killed 52 of its members. The
group has claimed the Iraqi government was complicit in the attack, an
accusation it has denied.

Protesters waved yellow banners and were addressed by Newt Gingrich, the former
House speaker; Tom Ridge, a former secretary of homeland security; and other
former American officials who support their demands.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/02/world/middleeast/surge-in-iraqi-violence-reuni
tes-maliki-and-obama.html

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq visited President
Obama at the White House on Friday for the first time since 2011.  Mr. Maliki
sought help in fighting terrorists in his country's west. Iraq's setbacks have
put both leaders in an awkward position. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


