                             1001 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 23, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

Delivery service arrives in the District

BYLINE: Steven Overly

SECTION: ; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 557 words


The only thing faster than the pace of innovation in the shipping industry is
how quickly companies want to actually deliver items to your door.

www.Amazon.com began with free two-day shipping, then same-day service in
certain markets and now dreams of delivery by flying drones. Other Internet
companies, including Google and eBay, are also testing same-day delivery.

Postmates has carved out a niche by delivering orders from local restaurants and
retailers to your home or office within an hour. It's a business driven by
consumers' desire for instant gratification and efficiency, executives say.

"There is a radical reduction of time between saying you want something and
receiving it, and it's not just delivery, it's a whole bunch of services,"
founder Bastian Lehmann said.

Postmates debuted  earlier this month in D.C., a city executives said is
brimming with busy professionals who have ample money, but little time to spend
it. The upstart began in San Francisco two years ago before expanding to Seattle
and New York.

"We had a very hard time finding people to believe in the idea initially,"
Lehmann said. "Most people thought we were nuts, that people would never pay
[for delivery] when they can use a car. After all, it's America."

Postmates primarily serves Washington's Northwest quadrant, with the exceptions
of Capitol Hill, Southwest Waterfront, the National Mall and parts of
Bloomingdale. The delivery fee ranges from $5.50 to $15.50 depending on the
distance between sites.

"There isn't a great delivery culture here that already existed. People are
really busy. It's very much a professional city," said Sarina Virk Torrendell,
the "launcher" who sets up Postmates in new cities.

The company boasts about 200 couriers in the District, each of them an
independent contractor who earns 70 to 80 percent of the fee on orders they
deliver. The more orders they run, the more money they make.

Clinton resident Arianna Wilson is among them. The 19-year-old applied to
Postmates through an advertisement on Craigslist as a way to supplement the
income from her job at a local restaurant.

Just a week into work at Postmates, Wilson has delivered carryout orders and
groceries to locations in Chinatown and Woodley Park. She even picked up a copy
of David Sedaris's essay collection, "Let's Explore Diabetes with Owls," for a
customer in the Senate Office Building.

But the delivery business comes with unexpected perils.

On a recent Friday afternoon, an order for three tofu tacos took longer to
deliver than the hour alloted when Wilson was unable to find the Far East Taco
Grille food truck at Franklin Square, even with the help of customer service
staff in San Francisco.

She ultimately drove three miles across town in midday traffic to the
restaurant's brick-and-mortar location, then hauled back the same distance to
make the delivery. Fortunately, the customer who met her in the lobby of a
downtown office building was gracious about the ordeal.

"You experienced one of the worst deliveries that I've ever heard of," Lehmann
said afterward. "It normally happens in 20 to 25 minutes."

Challenges arise in any business, Lehmann said, it's how you respond and how you
treat the customer when a delivery doesn't go according to plan.

"We at least have a process in place to make the best out of it," he said.

steven.overly@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


