                             1049 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 18, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Warnings of New Turmoil as Pakistan Pursues a Treason Case for Musharraf

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 872 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Pakistan's government said Sunday that it was initiating
a treason prosecution of the country's former ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, in
what would be a groundbreaking, if politically charged, assertion of civilian
supremacy over the powerful Pakistani military.

Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan said that the government had asked the
Supreme Court to establish a special panel to try General Musharraf on
accusations that he subverted the Constitution in late 2007 when he imposed
emergency rule and fired much of the judiciary.

The military has ruled Pakistan for about half of the country's 66-year history,
and no ruler or top military commander had ever faced criminal prosecution until
General Musharraf's return from exile in April. Since then, he has faced
criminal prosecution in four cases related to his time in power.

But a treason prosecution would sharply raise the stakes between civilian and
military leaders -- the charge carries a potential death penalty -- and,
analysts warned on Sunday, could cast the country into new political turmoil.

''It is a can of worms,'' said Talat Masood, a retired general and respected
political commentator. ''It is really absurd.''

The decision to proceed against General Musharraf comes at a tough time for
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, whose government is facing increasing scrutiny for
its handling of the economy, foreign relations and security. And personally, Mr.
Sharif, who is visiting Thailand, has been criticized for his frequent foreign
tours even as Pakistan has faced struggle after struggle.

On Friday, at least nine people were killed and 50 were wounded in Rawalpindi,
the garrison city next to the capital, as sectarian riots broke out between
Shiite and Sunni groups.

The violence led the government to clamp a two-day curfew on the city, suspend
cellphone services and bring out troops in several other cities to quell
tensions.

And relations with the United States are under strain over accusations that an
American drone strike that killed the Taliban leader Hakimullah Mehsud sabotaged
nascent peace talks with the Pakistani Taliban.

With such a turbulent political environment as backdrop, the sudden announcement
of treason charges brought immediate questions and criticism.

''What we saw today was a political decision,'' said Fahd Hussain, the director
of news at the Express News television network. ''It was important for Nawaz
Sharif to be seen to deliver on his past pledges.''

What seems clear, at least, is that Mr. Sharif's government wanted to prevent
General Musharraf from slipping out of Pakistan into exile. General Musharraf, a
former army chief, had been under house arrest at his villa outside Islamabad
until earlier this month, when he was released on bail on all cases and later
requested permission to go to Dubai, United Arab Emirates, to visit his mother.

On Monday, lawyers for General Musharraf are due to make a court application to
have him taken off an official list that prevents him from leaving Pakistan. A
treason prosecution would result in new restrictions on Mr. Musharraf's
movements, although it remained unclear how quickly the Supreme Court would move
on Monday.

In a statement on Sunday, General Musharraf's office described the treason
charges as a ''vicious attempt to undermine the Pakistan military'' and a
''botched attempt'' to divert attention from the country's other problems.

Babar Sattar, a lawyer and columnist with the English-language daily newspaper
Dawn, said that Mr. Sharif appeared to be betting that the army would not stop
the judiciary from trying General Musharraf in open court.

''I think Nawaz realizes that Musharraf is a bygone for the army,'' he said.
''He wants to fix him but does not want to give an impression that it is
revenge.''

General Musharraf's supporters say the law is being applied selectively,
pointing out that many senior justices, including the country's crusading chief
justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, validated the 1999 coup that brought the
military ruler to power. Mr. Chaudhry was among the judges fired by Mr.
Musharraf during the state of emergency, and later became a rallying point for
opposition to the former general's rule.

The decision to put General Musharraf on trial also comes at a time of
transition for the military. The current army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani,
is due to retire at the end of this month. Chief Justice Chaudhry is due to
retire in December.

But if Mr. Sharif is seeking to take advantage of this period of transition in
Pakistan's power politics, many warned that it could backfire.

''They are adopting an unchartered course of action that contains many
hazards,'' said Hasan Askari Rizvi, a defense analyst. ''This case may
ultimately alienate the military.''

Mr. Rizvi added that governance had been ''very poor'' and that ordinary people
had been severely affected in the last five to six months by inflation and
chronic power shortages.

''It just shows very poor sense of priority. What are they trying to achieve?''
said Mr. Masood, the retired general. ''The army is involved in the tribal belt.
It is also involved in maintaining peace in Karachi and now in Rawalpindi. What
message is the government sending?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/18/world/asia/pakistan-to-pursue-a-treason-case-f
or-musharraf.html

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gen. Pervez  Musharraf

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


