                             1157 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Learning to Think Differently

BYLINE: By LAURA PAPPANO

SECTION: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1748 words


IT BOTHERS MATTHEW LAHUE and it surely bothers you: enter a public restroom and
the stall lock is broken. Fortunately, Mr. Lahue has a solution. It's called the
Bathroom Bodyguard. Standing before his Buffalo State College classmates and
professor, Cyndi Burnett, Mr. Lahue displayed a device he concocted from a large
washer, metal ring, wall hook, rubber bands and Lincoln Log. Slide the ring in
the crack and twist. The door stays shut. Plus, the device fits in a jacket
pocket.

The world may be full of problems, but students presenting projects for
Introduction to Creative Studies have uncovered a bunch you probably haven't
thought of. Elie Fortune, a freshman, revealed his Sneaks 'n Geeks app to
identify the brand of killer sneakers you spot on the street. Jason Cathcart, a
senior, sported a bulky martial arts uniform with sparring pads he had sewn in.
No more forgetting them at home.

''I don't expect them to be the next Steve Jobs or invent the flying car,'' Dr.
Burnett says. ''But I do want them to be more effective and resourceful problem
solvers.'' Her hope, she says, is that her course has made them more creative.

Once considered the product of genius or divine inspiration, creativity -- the
ability to spot problems and devise smart solutions -- is being recast as a
prized and teachable skill. Pin it on pushback against standardized tests and
standardized thinking, or on the need for ingenuity in a fluid landscape.

''The reality is that to survive in a fast-changing world you need to be
creative,'' says Gerard J. Puccio, chairman of the International Center for
Studies in Creativity at Buffalo State College, which has the nation's oldest
creative studies program, having offered courses in it since 1967.

''That is why you are seeing more attention to creativity at universities,'' he
says. ''The marketplace is demanding it.''

Critical thinking has long been regarded as the essential skill for success, but
it's not enough, says Dr. Puccio. Creativity moves beyond mere synthesis and
evaluation and is, he says, ''the higher order skill.'' This has not been a
sudden development. Nearly 20 years ago ''creating'' replaced ''evaluation'' at
the top of Bloom's Taxonomy of learning objectives. In 2010 ''creativity'' was
the factor most crucial for success found in an I.B.M. survey of 1,500 chief
executives in 33 industries. These days ''creative'' is the most used buzzword
in LinkedIn profiles two years running.

Traditional academic disciplines still matter, but as content knowledge evolves
at lightning speed, educators are talking more and more about ''process
skills,'' strategies to reframe challenges and extrapolate and transform
information, and to accept and deal with ambiguity.

Creative studies is popping up on course lists and as a credential. Buffalo
State, part of the State University of New York, plans a Ph.D. and already
offers a master's degree and undergraduate minor. Saybrook University in San
Francisco has a master's and certificate, and added a specialization to its
psychology Ph.D. in 2011. Drexel University in Philadelphia has a three-year-old
online master's. St. Andrews University in Laurinburg, N.C., has added a minor.
And creative studies offerings, sometimes with a transdisciplinary bent, are new
options in business, education, digital media, humanities, arts, science and
engineering programs across the country.

Suddenly, says Russell G. Carpenter, program coordinator for a new minor in
applied creative thinking at Eastern Kentucky University, ''there is a larger
conversation happening on campus: 'Where does creativity fit into the E.K.U.
student experience?' '' Dr. Carpenter says 40 students from a broad array of
fields, including nursing and justice and safety, have enrolled in the minor --
a number he expects to double as more sections are added to introductory
classes. Justice and safety? Students want tools to help them solve public
safety problems and deal with community issues, Dr. Carpenter explains, and a
credential to take to market.

The credential's worth is apparent to Mr. Lahue, a communication major who
believes that a minor in the field carries a message. ''It says: 'This person is
not a drone. They can use this skill set and apply themselves in other parts of
the job.' ''

On-demand inventiveness is not as outrageous as it sounds. Sure, some people are
naturally more imaginative than others. What's igniting campuses, though, is the
conviction that everyone is creative, and can learn to be more so.

Just about every pedagogical toolbox taps similar strategies, employing
divergent thinking (generating multiple ideas) and convergent thinking (finding
what works).The real genius, of course, is in the how.

Dr. Puccio developed an approach that he and partners market as FourSight and
sell to schools, businesses and individuals. The method, which is used in
Buffalo State classrooms, has four steps: clarifying, ideating, developing and
implementing. People tend to gravitate to particular steps, suggesting their
primary thinking style. Clarifying -- asking the right question -- is critical
because people often misstate or misperceive a problem. ''If you don't have the
right frame for the situation, it's difficult to come up with a breakthrough,''
Dr. Puccio says. Ideating is brainstorming and calls for getting rid of your
inner naysayer to let your imagination fly. Developing is building out a
solution, and maybe finding that it doesn't work and having to start over.
Implementing calls for convincing others that your idea has value.

Jack V. Matson, an environmental engineer and a lead instructor of ''Creativity,
Innovation and Change,'' a MOOC that drew 120,000 in September, teaches a
freshman seminar course at Penn State that he calls ''Failure 101.'' That's
because, he says, ''the frequency and intensity of failures is an implicit
principle of the course. Getting into a creative mind-set involves a lot of
trial and error.''

His favorite assignments? Construct a résumé based on things that didn't work
out and find the meaning and influence these have had on your choices. Or build
the tallest structure you can with 20 Popsicle sticks. The secret to the
assignment is to destroy the sticks and reimagine their use. ''As soon as
someone in the class starts breaking the sticks,'' he says, ''it changes
everything.''

Dr. Matson also asks students to ''find some cultural norms to break,'' like
doing cartwheels while entering the library. The point: ''Examine what in the
culture is preventing you from creating something new or different. And what is
it like to look like a fool because a lot of things won't work out and you will
look foolish? So how do you handle that?''

It's a lesson that has been basic to the ventures of Brad Keywell, a Groupon
founder and a student of Dr. Matson's at the University of Michigan. ''I am an
absolute evangelist about the value of failure as part of creativity,'' says Mr.
Keywell, noting that Groupon took off after the failure of ThePoint.com, where
people were to organize for collective action but instead organized discount
group purchases. Dr. Matson taught him not just to be willing to fail but that
failure is a critical avenue to a successful end. Because academics run from
failure, Mr. Keywell says, universities are ''way too often shapers of formulaic
minds,'' and encourage students to repeat and internalize fail-safe ideas.

Bonnie Cramond, director of the Torrance Center for Creativity and Talent
Development at the University of Georgia, is another believer in taking bold
risks, which she calls a competitive necessity. Her center added an
interdisciplinary graduate certificate in creativity and innovation this year.
''The new people who will be creative will sit at the juxtaposition of two or
more fields,'' she says. When ideas from different fields collide, Dr. Cramond
says, fresh ones are generated. She cites an undergraduate class that teams
engineering and art students to, say, reimagine the use of public spaces. Basic
creativity tools used at the Torrance Center include thinking by analogy,
looking for and making patterns, playing, literally, to encourage ideas, and
learning to abstract problems to their essence.

In Dr. Burnett's Introduction to Creative Studies survey course, students
explore definitions of creativity, characteristics of creative people and
strategies to enhance their own creativity.These include rephrasing problems as
questions, learning not to instinctively shoot down a new idea (first find three
positives), and categorizing problems as needing a solution that requires either
action, planning or invention. A key objective is to get students to look around
with fresh eyes and be curious. The inventive process, she says, starts with
''How might you...''

Dr. Burnett is an energetic instructor with a sense of humor -- she tested Mr.
Cathcart's martial arts padding with kung fu whacks. Near the end of last
semester, she dumped Post-it pads (the department uses 400 a semester) onto a
classroom desk with instructions: On pale yellow ones, jot down what you
learned; on rainbow colored pads, share how you will use this learning. She then
sent students off in groups with orders that were a litany of brainstorming
basics: ''Defer judgment! Strive for quantity! Wild and unusual! Build on
others' ideas!''

As students scribbled and stuck, the takeaways were more than academic. ''I will
be optimistic,'' read one. ''I will look at tasks differently,'' said another.
And, ''I can generate more ideas.''

Asked to elaborate, students talked about confidence and adaptability. ''A lot
of people can't deal with things they don't know and they panic. I can deal with
that more now,'' said Rony Parmar, a computer information systems major with Dr.
Dre's Beats headphones circling his neck.

Mr. Cathcart added that, given tasks, ''you think of other ways of solving the
problem.'' For example, he streamlined the check-in and reshelving of DVDs at
the library branch where he works.

The view of creativity as a practical skill that can be learned and applied in
daily life is a 180-degree flip from the thinking that it requires a little
magic: Throw yourself into a challenge, step back -- pause -- wait for
brilliance to spout.

The point of creative studies, says Roger L. Firestien, a Buffalo State
professor and author of several books on creativity, is to learn techniques ''to
make creativity happen instead of waiting for it to bubble up. A muse doesn't
have to hit you.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/education/edlife/creativity-becomes-an-academi
c-discipline.html

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CLASS NOTES: Students in creative studies at Buffalo State
posted what they had learned. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN BANNON FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


