                             1127 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On Saturday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 748 words


9 P.M. (Showtime) SILVER LININGS PLAYBOOK (2012) Pat Solatano (Bradley Cooper,
above), who has returned to the home of his parents (Jacki Weaver and Robert De
Niro) after eight months in a mental institution, following a violent crime,
tries to tackle the world -- and reclaim his estranged wife, Nikki, who took out
a restraining order against him -- through a physical and psychological regimen
he created while locked away. Then he meets Tiffany (Jennifer Lawrence), a
heartbreaker who persuades Pat that she can circumvent the law by passing a
letter from him to Nikki -- if only he'll enter a dance contest with her. Soon,
she is leading, and he is following. ''For all its high-flying zaniness, the
movie has the sting of life, and its humor feels dredged up from the same dark,
boggy place from which Samuel Beckett extracted his yuks,'' Manohla Dargis wrote
in The New York Times about this best picture Oscar nominee directed by David O.
Russell, which also earned nominations for Mr. Cooper, Ms. Weaver and Mr. De
Niro, and a win for Ms. Lawrence.

'' 'Silver Linings Playbook' is crammed with people talking and shouting and
weeping and also yielding to what are sometimes called boundary issues but which
here turn out to be the mad, loving scrambling of people finding and saving one
another,'' Ms. Dargis added. ''These are characters who get in one another's
faces and occasionally punch a loved one right in the kisser. They must go on,
they can't go on, but together they do.''

NOON (13) RICHARD HEFFNER'S OPEN MIND In an episode taped before the death of
the show's host on Dec. 17, Dr. Sandip Kapur, the chief of transplant surgery at
NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, discusses living-donor kidney
transplant surgery chains.

8 P.M. (TBS, TNT) THE 20TH ANNUAL SCREEN ACTORS GUILD AWARDS Performers honor
their peers in movies and television in this ceremony broadcast live from the
Shrine Exposition Center in Los Angeles. ''12 Years a Slave,'' ''American
Hustle,'' ''August: Osage County,'' ''Dallas Buyers Club'' and ''Lee Daniels'
The Butler'' will compete for outstanding performance by a cast in a motion
picture. Bruce Dern, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Tom Hanks, Matthew McConaughey and Forest
Whitaker are in the running for best actor; Cate Blanchett, Sandra Bullock, Judi
Dench, Meryl Streep and Emma Thompson are nominees for best actress. And Rita
Moreno will receive the 50th-annual lifetime achievement award. Red carpet
coverage leads in at 6 on E!

8 P.M. (Lifetime) FLOWERS IN THE ATTIC (2014) After the death of their father,
four children (two of whom are played by Mason Dye, seated above left, and
Kiernan Shipka) are persuaded by their mother (Heather Graham) to stay hidden in
the attic of their grandparents' mansion so she can reclaim the family fortune.
But as her attention is diverted by a new husband (Dylan Brice), the youngsters'
ruthless grandmother (Ellen Burstyn) subjects them to horrible treatment.

8 P.M. (HBO) OBLIVION (2013) Sixty years after a war between Earthlings and
aliens rendered the planet nearly uninhabitable, Jack Harper (Tom Cruise) and
his partner, Victoria Olsen (Andrea Riseborough), maintain the drones that
defend power stations while most other Earthlings have retreated to a space
station. And in two weeks, Jack and Victoria will join them. Then Jack goes to
the rescue of a downed spacecraft and recognizes the woman (Olga Kurylenko) who
haunted his dreams. ''No matter how hard Mr. Cruise squares his jaw or flings
his body over and against the scenery,'' Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times of
this second feature directed by Joseph Kosinski, '' 'Oblivion' never transcends
its inspirations to become anything other than a thin copy.''

9 P.M. (CUNY) AJAMI (2010) In this Oscar nominee for best foreign-language film,
the Israeli directors Scandar Copti and Yaron Shani weave five stories, set in a
multicultural neighborhood in Jaffa, rife with political context and communal
mistrust. ''There is no finger-pointing here, and no group hugging either,'' A.
O. Scott wrote in The Times. ''Instead there is a sharp sense of just how deep
and wide the schisms are, not just between Jews and Arabs but also between
Christians and Muslims, rich and poor, farmers and city dwellers, men and women,
young and old and so on.''

10 P.M. (Science) THE MOANING OF LIFE Karl Pilkington, a frequent collaborator
with Ricky Gervais, tries to come to terms with middle age by exploring how
other cultures do it. KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/18/arts/television/whats-on-saturday.html

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOJO WHILDEN/WEINSTEIN COMPANY
 JAMES DITTIGER/LIFETIME)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


