                             1164 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Drawn-Out Sepulchral Note, Then a Swirl of Hyperactivity

BYLINE: By ZACHARY WOOLFE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 496 words


You could barely hear the most memorable note in the pianist Christian
Zacharias's recital on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall.

It came in the first work on the program, Beethoven's Sonata No. 12 in A flat.
The third movement of that changeable work is a funeral march that provided a
model for the masterly one in that composer's ''Eroica'' Symphony just a couple
of years later.

The sonata's march ends with a solemn dotted rhythm in the left hand, sinking
down to a sepulchral A flat. There's a fermata on the final chord, signaling
that it is meant to be held longer than its written value. But on Thursday it
was almost unbearable, hanging in the air until it was a nearly inaudible
apparition, a ghostly drone.

The note was a haunting conclusion to a march that had begun in a mood
intentionally cool and official before turning tender and personal. The fury of
Mr. Zacharias's mourning changed by the end to something that felt more like
acceptance, though colored with a quiet restlessness that justified every second
of that closing A flat.

And after the tone had finally died away for good, Mr. Zacharias, who is also
active as a conductor, took scarcely a beat before racing into the swirling
hyperactivity of the fourth-movement Allegro. One led inexorably into the other.
There was a sense throughout his stimulating, elegant recital of breaking down
old barriers: between Andantes and Allegros, between Classicism and Romanticism.

Fewer than 40 years separate the earliest work Mr. Zacharias played (Beethoven's
Sonata No. 10 in G, from 1799) from the latest (Schumann's ''Kreisleriana,''
1838), and here you felt their proximity acutely. The nimble stir of the Sonata
No. 10 was a different, more unsettled experience than usual, with its
contracting and expanding tempos and phrases like incomplete sentences when
heard directly after the savage mood swings of ''Kreisleriana.''

His tone sometimes bell-like and sometimes creamy, Mr. Zacharias made those
storied mood swings feel more integrated than they often do, the transition from
grand celebration to intimate soliloquy less dizzying. The brassy, public
declarations were never pounded; Mr. Zacharias's sound seemed to get larger
rather than louder.

Many pianists are effective in these furious passages, but few have Mr.
Zacharias's lyrical gracefulness and subtle touch. The fourth of Schubert's six
''Moments musicaux'' glittered darkly; in the second, each triplet felt
individually considered.

Played with both energy and poise, Mr. Zacharias's encore, Scarlatti's Sonata in
G (K. 55), brought out all of the kaleidoscopic aspects of his playing. A
velvety muted note would be followed by an icicle-bright one. But here and
throughout this deeply satisfying evening, Mr. Zacharias played with an
emotional force that kept these from being simply essays in texture and color.

Christian Zacharias will repeat the program on Sunday in San Francisco at the
Miner Auditorium, SFJAZZ Center; sfperformances.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/15/arts/music/christian-zacharias-bridges-the-cla
ssical-and-romantic.html

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


