                             1119 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 11, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Advisers Sent to Help Somalia Fight The Shabab

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 378 words


WASHINGTON -- The Pentagon has sent a small team of uniformed military advisers
to Somalia, the first American troops assigned there since 1993, when 18
Americans were killed in the failed ''Black Hawk Down'' mission.

But in a reflection of the administration's caution in deploying United States
forces to the strife-torn nation, the presence is tiny, at least for now --
three advisers, a Defense Department official said on Friday.

The advisers were deployed to the Somali capital of Mogadishu last month to help
provide logistics, planning and communications assistance to Somali and other
African forces combating the Shabab, the Islamic militant group, according to
the official, who spoke anonymously to discuss the mission.

Shabab fighters carried out a bloody siege at a shopping mall in Nairobi, Kenya,
last September in which more than 60 men, women and children were killed.

''The U.S. has established a military coordination cell in Somalia to provide
planning and advisory support to the African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali
security forces to increase their capabilities and promote peace and security
throughout Somalia and the region,'' Col. Tom Davis, a spokesman for the
military's Africa Command, said in a statement on Friday in response to an
online report by The Washington Post.

The Obama administration has been edging closer toward reversing a policy in
place for decades that effectively bars American ''boots on the ground'' in
Somalia. In January 2013, the United States officially recognized a new federal
government in Somalia, re-establishing diplomatic ties for the first time in
decades. The State Department has not yet reopened an embassy in Mogadishu, but
officials from the American Embassy in Nairobi visit there frequently.

Gen. David Rodriguez, the head of the Africa Command, made an initial trip to
Mogadishu last summer. Last October, Amanda J. Dory, the Pentagon's top policy
official for Africa, told a Senate committee that the military would increase
its presence in Mogadishu ''in tandem with the State Department.''

The C.I.A. has long maintained a covert presence in the country, at times
financing its security services, and American Special Operations forces have
periodically conducted drone strikes or commando raids.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/11/world/africa/us-advisers-sent-to-help-somalia-
fight-the-shabab.html

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


