                             1136 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Federer on a Higher Level as Other Stars Fall

BYLINE: By GREG BISHOP

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Sports Desk; AUSTRALIAN OPEN; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1042 words


MELBOURNE, Australia -- All week at the Upset Open, the favorites have fallen as
if engaged in a game of superstar dominoes. Serena Williams toppled first. Then
Maria Sharapova. Then Novak Djokovic. Then Victoria Azarenka.

The trend continued Wednesday night, albeit with a twist. The latest lower seed
to undo a top-five player was not really an underdog, but rather Roger Federer,
perhaps the greatest player in tennis history.

Federer, seeded sixth, arrived at the Australian Open with a new coach, Stefan
Edberg, and a larger racket frame, and for five matches now he has continued to
turn back the clock. His 6-3, 6-4, 6-7 (6), 6-3 destruction of fourth-seeded
Andy Murray in Wednesday's quarterfinal was vintage Federer, circa 2004 or 2006
or 2009: a blend of sliced backhands and risks taken and hair flopped, with
notes of confidence and hints of movement best described as silky or refined.

Speaking of good old days now here again, Federer's latest victory produced yet
another meeting with his longtime rival Rafael Nadal. On Friday, they will play
for the 33rd time, their first match at a Grand Slam event since the semifinals
here in 2012.

Once it would be a given that they would arrive here, pitted against each other
deep into a Grand Slam event. But this time so many dots needed to be connected.
The draw needed to align with them in the same half. Federer needed to adjust to
the new coach and the new racket and overcome doubts about whether he could
still compete for major tournament titles. Nadal needed to knock off two
opponents while playing with a cherry-red blister taking up much of his left
palm.

Murray needed back surgery last year, which made him a less formidable foe.
Mostly, though, Federer got himself to this point. He dismissed Jo-Wilfried
Tsonga and Murray in succession because of the level at which he played, a level
between high and somewhere above that. On court after beating Murray, Federer
declined to compare the 2014 Fed to the Fed of ''my good years,'' but he did say
that his movement felt off last season. Maybe only by a little bit. But by
enough.

''You can still play,'' he said, ''but it's not quite the same.''

After surgery, Murray knew what Federer meant. Movement is the key in this era
of men's tennis -- the ability not only to chase shots but also to position
one's body to deliver them. That was more evident than ever as Federer and Nadal
resumed their perpetual tennis collision course.

Day 10 of the Australian Open belonged to the creative set, to the artists, to
the bold. It was not acceptable to stand deep in the court and trade monotonous
groundstrokes like some sort of baseline drone.

On Wednesday, players won with verve, with drop shots and lobs and chips, with
backhands sliced and then hammered, with the kinds of shots that deserved
multiple replays. The faster courts here certainly played into that, but so,
too, did the athletes who competed.

Agnieszka Radwanska, the fifth seed in women's singles, added Azarenka, the
two-time defending champion, to the upset list by turning Azarenka's afternoon
into one long run. On one point, Radwanska flicked her wrist to catch a lob on
the backhand side, recovered and put away a volley. On another, she kissed a
drop shot inches over the net and then lobbed the next shot near the baseline's
edge. It was puppeteer tennis, same as with the men.

Then there was Nadal, who lassoed and punched and roared his way past Grigor
Dimitrov into the semifinals, victory obtained in four tight sets, 3-6, 7-6 (3),
7-6 (7), 6-2. With that, he inched closer toward becoming the first man in the
Open era to win each Grand Slam tournament twice.

Dimitrov, a 22-year-old Bulgarian, is considered a future star, a future
Federer, because of his one-handed backhand and graceful movement. His loss to
Nadal on Wednesday felt like the start of something rather than the end.
Dimitrov dropped a tear or two at his news conference -- emotion sure to draw
him more comparisons to Federer, never one short on sentiment.

What a tournament: Federer with the new racket and new coach, Murray on court
after the operation, fallen stars and wild weather that swung from four days of
extreme heat to lightning and rain to sun again. Fans were forced to bring
jackets, sunscreen and zero preconceptions about who might win.

Of the top five seeds in men's and women's singles, only three remain for the
semifinals. Eighth-seeded Stanislas Wawrinka, who upended No. 2 Novak Djokovic,
will face No. 7 Tomas Berdych in the other men's semifinal Thursday night.

Federer's tennis spoke loudest Wednesday. He almost finished off Murray an hour
earlier. He served for the third set, having been broken only once in this
tournament and five times this year. But Murray broke him, and the set went to a
tiebreaker, in which Murray saved two match points.

In the second game of the fourth set, with Murray serving, Federer reached break
point six times. Murray saved them all, and that is how the remainder of the
night unfolded, with Federer relentless, so close, and Murray on a survival
mission.

Finally, on Federer's 10th break chance in the fourth set, he converted. He hit
a drop shot that Murray chased and reached, but that took Murray out of position
as Federer sailed an easy backhand down the line. Again, Federer served for the
set, but this time, he held.

''I thought he played great tennis,'' Murray said. ''I thought he served
especially well.''

Immediately, the focus turned to Nadal. He was asked about Federer in his news
conference before Federer even played.

Nadal had coasted in the fourth set despite a blister on his hand that required
constant attention. After his fourth-round match, he held the hand up in his
news conference, and the blister looked about the size of a quarter and was
bright red. Following the third set Wednesday, trainers reapplied a wrap to the
blister, and as they did, Nadal's legs shook.

Later, Nadal said the blister hurt most when he served. Sometimes, he felt as if
he would lose his grip on the racket. Someone asked Federer about that. He
laughed and said he would see Friday.

So here they are, again. Everything, for Federer, is different, except for his
opponent. In this tournament of upsets, he is hoping for one more.

Australian Open

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/23/sports/tennis/at-australian-open-young-players
-show-their-promise-against-the-stars.html

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Roger Federer, seeded sixth, after winning his quarterfinal
against Andy Murray on Wednesday. He will play Rafael Nadal on Friday.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID CROSLING/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (B11)
 Rafael Nadal, above, and Roger Federer will be playing their first match at a
Grand Slam event since the 2012 semifinals in Melbourne. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SCOTT
BARBOUR/GETTY IMAGES) (B14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


