                             1129 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Bit of Bush and bin Laden

BYLINE: By ANDY WEBSTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 413 words


In ''BigMouth,'' his one-man show in the Under the Radar Festival, the Belgian
stage veteran Valentijn Dhaenens takes the long view. Centuries long: In this
spare, thought-provoking production, which he directed, Mr. Dhaenens quotes
speeches from luminaries across millenniums. Some, like Pericles and George S.
Patton, were military commanders; others, like Ronald Reagan and King Baudouin I
of Belgium, national rulers; and still others, like Socrates and the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., philosophical leaders. Several, like Nicola Sacco and
Ann Coulter, could be called political radicals.

Between characters, the lean Mr. Dhaenens, clad in a conservative suit and tie,
manifests a charming, understated, almost boyish bearing. He stands behind a
long table on which sit assorted microphones, which he moves among as he shifts
identities.

When he's not speaking English, a title screen overhead translates. Sometimes
electronic voice treatments help with a portrait, or simulate a crowd, or create
a didgeridoo-like drone; hand drumming on the table morphs into a rhythmic loop.
(Jeroen Wuyts designed the sound and minimal lighting.)

The sentiments are sharply juxtaposed. A speech by Joseph Goebbels, alternating
with macho rhetoric by Patton, underscores commonalities in their pleas for
wartime sacrifice. In 1990, a haughty King Baudouin cannot accept abortion,
while fiery oratory from Patrice Lumumba, who led Congo to independence from
Belgium in 1960, appears to refute such pious posturing. Osama bin Laden's
militant zeal seems to mirror George W. Bush's.

Mr. Dhaenens takes particular relish in gently lampooning Frank Vanhecke, a
present-day nationalist Belgian official of the European Union who, with a
contrived aw-shucks demeanor, speaks contemptuously of Europe's Muslim
population. (A reference to Brussels as ''Europe's capital'' was met with
chuckles from the audience, as Mr. Dhaenens apparently anticipated.)

When speeches are interrupted with a cappella strains of songs (Nirvana's
''Smells Like Teen Spirit,'' or ''America,'' from ''West Side Story''), a common
humanity, apart from podiums and halls of power, seeps in. When the electronics
appear to sputter and short-circuit, Mr. Dhaenens takes a seat in the audience,
assuming a place among the citizens, the spectators, the witnesses to history.

''BigMouth'' continues through Saturday at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette
Street, at Astor Place, East Village; 212-967-7555, undertheradarfestival.com.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/18/theater/bigmouth-lets-talkers-across-time-have
-their-say.html

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


