                             1125 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unkempt yet Profound, a Cult Band Returns for More Interpretation

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 478 words


JERSEY CITY -- After a 15-year absence, the reunited Neutral Milk Hotel could
have satisfied its fans at the Loew's Jersey Theater here on Tuesday night with
a rote run-through of the music it recorded in the 1990s. But the band did more
than that: It revved up and magnified all the impulses that collide in Jeff
Mangum's songs, which have continued to collect and baffle fans since Neutral
Milk Hotel released its last studio album, ''In the Aeroplane Over the Sea,'' in
1998. The band used to play clubs; now it is headlining sold-out theaters.

Neutral Milk Hotel's music had all the ingredients for the spiraling cult
reputation it drew. It stayed unkempt enough to deter most casual listeners and
profound enough to reward its serious fans.

Mr. Mangum's songs are musically blunt -- usually a few hard-strummed chords
driving the ornery holler of his voice -- but subject to metamorphosis. They can
be enfolded in brass chorales, walloped by punk drumbeats, blasted with
distortion or haloed by sustained lines played (by Julian Koster) on a musical
saw.

And the lyrics that Mr. Mangum rattles off beg for interpretation: They ponder
sex, God, family, war, pity, rage, yearning, disgust, emptiness and the
possibility of love. They are also, often, among the best run-on sentences in
rock songwriting.

Facing an audience that long ago memorized its recordings, Neutral Milk Hotel
kept the songs largely recognizable. But with an onstage lineup that could
expand to seven -- coming and going as they were needed, occasionally leaving
Mr. Mangum to strum alone -- the band members fleshed out their implications.
The punk got rowdier; the brass (with up to three horns) grew richer. ''Ferris
Wheel on Fire'' was fully realized as a power-chorded chantey, and ''Ruby
Bulbs,'' with a deep horn-section drone and eruptive cymbal crashes, traded the
low-fi noise of the studio version for the gravity of a Tibetan Buddhist
ceremony.

Through it all, Mr. Mangum sang his enigmas with clarity and conviction, and the
band took nothing for granted, for a show where foot-stomping and pondering were
fully compatible.

Mr. Mangum was a founder of Elephant 6, a 1990s record label and musicians'
collective that was fond of do-it-yourself sound and psychedelic whimsy. Elf
Power, another Elephant 6 band, opened the show with its literate,
straightforward folk-rock songs.

Strumming an electric, 12-string guitar, Andrew Rieger often sang about
aimlessness and lack of purpose -- ''Was it all a useless waste of time?'' he
wondered in ''Strange Designs.'' The paradox was that unlike Neutral Milk Hotel,
Elf Power has persisted through the 2000s.

Neutral Milk Hotel has sold-out shows at the Capitol Theater in Port Chester,
N.Y., on Wednesday; at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Jan. 23 to 25; and Webster
Hall in Manhattan, Jan. 27 and 28; tickets may be available through resellers.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/16/arts/music/reunited-neutral-milk-hotel-plays-i
n-jersey-city.html

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Neutral Milk Hotel: Jeff Mangum and the rest of this reunited
band performed Tuesday at Loew's Jersey Theater in Jersey City.

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


