                             1175 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sounds for the Start of the Day

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF, JON PARELES and JON CARAMANICA

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; NEW MUSIC; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1352 words


On first listening to Beck's placid, self-possessed 12th studio album, ''Morning
Phase,'' I did not look him up on Wikipedia to see if he'd broken up with his
wife. I was not fully functional: The record's beauty approaches slowly, floats,
surrounds and shuts off external awareness in the brain stem.

But I did look him up eventually -- he hadn't -- and the reason was that it
sounds like ''Sea Change,'' his 2002 album that was recorded after a breakup. On
''Morning Phase'' (Capitol), you hear slow tempos, reverb, acoustic guitar at
the front, a string section playing consonant long tones, sprouts of steel
guitar and banjo, modest and contained drumming. (Morning drumming, you could
call it.) Phaser pedal effects wah-wah through some of the songs. Lyrics about
universal aloneness drift in the broadest sense, for good or ill: ''These are
the words we use to say goodbye.'' ''Can we start it all over again?'' ''You
don't have to let it go away.'' ''The sound of your own voice/calling no one.''
''I-so-la-tion.''

After you notice that it sounds somewhat like ''Sea Change,'' you may notice
details that remind you of other people's records -- so many that you can start
to think that ''Morning Phase'' has nothing at the center. How could a record so
good have nothing at the center? Or, to turn the question around: How can
something with so many borrowed parts achieve a distinct unity and even, if you
like, a soul?

The string arrangements on ''Sea Change'' are by Beck's father, David Campbell,
who wrote string arrangements on similar tumbleweed-with-an-inner-life records
in the 1970s: Jimmie Spheeris's ''Isle of View''; Valerie Carter's ''Just a
Stone's Throw Away.'' Once you open that door, you have to open others, too.

Where do these songs come from, down to the mix, the chord changes, the
dynamics? Simon and Garfunkel's ''Sound of Silence,'' a morning record if there
ever was one? David Crosby's ''Laughing''? The Rolling Stones' ''Moonlight
Mile''? Nick Drake's album ''Bryter Later'' (for its morning drumming by Dave
Mattacks, and its string arrangements by Robert Kirby)? Bjork's ''Joga'' (for
the idea of a pop ballad sung as a romantic dirge, as is this album's ''Wave,''
over a short cycle of orchestral chords in a minor key)?

Other elements on ''Morning Phase'' are not so much traceable to particular
sources -- though you might swear they are -- as they are just useful
ingredients: major-to minor transitions, contrary motion in vocal harmonies,
metrical changes between three-beat and four-beat patterns, open guitar tunings.

But let's get back to slow tempos and reverb. Time and space. That's where
''Morning Phase'' really succeeds, beyond the material itself, such that Beck
could be writing two-chord drones, or just writing his own lyrics to other
people's compositions. These aren't great songs, if great means original, or
complex, or ready to be reinterpreted. It doesn't matter.

What matters is that these songs are a crucial and unfashionable half-turn
slower than they need to be, and stay that way. The rhythm section fills them
out, and Beck finds a way to sing in them, draping his groggy lead voice over
the words, echoing up the vocal harmonies for backgrounds and choruses. He's
found the right sound for his disposition and, he resonates like crazy with that
sound. It's as if he's found a way to sit right in the saddle, and the horse
takes care of itself. BEN RATLIFF

ST. VINCENT

''St. Vincent''

(Loma Vista/Republic)

St. Vincent gets funky -- in an art-rock way -- on ''St. Vincent,'' the fourth
album by the songwriter, singer and guitarist Annie Clark. Recording as St.
Vincent, Ms. Clark has from the beginning hurled opposites at one another to
create her songs: dulcet and ferocious, meticulous and deranged, clear and
oblique, calm and manic.

Her lyrics are often character studies, while her music builds patterns of
rhythm and riff, often in counterpoint to her vocal lines. She can sing with
airy ease, in lofty choruses, with confrontational tension or with operatic
hysteria. And at any moment, she might ambush her own elegant structures with
bursts of speedy, noisy guitar. St. Vincent's albums have been show-offy in the
best way: Lean or orchestral, intricate or blunt, they place each song in its
own surreal domain.

On St. Vincent's 2011 album, ''Strange Mercy,'' the settings were often plush
and billowy. But ''St. Vincent'' veers the other way: toward the brittle, the
shallow and the distorted, while the beat gets earthier. With the producer John
Congleton, Ms. Clark creates an unpretty backdrop for some of her most alluring
melodies.

The album announces its austere palette from the start with ''Rattlesnake'':
just a bass line played on an unidentifiable, fuzz-edged instrument, Ms. Clark's
exposed voice and, soon, a funk beat punctuated by layered guitar chords. It's a
song about a back-to-nature desert idyll gone badly wrong as a rattlesnake
chases her increasingly panicky voice -- ''sweating sweating rattle behind me''
-- out of its territory.

''St. Vincent'' harks back to the analog era. There's a mini-Moog on every
track, and when Ms. Clark stacks up her guitar parts in songs like ''Birth in
Reverse'' and ''Regret,'' they revisit the squashed sound of glam-rock and
Queen. Yet she writes about the digital era. In ''Digital Witness,'' she flings
herself into the social-media universe of constant display: ''If I can't show it
if you can't see me/What's the point of doing anything?''

Ms. Clark, who plays at Terminal 5 on Wednesday, has always kept listeners
guessing about what's personal and what's invented. But the second half of the
album may be newly open: in ''I Prefer Your Love,'' a hovering ballad full of
gratitude for a mother's love; in ''Regret,'' which swerves between post-breakup
loneliness and bravado; and in ''Every Tear Disappears'' and ''Severed Crossed
Fingers,'' two different tributes -- one blippy and staccato, one full and
stately -- to the healing power of love. Her openly artificial, deliberately
restricted sound might be one way of insisting that she's still levelheaded. JON
PARELES

DIERKS BENTLEY

''Riser'' (Capitol Nashville)

Country music's inexorable turn to the lunk has left Dierks Bentley in a pickle.
For about a decade, he was the either the thinking man's dope or the mindless
dope's thinker, a gentle soul with a mournful voice who never pushed too hard.
He could be reflective, and he could be rowdy, but never too much of either, and
therefore never too much of anything.

But the pendulum has swung forcefully past Mr. Bentley in recent years. Boors
are the new norm. As that was happening Mr. Bentley stepped back, first with a
bluegrass-heavy album and then one that tried to play along (see ''5-1-5-0,'' as
fun a man-child anthem as country has had in the last couple of years).

''Riser,'' which is Mr. Bentley's seventh album, is partly a rejection of his
bro birthright, not just a step away from modern trends, but toward the calm
purpose of Mr. Bentley's early albums. ''Say You Do'' is worthy melancholy,
about talking an ex into a last hurrah. ''Riser'' has real moments of grit. The
lonesome ''Bourbon in Kentucky'' is elegant, and features elegiac harmony vocals
from Kacey Musgraves.

Ms. Musgraves isn't an arbitrary choice. It's a nod from Mr. Bentley to
country's new wave of dissidents. He's deliberate in his choice of songwriters,
including Shane McAnally and Josh Kear, who provide some of the better songs on
this hit-or-miss album.

But only so much resistance can be airlifted in. Mr. Bentley has a monochromatic
voice and a firm idea about song pacing that make his funny songs about going on
a honeymoon alone and making the best of it (''Drunk on a Plane'') just as
wistful as the ones about death (''Here on Earth'') and the ones about pretty
girls (''Pretty Girls'').

That last one, especially, is neutered. For Mr. Bentley, that's probably the
right decision. But put the same song in the mouth of, say, Luke Bryan, and it
wouldn't be deep or meaningful, but it would thump something mighty. Mr. Bentley
would never thump -- his gift and his curse. JON CARAMANICA

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/25/arts/music/becks-new-album-is-morning-phase.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Beck, seen performing at the Governors Ball Music Festival in
2012, has just released his 12th studio album, ''Morning Phase'' (Capitol). (C1)

 The singer-songwriter Annie Clark performs as St. Vincent.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHAD
BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


