                             1174 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suicide Bomber in Pakistan Strikes Near Iran's Consulate

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 336 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- A suicide bomber detonated near the residence of the
Iranian consul general in Peshawar on Monday, killing two security personnel and
wounding 11 others, a security official said.

The official said that no one inside the residence or the nearby Iranian
Consulate General had been hurt.

The city's top police official, Ijaz Khan, said that the bomber, because of
heavy security outside the consulate and the adjacent residence, turned toward a
nearby tent camp for forces of the Pakistani Frontier Constabulary who had been
deployed to help protect the Iranian facilities.

''The bomber alighted from his car and started moving toward the tents of the
Frontier Constabulary,'' Mr. Khan said. ''The constabulary warned him to stop
and fired at him. In the meantime, he blew himself up, killing one of the men on
the spot; the other succumbed to his injuries later.''

A doctor at a nearby hospital said that nine people had been brought there for
treatment of injuries.

So far no militant group has come forward to claim responsibility, but the
bombing on Monday was the third militant attack this month in Peshawar, the
provincial capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa.

Attacks by the Pakistani Taliban in general have stepped up since the collapse
of an effort to start peace talks between the Pakistani government and the
Taliban, and the Pakistani military has responded with a new campaign of
airstrikes on militant havens.

In the North Waziristan tribal region, a senior Pakistani Taliban commander and
three of his aides were killed when gunmen opened fire on their vehicle on
Monday. The commander, Asmatullah Shaheen Bhittani, was appointed an interim
leader of the Pakistani Taliban in 2013 after Hakimullah Mehsud was killed in an
American drone strike.

There was no claim of responsibility for the attack, and some analysts
speculated that intertribal rivalries may have been a factor. Mr. Bhittani had
close ties with the Mehsud tribe, which has generally provided leadership of the
Taliban militants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/25/world/asia/pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


