                             1162 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rand Paul Sues Over Phone Program

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 565 words


WASHINGTON -- Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, on Wednesday filed a
lawsuit against President Obama and the leaders of several intelligence
agencies. The suit challenges as unconstitutional the National Security Agency's
once-secret program that is collecting bulk records about Americans' phone
calls.

Mr. Paul, who had announced his intention to file the lawsuit in early January,
joins an increasingly crowded set of plaintiffs, with several similar cases
already pending.

But because of Mr. Paul's status as a rising star of the Tea Party faction of
the Republican Party -- one who staged a nearly 13-hour filibuster on the floor
of the Senate in March raising concerns about the rules governing ''targeted
killings'' using drone strikes -- his lawsuit may attract particular attention.

''Today we ask the question for every phone user in America: can a single
warrant allow the government to collect all your records, all the time?'' Mr.
Paul said in a statement. ''I don't think so.''

FreedomWorks, the conservative and libertarian advocacy group, is listed as a
co-plaintiff in the lawsuit. The lead lawyer is Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the
former attorney general of Virginia. Bruce Fein, a former Reagan administration
attorney, is also among the lawyerson the case.

The Obama administration has defended the program as lawful, noting that 15
judges on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court have authorized it for
90-day intervals dating back to 2006. A 1979 Supreme Court ruling held that
''metadata'' -- records showing that calls took place, but not their content --
is not protected by the Fourth Amendment.

''We remain confident that the program is legal, as at least 15 judges have
previously found,'' Peter Carr, a Justice Department spokesman, said on
Wednesday.

The Bush administration began the bulk call records program in 2001 based on a
secret claim of presidential power, and it operated outside of any statutory or
judicial framework until the court in 2006 granted a Justice Department motion
to issue orders to phone companies for the records. The Justice Department
motion was based on the argument that a provision of the Patriot Act that allows
the F.B.I. to collect business records deemed relevant to an investigation could
allow the N.S.A. to collect records in bulk.

Mr. Paul filed his lawsuit in the Federal District Court for the District of
Columbia. In December, Judge Richard J. Leon of that court ruled in a similar
lawsuit brought by Larry Klayman, a conservative legal activist, that the
program probably violates the Fourth Amendment because its expansive scope makes
it different from case considered by the Supreme Court in 1979. The Justice
Department has appealed the decision.

In a separate case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union in the Southern
District of New York, Judge William H. Pauley III in December concluded that the
program is legal and complies with the Fourth Amendment. The A.C.L.U. has
appealed that ruling.

There are also similar cases in the Northern District of California and the
District of Idaho that are raising similar claims, including litigation in
California that dates back to earlier revelations during the Bush administration
era about domestic surveillance programs and has been stalled in disputes over
state secrets.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/13/us/politics/rand-paul-files-lawsuit-over-nsa-c
all-surveillance.html

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


