                             1156 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2014 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Wheelies: The Carrot and Stick Edition

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN PRESTON

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 491 words


A roundup of motoring news from the web:

â-  Mercedes-Benz saw deliveries of its compact cars rise 44 percent and
deliveries of its flagship S-Class rise 43 percent in the fourth quarter of
2013. Strong sales have meant that demand has overtaken supply, and accordingly,
the automaker says it will curtail sales incentives and raise prices on some
models. (Automotive News, subscription required)

â-  One of the toughest things about off-road driving is that it is often
difficult to see what obstacles lie ahead. Renault tackled this problem with a
companion drone for its Kwid concept, a scissor-door diminutive off-roader aimed
at grabbing the attention of India's younger buyers. (Wired)

â-  Senator Jay Rockefeller, a West Virginia Democrat, called for auto
manufacturers to set in-car technology standards more quickly to combat what he
sees as a growing problem: technology-related distraction among drivers. Senator
Rockefeller said that although infotainment systems had, in some ways, made
driving better, too much emphasis had been placed on smartphone connectivity and
distracting social media functions that lead to traffic accidents. (Bloomberg)

â-  A number of new cars were introduced this week at the Auto Expo, near Delhi,
India, with subcompact cars a primary focus. Among the small cars unveiled at
the show were the Maruti Suzuki Celerio, the Mahindra Halo concept E.V., the Gio
Explorer hatchback, which is really more of a golf cart, the Skoda Yeti, the
Ford Figo concept and the Honda Amaze. (CNN)

â-  About 150 Chinese companies do business in Saudi Arabia, but China is
exploring the possibility of manufacturing cars there to help meet growing
demand. Chinese automakers aren't the only ones considering opening assembly
plants in Saudi Arabia. General Motors, Ford and Chrysler are also studying the
feasibility of production there. (Al Arabiya)

â-  Fisker Automotive, the bankrupt manufacturer of luxury plug-in hybrids, lies
in ruins. But two Chinese-backed companies are wrangling over the remains in
federal court in the United States. To the winner goes nearly 20 patents and
possible entry into Chinese and American markets. A federal judge set Wednesday
as the date the matter would be settled. (Newsday)

â-  Joe Hinrichs, president of the Americas for Ford Motor Company, has gone on
record with strong words concerning Japanese automakers and currency
manipulation. Honing in on Toyota specifically, Mr. Hinrichs criticized Akio
Toyoda, chief executive of Toyota, for supporting Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe's call for a weaker currency, which Mr. Hinrichs said gives Japanese
automakers an unfair price advantage. (Automotive News, subscription required)

â-  Lapicida, a stone company in England, has created a marble version of the
1963 Ferrari 250 GTO. The stone car is about 4 feet long and costs about
$50,000. To make the marble GTO, the stonecutter made a laser scan of one of the
actual cars. (Lapicida)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/08/automobiles/wheelies-the-carrot-and-stick-edit
ion.html

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


