                             1178 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shrugging Off Past Setbacks, Obama Plans Personal Role in Middle East Peace Bid

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER; Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Ramallah,
West Bank.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1083 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama, after avoiding a hands-on role in Middle East
peacemaking since the setbacks of his first term, plans to plunge back into the
effort, his advisers said this week, starting with an urgent appeal to Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel.

When he welcomes Mr. Netanyahu to the White House on Monday, these officials
said, Mr. Obama will press him to agree to a framework for a conclusive round of
Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations that is being drafted by Secretary of
State John Kerry.

Later in March, Mr. Obama is likely to meet with the Palestinian president,
Mahmoud Abbas, to make the same pitch. The goal, officials said, is to announce
the framework, a kind of road map for further talks, by the end of April, the
nine-month deadline that Mr. Kerry set last summer for a final peace deal
between Israel and the Palestinians.

For Mr. Obama, the decision to thrust himself into the talks is fraught with
risk. He made Middle East diplomacy a centerpiece of his first term, bringing
Israelis and Palestinians together at the White House in September 2010 for
face-to-face talks, only to watch those negotiations collapse three months later
in acrimony.

Since his re-election, Mr. Obama has left the Israeli-Palestinian issue almost
entirely to Mr. Kerry, who has made the process a consuming priority, making
nearly a dozen trips to the region and holding countless meetings with Mr.
Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas in an attempt to bridge gaps that have separated the two
sides for more than three decades.

''Now is a very timely opportunity for him to get involved,'' a senior official
said of Mr. Obama, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the
delicacy of the issue. If the two sides agree to the framework, which would set
out general terms on issues like Israel's security and the borders of a future
Palestinian state, the negotiations could be extended, with a new target of
completing a treaty by the end of 2014.

Administration officials said Mr. Obama never lost interest in the diplomatic
effort, pointing to an impassioned speech he gave in Jerusalem last March. But
after his failed effort in 2010, and the failure of a follow-up push in May
2011, Mr. Obama's relationship with Mr. Netanyahu soured, and other issues, like
Iran's nuclear program, pushed peacemaking aside. With his own re-election bid
nearing, he showed little appetite for expending further political capital on
the issue.

The challenge for the White House has been to redeploy the president only when
it is believed he can make a critical difference. With Mr. Kerry's self-imposed
deadline nearing, and with little indication that Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas
have resolved key differences, that moment is now, the officials said. ''The
president wouldn't want to run any risk that it was the lack of his involvement
that would make the difference between success and failure,'' a senior official
said.

It is far from clear, however, that Mr. Obama can pull off what has so far
eluded his secretary of state -- not to mention several of his Oval Office
predecessors. While Mr. Kerry and his special envoy, Martin S. Indyk, have held
intensive meetings with Israelis and Palestinians in recent days, the two sides
have not met face to face for weeks. That suggests, analysts say, that there has
been scant progress in closing some of the core differences, like the status of
Jerusalem or the contours of a new Palestinian state. It is difficult to know
the exact status of the talks because the participants have largely kept a
promise not to air the details publicly.

Skeptics say Mr. Kerry's decision to opt for a framework is itself a sort of
concession -- or at best, a way to buy time. Some worry that if Mr. Obama puts
his prestige on the line to coax approval for an interim step, he will have less
leverage to push through a final deal.

Administration officials said the framework will cover all the major
final-status issues, though Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas will be able to express
reservations about individual provisions, so long, an official said, ''as they
don't vitiate the framework.''

American officials trying to sell the framework to both sides have shared some
details with Jewish groups. The document foresees the creation of a security
zone along the Jordan River that would be fortified with high-tech fences,
electronic sensors and unmanned drones, to protect Israel from attacks. But it
will not deal specifically with the status of Jerusalem, claimed as a capital by
both Israelis and Palestinians.

''Kerry is running into much heavier water on the substance,'' said Aaron David
Miller, a former Middle East negotiator who is a senior fellow at the Woodrow
Wilson International Center for Scholars. ''Either he feels the need, or they
do, to deploy the president.''

On one level, Mr. Miller said, the president's involvement is a promising sign,
''because it shows he is more risk-ready.'' On another, he said, it underscores
the hurdles to even a ''generalized framework,'' which he said raised the
question, ''What is it going to take to get to a comprehensive deal if the
president has to do heavy lifting?''

By re-engaging, Mr. Obama may deflect some of the blows his secretary of state
has taken lately. When Mr. Kerry warned last month that if Israel did not
resolve the Palestinian issue, it would fuel an anti-Israel boycott, he was
criticized by several Israeli officials, who said Israel would never negotiate
under pressure. Israel's defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, was quoted by an
Israeli newspaper as saying that Mr. Kerry was driven by ''misplaced obsession
and messianic fervor'' in his quest for a peace accord. Mr. Yaalon later
apologized for the remarks.

Mr. Kerry has met with skepticism from Palestinians as well. While he was
meeting with Mr. Abbas last week in Paris, another senior Palestinian official,
Hanan Ashrawi, offered a bleak assessment of his efforts to reporters in the
West Bank city of Ramallah.

A framework that allowed each side to voice reservations, she said, would be
''self-negating,'' adding, ''It will be a nondocument.'' Any document not based
firmly on international law, she said, ''will become a box of chocolates: You
can pick and choose what you want.''

Ms. Ashrawi did not say the Palestinian Authority would actually reject the
framework, if it came to that. But she asked: ''Why have it? Is it just to
maintain a semblance of progress? Is it meant to buy more time? Or is it not to
admit we have failed?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/27/world/middleeast/shrugging-off-past-setbacks-o
bama-plans-personal-role-in-middle-east-peace-bid.html

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


