                             1166 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 18, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bravado and Longing

BYLINE: By JON PARELES and BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; NEW MUSIC; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 739 words


SABINA

''Toujours''

(Bar/None)

Sabina Sciubba, the lead singer for Brazilian Girls, sets aside her last name
and switches production style but not persona on her solo debut album,
''Toujours.'' She's still the nonchalant, elusive, sophisticated and resolutely
hedonistic figure she plays in Brazilian Girls songs. And Sabina, who was born
in Rome to a German mother and an Italian father, still switches among the
multiple languages of her upbringing -- Italian, German, French, English -- in
not quite simultaneous translations.

But on ''Toujours,'' she often trades Brazilian Girls' international party
beats, electronics and retro lounge orchestrations for music that looks toward
garage rock and new wave, keeping the sound leaner.

Sabina produced the album with Frederik Rubens, who's also Brazilian Girls'
producer (and the bassist on most of the new songs). But now her own electric
guitar is at the center of the arrangements, often with just a simple picked
arpeggio or a few succinct chords. ''I will let you have me,'' she offers in ''I
Won't Let You Break Me,'' a peppy three-chord rocker that connects the Velvet
Underground and Talking Heads, '' 'cause you're the luckiest man in Europe/and
I'm your undisputed queen.''

She's charming when she shows her wry bravado, as she does in ''Viva L'Amour,''
a cowbell-thumping rocker that begins, ''Asked a man for a light, and he caught
on fire,'' or the album's title song, in which she jabs at an electric organ
over a Latin beat and distorted guitars as she insists, ''We might as well be
happy.''

But some of Sabina's songs have a more enigmatic side, an undercurrent of
restlessness and displacement. ''Mystery River'' sets up a breezy, hand-clapping
7/4 beat and mariachi trumpets, but Sabina oscillates between ''I've got to get
going back to my love'' and ''Nothing can stop me.'' In ''Non Mi Aspettare,''
amid glimmering loops of guitars and woodwinds, Sabina urges someone not to wait
up because she may not return.

She closes the album with ''Going Home,'' an eerie waltz that's not as certain
as its title might seem; it ends as she wonders, ''Ooh, where are you now?/Ooh,
where am I now?'' Behind the peregrinations, there's longing. JON PARELES

NEW BUMS

''Voices in a Rented Room''

(Drag City)

New Bums are two singer-guitarists: Ben Chasny of Six Organs of Admittance and
Donovan Quinn of the Skygreen Leopards, who both understand a continuum between
rough dissonance and pastoral, fingerpicked, clear-minded mellowness. They know
a lot, and each is used to making music that sounds like private recordings from
the early 1970s unearthed from a dead man's storage unit.

But, as a pair, there is something very now about them, and that is a kind of
perverse, end-of-the-road cultural fatigue. They want to show you how tired they
are.

You may need provisions and a mind-body regimen to endure ''Voices in a Rented
Room,'' their first collaborative album. Caffeine, at the very least; fresh
fruit; exercise; math problems. Their aesthetic, their whole deal, is textured
and untidy: That's what comes naturally to them. But the record keeps feeling as
if it might fall apart.

Sometimes, these are acoustic folk songs, no more, no less. ''Pigeon Town,''
with harmonica at the end, could be blurry acoustic Springsteen, and ''Burned''
coheres around a good old drone in D. Here and there, you get more: a spare drum
beat, an amplifier rumble, a burst of electric guitar. (Mr. Chasny can be a
thrilling guitarist, at times; his sliding, smoky electric-guitar solo, in a T.
Rex-like song with an unpublishable title -- the tautest four minutes on the
album, even as the tempo slackens and warps -- isn't his best, but it still
feels like rain during a drought.)

Both men put tender wheeze and murmur into their voices, but sing in unison or
octaves as a default mode, which grows dull almost instantly. The acoustic
guitars have been recorded closely and well, but Mr. Chasny's single-note
soloing, up on the neck, wilts from lack of forethought: You want to run a red
pencil through half of it.

Worst of all, they rustle together a good song concept only to waste it. ''Your
Girlfriend Might Be a Cop'': The eye falls on that title and doesn't want to
leave. The lyrics make it halfway there. (''She looks at me like a thief/like
she knows all my crimes and can bust me any time.'')

But the song needs more form than the five minutes it seems to have taken to
make it. No, four. BEN RATLIFF

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/18/arts/music/new-albums-by-sabina-sciubba-and-ne
w-bums.html

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTO (C1)
 Donovan Quinn, left, and Ben Chasny of New Bums are releasing their first
collaborative album, ''Voices in a Rented Room.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON QUEVER)
(C2)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


