                             1182 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2014 Saturday
                        The International New York Times

The Record of Israel's Universities

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg.

LENGTH: 598 words


Regarding ''Breakfast before the MOOC'' (Feb. 20): Thomas L. Friedman strikes a
resonant chord in describing the impact and potential of Prof. Hossam Haick's
open online course on nanotechnology from Israel's Technion. Indeed, several
Israeli institutions are sharing knowledge with the world through Coursera
online learning. In fields ranging from nanoscience to brain science, these
courses exemplify how Israel's top institutions are contributing to solutions --
not problems -- in the Middle East. Israeli academic institutions lead the way
in developing cross-cultural research and academic cooperation within the
country and around the Middle East. Israel's universities -- educating Jews,
Muslims, Christians and Druze side by side -- have a proven record of respect
and coexistence among all communities in the region.

Mr. Friedman made an important point when rejecting the simplistic and
destructive efforts of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement, which
seeks to ostracize Israel's multicultural universities and research institutes.
The Israeli academic community remains committed to building bridges to peace
and to creating a more hopeful future for all the peoples of the Middle East.

Peter Willner, New York

The writer is the national executive director of American Friends of The Hebrew
University.

In his enthusiasm for the Technion, Mr. Friedman omits to mention the Israeli
university's record of complicity in the abuse of Palestinian human rights.
Technion scientists, for example, developed a remote-controlled bulldozer used
to demolish Palestinian families' homes, and the institution enjoys close ties
with the military, as well as with companies like Elbit Systems, whose drones
are used to kill Palestinians in Gaza. Mr. Friedman also criticizes those who
''treat Israel as if it is only the sum of how it deals with the West Bank.''
Leaving aside what he omits -- Gaza, expelled refugees, institutionalized racism
-- it is instructive that Mr. Friedman thinks anything could balance out the
decades-long colonial occupation.

Ben White, Cambridge, England

A global boost for local philanthropy

Regarding ''Generosity amid want'' (Feb. 14): Bina Shah's opinion article
probably surprised many with the scale of Pakistan's private philanthropy and
its culture of ''everyday humanitarianism.'' I appreciated her mention of the
Aga Khan Foundation's initiatives and the Pakistan Center for Philanthropy. We
at the Aga Khan Foundation have witnessed this tradition of local philanthropy
in Pakistan and across the developing world. Our foundation has supported the
Pakistan Center for Philanthropy in its efforts to provide the kind of
certification and transparency that Ms. Shah describes. We agree that harnessing
the creative energies of community philanthropists holds great promise both for
social development and for reducing dependence.

But making this movement grow is a challenge. Fortunately, an international
effort is emerging. A Global Alliance for Community Philanthropy, which the Aga
Khan Foundation is pleased to support along with the C.S. Mott Foundation, the
Rockefeller Brothers Fund, the Global Fund for Community Foundations and the
United States Agency for International Development, has just been launched. The
alliance studies and supports the practice of community philanthropy around the
world. By fostering homegrown civil society energies, we can expand the capacity
for self-reliance that is essential to preserving human dignity.

Mirza Jahani, Washington

The writer is the chief executive officer of the Aga Khan Foundation U.S.A.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/01/opinion/the-record-of-israels-universities.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


