                             1193 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debate Over Who, in U.S., Is to Blame for Ukraine

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1164 words


WASHINGTON -- In Moscow, especially in the not-so-good old days, the question
almost always asked is kto vinovat: ''Who is to blame?'' The American capital
now finds itself engaged in that very Russian exercise ever since President
Vladimir V. Putin's troops entered Ukraine.

Many on the right maintain that Moscow's land grab is President Obama's fault
for pursuing a foreign policy of weakness. Some on the left contend that it is
former President George W. Bush's fault for invading Iraq and providing a
precedent. And across the political spectrum there are accusations that it is
the intelligence community's fault for failing to anticipate that Russia would
send troops to the Crimean Peninsula.

The who-lost-Ukraine debate eerily echoes the sorts of recriminations common
during the Cold War, starting with the who-lost-China reproaches after
Communists took power in Beijing in 1949, but this time fueled by 21st-century
technology and flavored by 21st-century politics. On Twitter and cable
television talk shows as well as in speeches, columns and congressional
hearings, partisans have wasted little time trying to frame the crisis in
Eastern Europe as an indictment of their political opponents.

As president, Mr. Obama naturally has absorbed most of the criticism, accused of
being too soft not only in his dealings with Mr. Putin of Russia, but also with
Syria, Iran and other rogue players on the world stage. The coincidental timing
of his proposal to slash the Army to pre-World War II size only gave additional
ammunition to the hawks. And some made sure to put former Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton in the cross hairs as well, recognizing her possible
presidential campaign in 2016.

''This is the ultimate result of a feckless foreign policy,'' Senator John
McCain, Republican of Arizona, told the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said on the Senate
floor, ''The president has eroded American credibility in the world.''

Most provocative, perhaps, was Senator Lindsey Graham, who faces a Republican
primary challenge from the right in South Carolina. He traced the Ukrainian
crisis to the 2012 attack on the United States diplomatic post in Benghazi,
Libya, that killed the envoy to Libya and three other Americans. ''It started
with Benghazi,'' Mr. Graham said on Twitter. ''When you kill Americans and
nobody pays a price, you invite this type of aggression.'' He added in another
post: ''Putin basically came to the conclusion after Benghazi, Syria, Egypt --
everything Obama has been engaged in -- he's a weak indecisive leader.''

The White House fired back. ''GOP criticism of Pres Obama jumped the shark today
when they started saying Benghazi is one of the reasons for what is happening in
Crimea,'' Dan Pfeiffer, the president's senior adviser, wrote on Twitter.

The emerging critique has clearly gotten under the president's skin as well.
Without waiting to be asked, he rebutted the idea that Mr. Putin had gotten the
upper hand. ''I would also note just the way that some of this has been
reported, that there's a suggestion somehow that the Russian actions have been
clever strategically,'' Mr. Obama said Tuesday. ''I actually think that this has
not been a sign of strength but rather is a reflection that countries near
Russia have deep concerns and suspicions about this kind of meddling.''

The case against Mr. Obama has been building for years. Critics accuse him of
caving in to Russia by recalibrating plans for missile defense in Europe and
focusing too much on trying to repair relations with Moscow. They point to Syria
and the ''red line'' he warned President Bashar al-Assad not to cross by using
chemical weapons as well as his failure to follow through with a planned
retaliatory strike.

To White House officials, the weakness narrative rings hollow against a
president who initially tripled troop levels in Afghanistan, escalated drone
strikes in Pakistan, Yemen and elsewhere, and ordered the strike that killed
Osama bin Laden. Mr. Obama's defenders note that Mr. Putin did not hesitate to
go to war with Georgia when Mr. Bush was president.

But Mr. Bush has also not emerged from the current episode unscathed. Some
liberals have said his invasion of Iraq made it hard for the United States to
complain about Russia invading another country.

On her MSNBC show, Rachel Maddow said, ''There is an awkwardness about the
United States government trying to lead a response to international outrage to
that violation when we're only a couple of years out from our own near-decade of
war in Iraq, which was a war that was, of course, also launched on a trumped-up
false pretext.''

Chris Matthews, another MSNBC host, echoed that. ''The same people who blew the
bugles for us to invade that country, Iraq, are blowing the bugle because some
other country, Russia, did something a little bit like it,'' he said. ''Well,
the big difference is, need I say, the tens of thousands of bodies the
Bush-Cheney crowd left in their trail.''

Mr. Bush's defenders said it was ludicrous for liberals to keep trying to pin
Mr. Obama's own failures on his predecessor more than five years after he left
office.

The debate played out on Wednesday before the House Armed Services Committee.
Representative Howard McKeon, the Republican chairman, said the Ukrainian
showdown argued against Mr. Obama's military cuts. ''The president's assumption
that the tide of war is receding and that we can safely reduce American hard
power in favor of soft power to assure our national security lies in stark
contrast to reality,'' he said.

Representative Adam Smith of Washington, the top committee Democrat, rejected
the argument: ''Back in 2008, when we had a defense budget well over $700
billion and George W. Bush was president, Putin felt no limitation whatsoever on
going into Georgia and essentially taking over two separate provinces.''

At a separate Senate hearing, Mr. McCain turned his fire on the nation's
intelligence agencies for not forecasting the Russian intervention. ''The fact
is, Mr. Secretary, it was not predicted by our intelligence, and that's already
well known,'' he scolded Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel, calling it ''another
massive failure.'' Mr. Hagel countered that the United States had been ''well
aware of the threats.''

Some Republicans worried that their party was going too far. John Ullyot, a
former Senate aide, said it was disingenuous to argue that weakness by Mr. Obama
encouraged Russia. ''Putin acts in his sphere when he feels the need to act,
regardless of who's in the White House,'' Mr. Ullyot said.

Other Republicans were careful to modulate their criticism by not losing sight
of Russia's role. Speaking on CNN, Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin
shared the party's assertion that Mr. Obama had ''projected weakness'' that
''invites aggression.''

''But,'' he added, ''let's be really clear who is to blame for this. Vladimir
Putin is to blame for this.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/06/world/europe/debate-over-who-in-us-is-to-blame
-for-ukraine.html

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: As the United States tried on Wednesday to set up a meeting
between Russia and Ukraine, Russian  and Ukrainian soldiers guarded the entrance
to a military base in Yevpatoriya in Crimea. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


