                             1103 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Great Expectations for 2014

BYLINE: By THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4239 words


From the theater to visual arts, opera to pop, critics for The New York Times
anticipate the highlights of their fields in the coming year. Among the events
that whet their appetites: the cinematic provocation of Lars von Trier, the Big
Ears music festival, Hindu and Buddhist sculpture at the Met, Italian Futurism
at the Guggenheim, the history of Polish Jews, a new Caryl Churchill play and a
John Updike biography. GRAHAM BOWLEY

ART

I'M LOOKING FORWARD to the Guggenheim Museum's filling more or less top to
bottom on Feb. 21 with ''Italian Futurism, 1909-1944: Reconstructing the
Universe.'' It will be the first American museum survey of the most
obstreperous, contradictory and possibly least loved of all strains of early
European Modernism. Brace yourself.

First glimpses of the unbound catalog bode well for the lavish ''Treasures From
Korea: Arts and Culture of the Joseon Dynasty, 1392-1910,'' opening at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art on March 2, before touring to the exhibition's
co-organizers, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts,
Houston. Some 150 works from the National Museum of Korea in Seoul will
summarize the heights of classical Korean culture, achieved during what may be
the world's longest-running Confucian dynasty.

What else? ''Laure Prouvost: For Forgetting,'' at the New Museum on Feb. 12,
will give New York its most extensive view yet of one of the immersive video
installations of Ms. Prouvost, the unexpected winner of the 2013 Turner Prize.
The Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art will unveil its
redesigned gallery on May 8 with an exhibition devoted to the singularly
sculptural garments of the legendary British-American designer Charles James
(1906-1978).

And on March 7, the Whitney Museum of American Art will present its 77th
biennial -- and the last in its Marcel Breuer building at Madison Avenue and
75th Street, for at least a while. This incarnation is not your mother's
by-committee biennial. It has been selected by three curators from outside the
museum, working independently, and each taking a floor. Look forward to some
interesting contrasts of curatorial visions and installation approaches. ROBERTA
SMITH

I'M EXPECTING ''Lost Kingdoms of Early Southeast Asia: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture
from 5th to 8th Century,'' at the Metropolitan Museum, to be a spring sensation
with early sculpture from Cambodia, Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia and Myanmar that
is dew-fresh and beyond beautiful.

I'm intrigued to see what Quentin Bajac, the new chief curator of photography
for the Museum of Modern Art, has in store in his first big outing there in a
historical survey called ''A World of Its Own: Photographic Practices in the
Studio.'' Everything was made within four walls, but, if you judge by the names,
the sky's the limit.

I look forward with huge relief to the arrival of El Museo del Barrio's new
director, Jorge Daniel Veneciano, and to seeing that indispensable institution
back on its economic feet. Finally, I'm hoping against hope that the New York
art establishment will wake up to the fact that by continuing to pile all its
money on a minute handful of artists in a minute handful of galleries, it's
killing this city as a home to experimental new art. Spring's the time for a
palace revolution. HOLLAND COTTER

TELEVISION

IT MAY SOUND TREASONOUS to favor the K.G.B. over the C.I.A., but the best thing
coming up is the second season of ''The Americans,'' on FX in February. This
clever, complex series about Soviet spies posing as an ordinary suburban couple
makes it a lot easier not to care when ''Homeland'' returns for a fourth season
on Showtime.

''The Americans'' stars Matthew Rhys and Keri Russell (''Felicity'') as a
husband and wife in a K.G.B.-arranged marriage who have deep, conflicted
feelings for each other and fluctuating faith in their own masters, even as they
scheme to undermine Reagan-era America. (All their impostures are made more
perilous by their neighbor, who happens to be an F.B.I. agent secretly assigned
to counterintelligence.)

It's a 1980s period piece that doesn't feel dated, partly because the
ideological allegiances and betrayals of Cold War politics are filtered through
more abiding themes of marital loyalty and mistrust. ALESSANDRA STANLEY

REALITY TELEVISION has been around long enough to have its village elders, still
trucking but a little creaky and worse for wear. Of late, producers have taken
some of these shopworn franchises and, in the interest of revivifying them,
injected ready-made strife. With ''Survivor'' this past season, it was adding
family members to the game.

On the new installment of MTV's durable but increasingly blank ''Real World,''
it's former lovers. ''The Real World: Ex-plosion,'' which has its premiere next
Wednesday, will probably be slimy and gross, likely to hasten the show's descent
into ''Bad Girls Club'' mayhem territory, with an added helping of bed-hopping.
This season takes place in San Francisco, which previously had the distinction
of hosting the most socially aware ''Real World'' cast, and now, given the tease
in the trailer about a possible cast pregnancy, could end up better known for
spawning a ''Real World'' baby. JON CARAMANICA

SHOWTIME HAS TURNED OUT some of the quirkiest, most enjoyable shows of recent
years -- ''Shameless,'' ''House of Lies,'' ''Weeds'' -- and a new series
scheduled for spring seems as if it could find the same skewed sweet spot. It's
called ''Penny Dreadful,'' after the pulp publications popular in Victorian
Britain, and John Logan, its writer and creator, intends to toss some famous
fictional characters from that era into a pot and see what bubbles up.

''In practically a 10-year span, 'Dracula,' 'The Picture of Dorian Gray,' 'Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,' 'The Island of Doctor Moreau,' 'War of the Worlds' were
all written,'' Mr. Logan, whose screenwriting credits include ''The Aviator''
and ''Sweeney Todd,'' says in a video blog about the making of the series. ''And
I started thinking, 'How amazing that all of those essential texts of the horror
genre were written within 10 years. What was in the water in Victorian London to
make this happen?' ''

Among the stars who will help him explore that question: Josh Hartnett, Timothy
Dalton, Eva Green and Rory Kinnear. NEIL GENZLINGER

ATTENTION-GRABBING CASTING doesn't always work for HBO: James Carville and Mary
Matalin polled poorly in ''K Street,'' and Dustin Hoffman and Nick Nolte
couldn't save ''Luck.'' (Dead horses were the least of that show's problems.)
But the pairing of Woody Harrelson and Matthew McConaughey as partners chasing a
serial killer in the first season of the anthology series ''True Detective,''
beginning on Jan. 12, feels particularly promising.

Mr. Harrelson is one of our most reliable film actors, and Mr. McConaughey has
been on a roll, sometimes referred to as the McConnaisance, since ''The Lincoln
Lawyer.'' As a bonus, the show's fractured narrative, spanning 17 years, allows
him to play his character as both a button-down, classically handsome leading
man and a longhaired burnout, covering all bases for his fans. MIKE HALE

THEATER

WHENEVER CARYL CHURCHILL comes up with a new a play, she seems to create an
entirely new idiom. Surely the most adventurous and multifarious dramatist in
English today, Ms. Churchill has taken apart and reassembled the languages of
gender (''Cloud Nine''), high finance (''Serious Money''), the classic fairy
tale (for the dystopias of ''The Skriker'' and ''Far Away'') and Anglo-American
politics (''Drunk Enough to Say I Love You?'').

With her latest work, ''Love and Information,'' opening on Feb. 4 at the New
York Theater Workshop (her customary Manhattan base of operations), Ms.
Churchill is giving our fragmented, terminally impatient world an appropriately
splintered mirror in which to regard itself. Directed by her longtime
collaborator James Macdonald, this import from the Royal Court Theater in London
has 57 scenes (crammed into less than two hours) and more than 100 characters
(played by 16 actors). As with any new play by Ms. Churchill, attention must be
paid; this time, though, attention will also be smashed into atoms. BEN BRANTLEY

TWO OF THE MOST ORIGINAL playwriting voices to emerge over the past decade are
brightening the spring season: Will Eno and Sarah Ruhl both have new-to-New York
plays planned in the coming months. After a foray onto Broadway with the
Tony-nominated ''In the Next Room, or the vibrator play,'' Ms. Ruhl returns to
her Off Broadway roots with ''Stage Kiss,'' a playful riff on romance and the
theater in which two ex-lovers find life and art colliding when they are cast in
the same play. Ms. Ruhl's gift for blending surrealism, lyricism and sincere
feeling is unmatched by any other playwright working today, and the casting of
Jessica Hecht, who shares a similar ability to be funny, strange and touching
all at once, augurs something special. The production opens in March at
Playwrights Horizons.

Meanwhile, after having his work produced exclusively off Broadway in New York,
Mr. Eno is primed to make his Broadway debut with ''The Realistic Joneses,''
which I saw during its premiere run at Yale Repertory Theater. A darkly funny
drama about two couples whose friendship is complicated by the shadow of
mortality, the production has lined up the spring season's most enticing
ensemble cast: last year's Tony winner Tracy Letts (who appeared in the Yale
production), alongside Toni Collette, Michael C. Hall and Marisa Tomei, with the
still white-hot Sam Gold (''Fun Home'') directing. A theater has not yet been
announced, but the opening is slated for March. CHARLES ISHERWOOD

EXHIBITION

HOW DOES A museum in a nation's capital tell the story of a people once deeply
knit into that nation's history and culture -- until they were systematically
murdered by the millions? The Museum of the History of Polish Jews opened last
spring in Warsaw (on a site once in the walled-off Warsaw Ghetto), but the
answer will not come until sometime this year, when its core exhibition --
including eight galleries occupying more than 40,000 square feet -- will finally
be complete.

Developed by an international team, with the museum's curators led by the
Canadian scholar Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, the exhibition, in its size,
ambition, location and importance, will instantly become a touchstone. If
successful, it may influence the evolution of Jewish museums and other identity
museums everywhere. EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

FILM

IN JUNE 1962, François Truffaut asked one of his ''masters,'' Alfred Hitchcock,
to answer some 500 questions about his career. On Aug. 13 (Hitch's 63rd
birthday), the men, along with Truffaut's collaborator the translator Helen G.
Scott, met in Beverly Hills to commence work on the first of two epic interview
sessions that resulted in more than 40 hours of tape. Their conversations
covered the sweep of Hitchcock's astonishing career -- from his early stint
creating title cards for silent pictures to a gruesome, lengthily staged murder
in ''Torn Curtain'' -- and led to the publication of Truffaut's ''Hitchcock,''
one of the most influential books on its subject.

This year, Bruce Goldstein, the director of repertory programing at Film Forum,
will turn that legendary Hitchcock/Truffaut encounter into a pair of
complementary, back-to-back retrospectives. The Complete Hitchcock, a five-week
series, begins on Feb. 21 and includes nine silent features that have been
restored by the British Film Institute. (Hitchcock's television oeuvre will be
shown at the Paley Center for Media.) On March 28, the day after the Hitchcock
series ends, with his 1928 feature ''The Manxman,'' Tout Truffaut begins. The
three-week series will allow you to trace Hitchcock's influence on Truffaut,
including in ''The Bride Wore Black,'' a Hitchcockian tale with Jeanne Moreau,
which he shot in 1967 -- the year the American edition of his Hitchcock book was
published.

''I especially liked the scene of Moreau watching the man who had taken poison
Arak dying slowly,'' Hitchcock later wrote Truffaut. ''I think my particular
sense of humor might have taken them a little further, so that Moreau could have
picked up a cushion and put it under his head so that he could die with more
comfort.'' MANOHLA DARGIS

WITH ITS AUSTERE black-and-white cinematography, its stark images and its boxy
frames, Pawel Pawlikowski's ''Ida'' looks as if it were shot in the early 1960s,
when it takes place. But there is much more than period nostalgia to this movie,
which floated through festivals in Warsaw; London; and Telluride, Colo., in 2013
and is expected to have a North American release this spring. Reckoning with the
Holocaust in Poland and the Communist rule that followed World War II, ''Ida''
is both a study of memory and an act of remembering, telling the story of a
young religious novice and her aunt, a bitter Communist Party official. It is
also something of a homecoming for Mr. Pawlikowski, a Polish filmmaker who has
worked mostly in England. It haunted me as much as anything I saw in the past 12
months, and I can't wait to see it again. A. O. SCOTT

NYMPHOMANIAC,' LARS VON TRIER'S sexually graphic four-hour, two-part erotic epic
that recently opened in Europe and is scheduled to arrive in the United States
on March 21 (Volume 1) and April 18 (Volume 2), poses a question: When the
simplest Google search can yield an almost infinite variety of explicit
pornographic images, what is the appeal of a movie about a woman named Joe
(played as a teenager by Stacy Martin, and as an adult by Charlotte Gainsbourg)
who relates her sexual history, Scheherazade style? Her audience is an older man
(Stellan Skarsgard) whose questions and observations supply the movie's
intellectual superstructure. Each episode consists of four chapters. Shia
LaBeouf plays the young man who deflowers her. Willem Dafoe, Jamie Bell and
Christian Slater also appear.

Because Mr. von Trier is a cinematic provocateur with a grand visual
imagination, ''Nymphomaniac'' is likely to be at least intermittently
captivating, and the initial reviews have been guardedly respectful. The version
being shown is an edit of this Danish director's original five-and-one-half-hour
version. STEPHEN HOLDEN

BEFORE 'STAR WARS' persuaded Hollywood that budget-sucking sci-fi epics could be
profitable, the Chilean director Alejandro Jodorowsky -- the blissed-out force
behind such trippy fare as ''El Topo'' and ''The Holy Mountain'' -- had a
magnificent vision. He would turn Frank Herbert's operatic novel ''Dune'' into a
picture that would deliver the hallucinatory equivalent of LSD.

''Jodorowsky's Dune,'' a look-what-we-missed documentary by Frank Pavich,
currently slated for release in March, details this failed 1970s enterprise
through the eyes of its creator, now 84, and others, some of whom would go on to
collaborate on Ridley Scott's ''Alien.'' Whether this grand obsession would have
flunked or flown, we will never know, but with Orson Welles and Mick Jagger
lined up for roles, Pink Floyd on soundtrack duty and a special-effects burden
that (according to Mr. Jodorowsky's ''Unseen Dune'' website) sent Dan O'Bannon
to a psychiatric hospital, it might have made David Lynch think twice before
diving into his own adventure with spice and sand. JEANNETTE CATSOULIS

VIDEO GAMES

A RAFT OF BIG-BUDGET TITLES for Sony's PlayStation 4 and Microsoft's Xbox One
will be released in 2014. Some, perhaps many, will be excellent. But the two I'm
most looking forward to playing are from the vibrant independent movement in
video games: Brendon Chung's Quadrilateral Cowboy and Jonathan Blow's the
Witness.

That's a bit of a cheat, because I've already played some of both: Quadrilateral
Cowboy at the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens, where it's on display as
part of the ''Indie Essentials'' exhibition, until March 2 (go play it!); and
the Witness at a Manhattan hotel in 2011, when Mr. Blow was demonstrating a
prototype of the game. It is, he said, designed to convey meaning nonverbally,
through the player's interaction with puzzles. I can't wait to try to explain
whether that works -- in words. CHRIS SUELLENTROP

DANCE

WHEN I WAS NEW TO DANCE, I soon learned that the choreography of Frederick
Ashton repays endless rewatching, and there are several ballets of his of which
I hated to miss a single performance. Watching the casts change was merely
incidental. For me, these creations were like detective stories. Every step was
a clue that played its part in the fascinatingly intricate whole. Today, I
haven't changed; I'm still learning from Ashton.

In June, American Ballet Theater (abt.org) will bring its first production of
his ''Cinderella'' to the Metropolitan Opera House. This is actually one of his
few imperfect creations. Although the score is Prokofiev's greatest -- far more
rhythmically fascinating than the better-known ''Romeo and Juliet'' -- it has a
few ugly moments, and the final act, though irresistible, is not its finest. And
the roles of the Ugly Sisters, played by men, have seldom been remotely funny in
the last 25 years.

What I hanker to see again are those steps. The ballroom of Act II is like
nothing else in ballet. In this tight, dense dream world, steps echo one another
as if in a hall of mirrors, and Cinderella reigns -- until the astounding
strokes of midnight, when everyone around her turns into an implacable but
classical machine. ALASTAIR MACAULAY

MUSIC

LOOKING AT VIENNA as a hotbed of artistic innovation may not seem like such a
novel idea for a festival. But Carnegie Hall is doing it right with Vienna: City
of Dreams, an ambitious, three-week celebration presenting more than 90 events,
many of them at partnering institutions and ensembles across New York City. The
festival will look at developments that took place in Vienna not just in all the
arts, but in history, science and politics as well.

And of all the offerings in this comprehensive festival, I am most eager to
attend the concert performances of two seminal early-20th-century operas by the
Vienna State Opera, featuring the glorious Vienna Philharmonic, at Carnegie Hall
(carnegiehall.org). On Feb. 28, Daniele Gatti conducts this renowned orchestra
in Berg's ''Wozzeck,'' with a cast headed by the compelling baritone Matthias
Goerne in the title role of an oppressed and delusional soldier in an Austrian
garrison town in the 1820s who supplements his meager pay by performing menial
tasks for an overbearing captain; he is undone when Marie, his beleaguered,
common-law wife, is enticed by a dashing drum major. The soprano Evelyn
Herlitzius sings Marie.

The next night (March 1), Andris Nelsons, the music-director designate of the
Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducts the Vienna Philharmonic in Strauss's
''Salome,'' with the German soprano Gun-Brit Barkmin in the title role, and the
baritone Falk Struckmann as Jochanaan. For this look ahead, each critic was
asked to pick just one event. Technically, I'm cheating a bit by choosing two.
But these concert performances on successive nights are like a paired offering
at the festival. For sheer impact, they should be an operatic one-two punch.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI

THE MOST WIDELY repeated judgment on the Greek violinist Leonidas Kavakos is
that he's ''a violinist's violinist,'' and ''a musician's musician.'' I'd like
to disagree. With a clean, singing sound and an approach to phrasing that is as
elegant as it is intelligent, Mr. Kavakos's playing requires no special training
to appreciate. His recording of the complete Beethoven sonatas with the
wonderful Italian pianist Enrico Pace is one of the finest introductions to the
cycle. The conversations, arguments and flirtations between violin and piano are
rendered with spirit and impeccable taste, as are the sublime moments of
contented calm that are all the more magical because they appear so hard won.

Hear them live over the course of three evenings from March 2 through 4 in
Zankel Hall at Carnegie Hall (carnegiehall.org) -- no instrument case required.
CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

THE ONLY DISAPPOINTMENT of a visit by William Christie and his brilliant Baroque
ensemble, Les Arts Florissants, in April is that audiences will get only part of
''Platée,'' Rameau's uproarious, unexpectedly affecting opera. The music will
all be there, of course, but unlike Vienna and Paris, where the company is
mounting a full production (directed by Robert Carsen, who did the Metropolitan
Opera's new ''Falstaff''), New York will hear ''Platée'' only in concert, at
Alice Tully Hall (lincolncenter.org). Perhaps the problem was insufficient
funds, or a lack of an appropriate hall: The city doesn't have a really good
space for Baroque opera. Whatever the reason, the bittersweetness will likely
dissolve into pure joy when these consummate artists start to play and sing.

As a bonus, Mr. Christie is staying on for a short residency at the Juilliard
School (juilliard.edu), leading its crisp Baroque group, Juilliard415, in a
program of French Baroque chamber music at the Vélez Blanco Patio of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, and then in Charpentier's short, exquisite
''Actéon,'' as part of the Music Before 1800 series at Corpus Christi Church in
Morningside Heights. ZACHARY WOOLFE

THE INEXORABLE LOGIC of a pop career has called for ever-larger audiences: club
to theater to arena. The xx, an English band whose songs whisper about love and
uncertainty in rigorously sparse, intimate arrangements, has been ambivalent
about that ascent. In ''Chained,'' from the band's 2012 album, ''Coexist,'' Romy
Madley Croft and Oliver Sim sing, ''We used to get closer than this/Is it
something you miss?''

This spring, they are briefly and conceptually scaling down, bringing to the
United States an event they staged last year in Manchester, England. From March
19 through 29, they are playing 25 shows -- two or three per day -- in a
specially constructed space within the Park Avenue Armory (armoryonpark.org;
sold out with a waiting list). For those 1,000 concertgoers, the promise isn't
exclusivity, it's intensity. JON PARELES

BIG EARS IS BACK: It's an extraordinary music festival in Knoxville, Tenn.,
drawing and serving the intersections among classical minimalism;
detail-oriented indie-rock; experimental electronics and improvisation; drone
-based or ambient music; and complete wild-hair whatever.

During its first two editions, in the spring of 2009 and 2010, I was amazed to
see challenging music take over a relaxed, midsize city, presented with
attention to sound and comfort -- in renovated historic theaters, a museum, a
large club and a cheery warehouse district dive. Then it went away for three
years because of scheduling difficulties.

The whole thing seemed too smart and feisty and multigenerational to live, at
least in this country. But it's not presented by a scratchy nonprofit; it's run
by AC Entertainment, one of the founders and producers of the enormous Bonnaroo
festival, and manager-operator of those historic Knoxville theaters. It has a
fighting chance.

This year, Steve Reich, 77, and his music will serve as its centerpiece. (The
festival is scheduled for March 28 through 30.) John Cale, once of the Velvet
Underground, will be there, as will the reunited New York City band Television,
and the ambient-sound artist Laraaji. The loud, riveting, improvisational power
trio Nazoranai will make its first American appearance. And three significant
contemporary electronic composers -- the Canadian Tim Hecker, the Finnish
Vladislav Delay and the American Daniel Lopatin -- will work with totally
different conceptions of melted or erased pop languages.

Go, and try to hear things that may not be in your normal aural diet; pay
attention to the connections it draws; make your own. BEN RATLIFF

BOOKS

FIVE YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH, John Updike seems like a very Dead White Male
indeed. He's on few academic reading lists. Young novelists spurn him the way
the '60s generation spurned their parents' martinis. The consensus is that
Updike lost the marathon to Philip Roth, who turned on the afterburners in his
late decades. I'm less certain, agreeing with Ian McEwan that ''the Updike opus
is so vast, so varied and rich, that we will not have its full measure for years
to come.'' Adam Begley is a smart writer, and his forthcoming biography of
Updike is tantalizing. There are hints of darker shadows behind the man Martin
Amis once called a ''psychotic Santa of volubility,'' a man who made it all look
easy, probably too easy. DWIGHT GARNER

'OPEN CITY,' Teju Cole's 2011 novel, meanders with its narrator, Julius, a young
German-Nigerian doctor with a deep reservoir of political and cultural knowledge
who takes long walks around New York City, remembering his past and closely
observing his present. The book casts a spell that's hard to classify.

Mr. Cole's novella, ''Every Day Is for the Thief,'' came out in Nigeria in 2007,
and Random House is publishing it here for the first time in March. In it, a
Nigerian returns home for a visit and assesses the country and his life through
a series of encounters with family and old friends. ''Open City'' earned its
author comparisons to the German writer W. G. Sebald, whose work wanders and
ruminates in a similar way. The American edition of ''Thief'' includes photos
that Mr. Cole took in Lagos, a Sebaldian touch that is likely to keep the
comparisons coming. JOHN WILLIAMS

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/01/arts/new-york-times-critics-on-what-they-want-
to-see.html

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: COMING UP: Clockwise from top left, ''Ida,'' a film by Pawel
Pawlikowski
''Speeding Train,'' by the Futurist Ivo Pannaggi
the violinist Leonidas Kavakos
John Updike, circa 1962
the xx
Caryl Churchill's ''Love and Information''
a seventh-century Buddhist deity from Vietnam
Lars von Trier's ''Nymphomaniac.''(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MUSIC BOX FILMS
FONDAZIONE CASSA DI CARIMA
MARCO BORGGREVE
CHRISTIAN GEISNAES
W. EARL SNYDER
STEPHEN CUMMISKEY
CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
THIERRY OLIVIER) (C1)
STARS AND QUANDARIES: Woody Harrelson, left, and Matthew McConaughey in the HBO
series ''True Detective,'' and an image from the puzzle adventure video game the
Witness. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM BRIDGES/HBO
NUMBER NONE)
SO MUCH INTRIGUE: Top left, players are early-computer hackers in the video game
Quadrilateral Cowboy
top right, Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys in ''The Americans.'' Center, Sarah
Ruhl's ''Stage Kiss'' in its Chicago production. Above, the conductor William
Christie, and the cast of MTV's ''Real World: Ex-Plosion.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
BLENDO GAMES
FRANK OCKENFELS/FX
LIZ LAUREN
AGNES DHERBEYS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 MTV) (C8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


