                             1190 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Convoy With NATO Supplies Is Attacked in Pakistan

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 252 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Gunmen in the Khyber tribal region in Pakistan, which
borders Afghanistan, opened fire Tuesday on a two-truck convoy carrying NATO
supplies, killing one driver and wounding two others, a government official
said.

The official said the attack occurred about 25 miles northwest of Peshawar, the
provincial capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa. A ''search operation has been launched
to find the culprits,'' said the official, who requested anonymity.

The attack came only days after the governing Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party,
led by Imran Khan, announced that it would end a blockade of NATO supplies after
a court ruling declared it to be illegal. Mr. Khan's party imposed the blockade
to protest American drone strikes in the tribal region, saying they were killing
more innocent people than militants.

The attack also came days after Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, an umbrella
organization representing Pakistani militant groups, announced that it would
observe a monthlong cease-fire to allow government-proposed peace talks to
start.

The announcement, however, was followed by a spate of bombings, including one on
Monday in the district court complex in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, that
left 11 people dead and over two dozen wounded.

Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan has denied involvement in the violence. A relatively
new group, Ahrar-ul-Hind, said it was behind the attack. Ahrar said that it was
fighting for the enforcement of Shariah in Pakistan and that peace talks were
not the way to do it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/world/asia/nato-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


