                             1172 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2014 Monday
                        The International New York Times

Pakistan Mustn't Surrender

BYLINE: By HAIDER ALI HUSSEIN MULLICK

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg.

LENGTH: 1075 words


WASHINGTON -- Last week, a Pakistani Taliban commander reported the execution of
23 Pakistani frontier troops held hostage; two weeks ago, a suicide bomber
killed nine Shiite Muslims in Peshawar. In response, Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif's government has conducted retaliatory airstrikes but has only suspended,
not abandoned, its foolhardy strategy for peace: keep trying to talk the
Pakistani Taliban into disarming, in exchange for halting military operations
against them.

These peace talks will fail. They are an effort to surrender, and they ignore
what most Pakistanis want: to regain control of their country from this deadly
insurgency.

So Mr. Sharif should end the talks definitively and have the army mount a strong
land offensive to drive the Pakistani Taliban out of their mountainous
stronghold south of Peshawar once the snows melt this spring. It is there that
the group poses the greatest risk to Pakistan's people, and to America's supply
line to Afghanistan. The United States should help the army prepare.

In the last decade, the Pakistani Taliban and associated groups, operating from
the northwest, have terrified much of Pakistan. They have killed more than
18,000 civilians, including more than 2,000 Shiites and 5,500 police officers
and soldiers. A sense of siege prevails west of the Indus River, even though
that area is garrisoned by Pakistan's military.

Much of the problem can be laid at the feet of Pakistan's leaders. For decades,
with government acquiescence, Pakistan's military and its intelligence agency
have used radical Islamist groups to foment insurgencies in Afghanistan and
Kashmir. The groups recruit and train ideologues and fighters; raise funds; run
seminaries and businesses; broadcast hatred of their political and religious
enemies; and get hospital treatment when they are wounded. The military's
original goal was to counter Indian regional influence, but the cost to
Pakistanis has been the failure of their state. Now the extremists increasingly
target the very military that armed and encouraged them.

In other words, Pakistan's luck has run out. You can sway an insurgent to fight
''injustice'' in a neighboring country like India, but once his leaders feel
they have impunity, you can't stop them from acting independently or exploiting
local grievances. These days, as much as the Pakistani Taliban hate Indians and
Americans, they hate other Pakistanis more. Acting in tandem with Al Qaeda, the
Haqqani network, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other lethal groups, the Pakistani Taliban
has slaughtered Shiites, Christians, Indians, Americans, Afghans and polio
prevention workers, often with the state looking the other way.

Pakistan's decade-long response has been based on a fallacy: that the military
could target ''bad'' insurgents (those fighting Pakistan's army and citizenry),
while it worked with ''good'' ones (those fighting India). In reality, the two
types are increasingly indistinguishable and have killed a great many times more
Pakistanis than Indians. For example, Lashkar-e-Taiba, the group responsible for
the 2008 Mumbai attacks, also has supported anti-Shiite death squads. And the
Haqqani network, which has fought Indian influence in Afghanistan, has also
helped Al Qaeda and the Pakistani Taliban kill Pakistanis.

Last year, a poll conducted by the Pew Research Global Attitudes Project found
that 93 percent of Pakistanis said terrorism was a big problem, while only 45
percent worried that much about Indian influence in Afghanistan. Nevertheless,
peace efforts have kept chasing the dream of compromise. In 2004, 2006 and 2008,
Pakistan's army signed deals that gave insurgents territory, amnesty,
reparations, exemption from constitutional rules -- along with time to rearm,
regroup and resume their attacks. The record of mayhem, which has included
attacks on major military headquarters, has left one mediator defending the
current talks with this logic: ''If America, with all its might, couldn't win in
Afghanistan, how can we win against the Pakistani Taliban? They have scores of
suicide bombers. We must negotiate.''

But that is nonsense. Of course Pakistan's army can't expect to win the war by
simply killing enough of the enemy. It must also focus on winning over the local
populace by assuring their safety. But the army showed in 2009 that it could do
this: After the Taliban seized the peaceful Swat Valley and proceeded to behead
policemen, flog women and keep girls like Malala Yousafzai from attending
school, the army swept in. Aided by new training and tactics, and with an
infusion of American dollars and equipment, the troops took back the area and
then kept control of it -- a first for them since 9/11. And most of the two
million displaced residents returned home.

Today, most Pakistanis want to apply the ''Swat Valley model'' to North
Waziristan, the nerve center of the Pakistani Taliban. Prime Minister Sharif, in
a Jan. 29 speech defending negotiations, admitted as much. ''I know if the state
today decides to use force to eliminate the terrorists, the entire nation will
support it,'' he said.

What he should have added was that peace talks would make the most sense after
Pakistan's troops took the area from the insurgents. Today, the Taliban demand
nothing less than blanket immunity, a return of prisoners, the exit of all
Pakistani troops, an end to American drone strikes, the abandonment of secular
education and the severance of ties between the United States and Pakistan.
Defeating them in battle might allow Pakistan to demand, instead, that the
Taliban accept the rule of law.

That outcome would benefit the United States. We need Pakistan as a strategic
ally, and we need both its stability and a good working relationship with its
leaders to help keep its 100 or so nuclear warheads from falling into terrorist
hands. Nevertheless, our relationship has been strained for decades by mutual
distrust -- largely traceable, on the American side, to Pakistan's reluctance to
directly confront the dangerous partners it has coddled for so long.

So in preparation for a spring offensive, America should now offer Pakistan
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance support, as well as humanitarian
assistance for those citizens whom fighting would inevitably displace. It is an
opportunity to start building trust between our two countries by helping
Pakistan take on its worst internal threat, one that menaces the democracy that
Pakistanis crave.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/24/opinion/pakistan-mustnt-surrender.html

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


