                             1131 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jeep Thirst Quenched by Diesel

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE ULRICH

SECTION: Section AU; Column 0; Automobiles; AROUND THE BLOCK; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 689 words


TESTED 2014 Jeep Grand Cherokee EcoDiesel

WHAT IS IT? A hardy S.U.V. with a gentle fuel footprint.

HOW MUCH? $41,690 to start; $53,685 as tested.

WHAT MAKES IT RUN? A 3-liter turbodiesel with 240 horsepower and 420 pound-feet
of torque.

HOW QUICK IS IT? Jeep says it breezes from 0 to 60 m.p.h. in about 7.2 seconds.

IS IT THIRSTY? E.P.A. ratings are 21/28 m.p.g. (all-wheel drive) and 22/30 (rear
drive).

Like any jerky-chewing, flannel-wrapped woodsman, authentic 4-wheel-drive
vehicles were resistant to change. But the Grand Cherokee EcoDiesel proves that
an outdoorsy S.U.V. can be as pampering as a spa facial -- and remarkably
fuel-efficient -- without sacrificing toughness.

How efficient? Try a no-sweat 33 m.p.g., which the Jeep delivered on a 60-mile
highway run north of Manhattan.

Such real-world mileage is especially praiseworthy in a roughly 5,400-pound,
five-passenger S.U.V. that's sophisticated on road and heroically capable off
road -- an increasingly rare double threat in this era of sheltered suburban
crossovers.

The Italian connection of Chrysler and Jeep, through their common parent, Fiat,
brings a V6 turbodiesel from VM Motori, the Italian diesel engine maker. Equal
billing goes to the ZF 8-speed automatic transmission, whose top gear lets the
Jeep loaf at 1,500 r.p.m. at a steady 60 m.p.h. An Eco mode unobtrusively
adjusts gear changes and other parameters to save fuel.

Like so many modern diesels, the tested 4x4 Jeep easily topped its E.P.A.
rating. Also familiar is the reservoir of urea fluid that scrubs tailpipe
pollution to meet 50-state standards.

Compared with the Jeep's gasoline V6 and Hemi V8 engines, the diesel chugs and
drones at city speeds, especially when cold. But I got accustomed to the extra
frequencies. It seemed a fair trade-off for the swift acceleration, 730-mile
range and towing capacity of up to 7,400 pounds.

Not so long ago, the interiors of Chrysler products looked as bankrupt as the
company once did. But like most new Chryslers, the Grand Cherokee's cabin,
updated for 2014, is fully competitive and technically advanced. It nails
details with pleasant-to-touch finishes and pleasing flourishes: comfortable
seats with extra-strong lumbar adjustment; pie-wedge-shape gauge pointers that
bookend a programmable 7-inch display; a tidy three-point steering wheel and
electronic console shifter.

The latest, optional UConnect infotainment system, with its 8.4-inch touch
screen, offers features unavailable on many luxury models -- including an
iPad-loving Wi-Fi connection -- while being blessedly simple to use.

For 2014, a power liftgate replaces the former grab handle. Subtle changes to
the husky, handsome exterior include a larger hatch window, restyled body
fascias, new LED marker lights and available adaptive high-intensity headlamps.

The Quadra-Lift air suspension can drop the body for easy loading, or raise it
to almost 11 inches of off-road ground clearance. Cranking the air bladders to
full inhale, I pointed the Jeep up a few steep rocky hillsides just to remind
myself it could be done.

Selecting Hill Descent Control, I descended into a gully so steep it seemed the
Jeep would stand on its front end: The driver's display revealed that I could
adjust downhill speed in 1-m.p.h. increments with the paddle shifters, a nifty
touch. The Selec-Terrain 4-wheel-drive system, akin to Land Rover's, let me dial
up settings for snow, mud, sand or rock, or for automated operation.

Back on everyday roads, the Jeep's steering feels overassisted, yet this truck
handles serenely, its ride quality on par with luxury S.U.V.'s.

This twin bill of capability and conservation will cost you. The Ecodiesel adds
$4,500 to the cost of a Grand Cherokee V6 ($5,000 for the Summit 4x4). The
diesel is available in high-end Limited, Overland and Summit models.

To the lasting credit of the former DaimlerChrysler partnership, part of what
makes the Grand Cherokee so good is that it shares its fine chassis with the
last-generation Mercedes ML. Now, with an Italian engine under the hood, buyers
of the EcoDiesel can brag about the international genes of the world's first 33
m.p.g. Jeep.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/19/automobiles/autoreviews/jeep-thirst-quenched-b
y-diesel.html

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: With a diesel V6, the Grand Cherokee delivered a real-world 33
m.p.g. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRYSLER GROUP)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


