                             1171 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Japan's Drill With the U.S., a Message for Beijing

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1159 words


CAMP PENDLETON, Calif. -- In the early morning along a barren stretch of beach
here last week, Japanese soldiers and American Marines practiced how to invade
and retake an island captured by hostile forces.

Memo to Beijing: Be forewarned.

One Marine sergeant yelled for his men, guns drawn, to push into the right
building as they climbed through the window of an empty house meant to simulate
a seaside dwelling. The Marines had poured out of four amphibious assault
vehicles as another group of smaller inflatable boats carrying soldiers of
Japan's Western Army Infantry Regiment landed in an accompanying beachhead
assault.

There were shouts in Japanese. There were shouts in Marine English. There was
air support, from Huey and Cobra helicopters hovering above. Then larger Navy
hovercrafts roared in, spitting up a spray of seawater before burping out
Humvees and more Japanese troops, their faces blackened with camouflage paint.

American military officials, viewing the cooperative action of the former World
War II enemies from a nearby hillside, insisted that the annual exercise, called
Iron Fist, had nothing, nothing to do with last fall's game of chicken between
Tokyo and Beijing over islands that are largely piles of rocks in the East China
Sea. But Lt. Col. John O'Neal, commander of the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit,
said that this year, the Japanese team came with ''a new sense of purpose.''

''There are certainly current events that have added emphasis to this
exercise,'' he said, as Japanese soldiers made their way up into the rocks
before disappearing into the hills above the beach. ''Is there a heightened
awareness? Yes.''

In the United States military, commanders are increasingly allied in alarm with
Japan over China's flexing of military muscle. Capt. James Fanell, director of
intelligence and information operations with the United States Pacific Fleet,
recently said in San Diego that China was training its forces to be capable of
carrying out a ''short, sharp'' war with Japan in the East China Sea.

In a sign of continuing concern, Gen. Ray Odierno, the Army chief of staff, was
in China over the weekend seeking to improve the limited relationship between
the American and Chinese militaries, perhaps through exchanges of top officers.
In recent years, the Pentagon has worried about the buildup of China's military
and a lack of transparency among its leaders.

The islands at the center of the dispute, known as the Senkaku in Japanese and
the Diaoyu in Chinese, are a seven-hour boat ride from Japan, even farther from
China, and thought to be surrounded by man-eating sharks. Japan has long
administered the islands, but they are claimed by China and Taiwan.

Last year, China set off a trans-Pacific uproar when it declared that an ''air
defense identification zone'' gave it the right to identify and possibly take
military action against aircraft near the islands. Japan refused to recognize
China's claim, and the United States defied China by sending military planes
into the zone unannounced -- even as the Obama administration advised American
commercial airlines to comply with China's demand and notify Beijing in advance
of flights through the area.

A few weeks later, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan approved a five-year
defense plan that took the pacifist nation further toward its most assertive
military posture since World War II.

This year, when Japanese troops showed up for the exercise with the Marines at
Camp Pendleton, they came packing. Instead of the platoon of 25 soldiers they
sent to the exercise in 2006, the first year it was conducted, the Japanese
arrived nearly 250 strong. They brought along their own Humvees, gear and
paraphernalia for retaking islands -- or, in Marine parlance, ''amphibious
assault with the intent to seize objectives inland.''

The monthlong exercise, which ends Monday, has been spread over a wide section
of Southern California. There was the amphibious assault at Camp Pendleton,
mortar shoots at the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center at Twentynine Palms
and live firing exercises at San Clemente Island. There was a nighttime raid at
Naval Amphibious Base Coronado, presumably out of sight of guests sipping pink
Champagne on the verandas of the bejeweled Hotel del Coronado a short distance
away.

This year's Iron Fist, Colonel O'Neal said, was the largest and most involved
operation so far. The exercise included drones and the kinds of air support that
would be needed to protect Japanese and American troops retaking an island,
though the ''shaping'' that would normally be done in a real-world assault --
when the Air Force and Navy bomb intended targets before carrying out an actual
ground invasion -- was only implied.

In the waters just off Coronado last month, Japanese soldiers, clutching their
gear, pushed rubber reconnaissance boats out of a hovering helicopter and jumped
into the cold water as part of what the Marines called ''helo cast'' training.
The bread and butter of the Marine Corps, helo cast training, with its emphasis
on fast and light movements into hostile territory, is not the type of training
which Japanese troops have routinely had in the past.

The Japanese soldiers and the Marines have spent much of the past month managing
a considerable language barrier. Although they have worked side by side in the
joint exercises, they are not intertwined, hence the reason for the parallel
amphibious landings. Marine interpreters and their Japanese counterparts dashed
between the two militaries, discussing coordinates and plans.

For Japan, the Iron Fist exercise is a ''valuable opportunity where we can learn
various techniques from the U.S. forces,'' Col. Matushi Kunii, the Japanese
commander of the Western Army Infantry Regiment, said at the opening ceremony
last month.

For Japan, defense experts said, the shift to the more comprehensive training
with the Marines is a direct response to a more assertive China. ''The Japanese
have been getting more serious about broadening their training,'' said
Christopher K. Johnson, senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies, because ''the Chinese are doing their own exercises that
look a lot like island-grabbing.''

He pointed to recent military exercises by China that Asia experts believe could
be rehearsals for landing operations targeting the uninhabited islands.

And imagine, Asia experts said, if China became assertive about islands where
people actually live, like Okinawa.

Some Asia experts believe that is already happening, pointing to recent talk
from Chinese scholars, though not the Chinese government, about Okinawa, which
the Japanese call Ryukyu.

''All of a sudden,'' said Andrew Oros, an associate professor of political
science at Washington College in Chestertown, Md., and a specialist on East
Asia, ''it's no longer about protecting some deserted island; it's about
protecting somewhere where more than one million Japanese people live.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/world/asia/in-japans-drill-with-the-us-a-messa
ge-for-beijing.html

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: TRAINING TOGETHER: Top, an officer watched as Marines and
Japanese soldiers were transported during an annual joint exercise called Iron
Fist in Camp Pendleton, Calif. The Japanese arrived nearly 250 strong as
tensions with Beijing over a set of disputed islands in the East China Sea
continue. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOE KLAMAR/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES
 T. LYNNE PIXLEY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


