                             1104 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Cold, Appraising Eye, Spying Treasure

BYLINE: By NICOLAS RAPOLD

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MOVIE REVIEW; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 580 words


It doesn't take an expert's eye to see that Virgil Oldman, the supercilious
auctioneer played by Geoffrey Rush in Giuseppe Tornatore's creaky art thriller
''The Best Offer'' (''La Migliore Offerta''), is riding for a fall. And fall he
does, for the unknown woman -- to borrow the title of another Tornatore film --
who wants to sell paintings and other treasures from the villa she inherited.
That the mysterious seller insists on communicating by phone or through closed
doors probably increases her appeal to a man who makes much of his living
looking at things.

Virgil and this woman, Claire, circle each other warily -- she goes by Ms.
Ibbetson at first -- in a dance that's partly about gaining the upper hand and
partly about their respective weird habits. Virgil is the kind of aesthete movie
character whose cold formality goes hand in glove (he actually wears gloves)
with a raging fear of intimacy. He's an art collector, aided by a swindle that
he runs with a raggedy-haired painter buddy, Billy (Donald Sutherland, politely
pitching in). From this premise, one might wonder what delicious conspiratorial
excesses might have transpired in other hands; for instance, in the art-centered
mystery ''Trance,'' last spring, Danny Boyle ambitiously disassembled his crazy
story as fast as he told it.

Here the excesses come courtesy of Mr. Tornatore (''Cinema Paradiso''), the
Italian filmmaker who sometimes seems to deliver his handsome, vintage 1990s
art-house fare by the yard. His latest, which takes place in a generic European
city, looks set to introduce a collision of pathologies, or at least some
overwrought dueling like his Depardieu-Polanski face-off, ''A Pure Formality''
(1995). But ''The Best Offer'' settles in for a dull courtship leading to a bad
end. Adding a superfluous drone of intrigue, Virgil keeps finding old gears and
doodads at the villa, and he takes them to a technical-whiz friend (Jim
Sturgess) who also dishes out romantic advice.

Those metal bits gradually take shape as an antique automaton that provides, in
its laborious construction and inevitable shape, an unfortunate metaphor for the
film. Mr. Rush, ever game to make a pitch, does bring nerve to his mercurial
character, tempering a guy who's often just a jerk, and his heavy features
(which rival Kevin Spacey's in shifting between masklike and animated) receive
central attention from the cinematographer Fabio Zamarion's camera. But Mr. Rush
can't fly far on Mr. Tornatore's dialogue and workmanlike plotting, and Sylvia
Hoeks, as Claire, doesn't bring a corresponding energy.

At one point, Virgil puts down Billy by airily declaring that his work lacks the
inner mystery of true art. The film includes its share of imagery from famous
paintings whose names roll by in the credits, but the director stages his
serviceable gothic mystery premise with the elegance of an auction.

The Best Offer

Opens on Wednesday in Manhattan.

Written and directed by Giuseppe Tornatore; director of photography, Fabio
Zamarion; edited by Massimo Quaglia; music by Ennio Morricone; production design
by Maurizio Sabatini; costumes by Maurizio Millenotti; produced by Paco
Cinematografica/Isabella Cocuzza and Arturo Paglia; released by IFC Films. At
the IFC Center, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village.
Running time: 2 hours 11 minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Geoffrey Rush (Virgil Oldman), Jim Sturgess (Robert), Sylvia Hoeks (Claire
Ibbetson) and Donald Sutherland (Billy).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/01/movies/the-best-offer-from-giuseppe-tornatore.
html

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


