                             1126 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Spying, Woes of Obama Echo Those of Past Presidents

BYLINE: By JOHN HARWOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; POLITICAL MEMO; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 891 words


WASHINGTON -- In his first Inaugural Address, President Obama stirred liberals
by proclaiming that ''we reject as false the choice between our safety and our
ideals.''

Five years in, the presidency has taught Mr. Obama that the choice he rejected
is not so false after all. Ever since the disclosures about the extent of
National Security Agency surveillance, leading to the changes that Mr. Obama
plans to announce in a speech on Friday, a chastened president has embraced
''balance'' between competing imperatives of security and civil liberties.

History shows that is what the Oval Office does to everyone who occupies it. The
grinding reality of governing the country nearly always gives the lie to the
facile, I-can-square-the-circle formulations that winning candidates carry with
them into the White House.

Those formulations typically stem from candidates' attempts to please all sides
in contentious debates by acknowledging the concerns of opponents without
surrendering their own principles. But it is rarely that easy.

A tour through recent history shows Mr. Obama with plenty of company.

When John F. Kennedy was campaigning for the White House and trying to counter
concerns about his youth and inexperience as compared with his opponent, Richard
M. Nixon, the two-term vice president, he ran as a fierce Cold Warrior who would
close a ''missile gap'' with the Soviet Union. Once elected, he vowed in his
Inaugural Address to ''pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship,
support any friend, oppose any foe'' in the nation's defense.

Within three months, Kennedy had begun to distance himself from the idea that
the missile gap even existed. (Intelligence showed that the United States was
much better armed.) And he had, to his own and the nation's embarrassment,
withdrawn air cover for American-trained Cuban exiles seeking to overthrow Fidel
Castro at the Bay of Pigs.

Four years later, President Lyndon B. Johnson tried to calm turbulence beneath
the surface of postwar America while pursuing an ambitious civil rights, health
care and antipoverty agenda. ''The day and the time are here to achieve progress
without strife, to achieve change without hatred, not without difference of
opinion but without the deep and abiding divisions which scar the union for
generations,'' he said.

Johnson achieved much of the progress and change he sought, but with steadily
escalating strife and divisions that persist today in America's polarized
political system.

In 1968, Nixon won as a candidate hard-nosed enough to calm riotous streets. But
while promising ''decent order'' in his first Inaugural Address, he also sought
to blunt his reputation as ''Tricky Dick'' by citing ''the better angels our
nature'' -- words from Abraham Lincoln's first Inaugural Address -- as an answer
to the nation's ''crisis of the spirit.''

Five years later, Nixon resigned in disgrace over the Watergate scandal.

President Ronald Reagan insisted that he could cut taxes and the deficit at the
same time, but he accomplished the former as deficits ballooned. His successor,
President George Bush, pledged to curb the deficit while preserving Mr. Reagan's
tax cuts, but he ended up abandoning his no-new-taxes pledge to achieve a budget
deal with congressional Democrats.

President Bill Clinton vowed to ''invest more in our own people'' while also
cutting ''our massive debt.'' He left office with a budget surplus for the first
time in a generation, but Congress made him set aside many of the investments.

As a self-described ''compassionate conservative,'' President George W. Bush
advocated tax cuts while at the same time describing antipoverty work as a
biblical imperative. ''When we see that wounded traveler on the road to
Jericho,'' Mr. Bush told his first inaugural audience, ''we will not pass to the
other side.''

Mr. Bush proved far more successful on tax cutting than poverty fighting, and
the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, soon transformed Mr. Bush's agenda into that of a
wartime president.

The controversies accompanying Mr. Bush's emphasis on security -- the Iraq war,
the detainees held at Guantánamo Bay, the Abu Ghraib prison scandal and the
National Security Agency's surveillance -- ignited strong Democratic opposition.
But while Mr. Obama capitalized on the backlash against Mr. Bush's security
policies when he ran in the 2008 election, Mr. Obama also needed to assure
Americans he could keep them safe.

In practice, Mr. Obama has continued and in some cases expanded many of the
previous administration's security policies, from striking foes with drone
aircraft to maintaining the Guantánamo facility in Cuba to preserving
far-reaching N.S.A. surveillance.

If that represents a source of satisfaction to conservatives like former Vice
President Dick Cheney, it has angered Mr. Obama's liberal base as well as a
rising band of libertarian Republicans, among them Senator Rand Paul of
Kentucky.

Mr. Obama's position reflects the lesson that Johnson alluded to in his memoirs.
His father had told him no man could understand parenthood until becoming a
parent, Johnson wrote, and he came to think of the presidency the same way.

''Presidents are always going to grow and evolve because of what they learn,''
said the presidential historian Michael Beschloss. ''A president who does not do
that is someone you probably don't want as president.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/17/us/politics/on-spying-obamas-woes-echo-those-o
f-past-presidents.html

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


