                             1195 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rand Paul Wins Conservative Straw Poll

BYLINE: By JONATHAN MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 319 words


OXON HILL, Md. -- Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, won a presidential
straw poll at a prominent conservative conference here on Saturday, capturing 31
percent of the vote among no fewer than 10 potential candidates.

The straw poll, conducted at the annual Conservative Political Action
Conference, is hardly predictive of future presidential success. Indeed, Mr.
Paul's father, former Representative Ron Paul of Texas, won the poll in 2010 and
2011 but never came close to winning his party's nomination.

But the win by the younger Mr. Paul, a first-term senator, reflected the
enthusiastic reception he has received at the three-day conference. When Mr.
Paul took the stage on Friday, a capacity audience filled with college-age
Republicans, many of them wearing ''Stand With Rand'' lapel stickers, repeatedly
rose to their feet as he made the case for his brand of libertarian-infused
conservatism.

Among the senator's targets were the National Security Agency's data collection
practices and the expanded use of armed drones under President Obama.

The 2,459 participants in the straw poll were heavily young and indicated that
their politics matched the libertarian tendencies of Mr. Paul. A plurality, 41
percent, backed legalizing marijuana and another 21 percent said that it should
be legalized for medicinal purposes. And 78 percent of those who participated in
the poll said they disapproved of the N.S.A.'s ''use of data collection.''

Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, finished second in the straw poll with 11
percent of the vote.

The long-running conservative conference has always included significant numbers
of libertarian-leaning youths, but polls now show that the broader population of
young Republicans share some of those same views. That tilt and the following
Mr. Paul enjoys among such conservatives suggest a ready-made base of
20-somethings for him should he run for president in 2016.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/09/us/politics/rand-paul-wins-conservative-straw-
poll.html

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


