                             1124 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tensions Between Afghanistan and U.S. Increase as Airstrike Kills Civilians

BYLINE: By AZAM AHMED; Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 828 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- A coalition airstrike in a province north of Kabul killed
at least two Afghan villagers on Wednesday morning, prompting President Hamid
Karzai to order an official inquiry and escalating tensions yet again between
the allies over civilian deaths.

While details of the fighting in the Seya Gerd district of Parwan Province
remained sketchy, officials confirmed that a strike had been called in after
Afghan and coalition Special Operations advisers took heavy fire during a
mission to clear the area. The gunfight, which took place in an insurgent
stronghold used to carry out attacks on Bagram Air Base, claimed the life of one
coalition soldier, at least 10 Taliban fighters and several civilians, though
the exact number was not yet clear, coalition and Afghan officials said.

Civilian casualties have always been a contentious issue in Afghanistan, but
perhaps never more so than now. With the fate of a long-term security deal
between the United States and Afghanistan hanging in the balance, Mr. Karzai has
made a cessation of the airstrikes, which take the biggest toll on civilians, a
precondition of any agreement. In late November, after a drone strike claimed
the lives of civilians in southern Helmand Province, the president all but
threatened to cancel the deal.

The civilian deaths on Wednesday are likely to worsen the relationship between
the Afghans and Americans, a partnership that seems to grow more strained with
every passing week. Mr. Karzai's recent order to release dozens of prisoners
believed to have killed American forces, despite weeks of threats of a troop
withdrawal by the United States, caused the latest dispute between the allies.

A spokesman for Mr. Karzai, Aimal Faizi, said eight civilians had been killed in
the airstrike. ''Of course, this is exactly about one of our conditions about
the signing'' of a long-term security agreement, he said, ''but it seems like it
is not understood. How many more innocent Afghans have to die so it gets the
attention of U.S. officials?''

So heavy is the tension over the issue of civilian casualties that, after the
episode in Parwan, the presidential palace, the coalition and even the Taliban
released statements giving it their own spin.

The palace said it had appointed a fact-finding delegation that would report
back with details in three days. The coalition, in addition to offering an
apology for any civilian casualties, sought to offer context to the
''Afghan-led'' operation in its statement.

''This deliberately planned clearing operation was conducted to disrupt
insurgent activities in the district, including attacks on Bagram Air Field, and
in support of Afghan National Security Forces' tactical priorities,'' the
statement said. ''Local district and provincial officials were informed in
advance of the operation and were provided updates during and after the
actions.''

The Taliban, for their part, seized the opportunity to score a propaganda point.
While the Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, sent a note to reporters saying
that his email address had been hacked ''by the enemy,'' the insurgent group
managed to put out a brief statement about the deaths.

''Last night foreign and local forces targeted and bombed civilian homes,'' the
statement said. ''Four children and two women were martyred, and a number of
them were wounded. The misery is still going on.''

The Seya Gerd district of Parwan, and the neighboring Wazghar Valley, has been a
hotbed of the insurgency for the last few months, according to Afghan officials.
Taliban fighters frequently attack the local police in the area, and it is
believed that several recent attacks on Bagram Air Base were carried out from
the area.

Aziz Ahmad Zaki, a spokesman for the governor of Parwan, said that the coalition
Special Operations advisers had come to assist the Afghan forces in the area,
setting up alongside them in a district check post that quickly came under fire
from Taliban attackers on Tuesday.

Around 6:30 a.m. Wednesday, Afghan and coalition forces began a clearance
operation in the Wazghar Valley, but ran into a Taliban ambush, taking fire from
several compounds in the area at once, officials said.

''Afghan and coalition forces returned fire and required defensive air support
to suppress the enemy fire,'' according to the coalition statement.

''The insurgents in this area enjoy freedom of movement allowing them to harass
and threaten the local population as well as stage and facilitate attacks,'' the
statement said. ''Tragically, two civilians inside a building from which
insurgents were firing on the commandos were killed.''

The fallout from the deaths remains to be seen. The early statement from the
presidential palace was measured when compared with the outrage expressed after
the civilian deaths in Helmand in late November. At the time, the president
threatened to cancel the long-term security deal if such ''arbitrary acts and
oppression of foreign forces continue.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/16/world/asia/us-afghan-tensions-increase-as-airs
trike-kills-more-civilians.html

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


