                              11 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 5:37 PM EST

Philosophical approaches to drone regulation

BYLINE: Eugene Volokh

LENGTH: 1139 words


Federal, state, and local governments are actively considering how to regulate
domestic drone use. We will explore the history of this regulation, the current
regulatory landscape, and some of the existing laws enacted by states in future
posts. This post describes the philosophical approaches to drone regulation.

As policymakers consider drone regulation - particularly with respect to privacy
and safety - the possible fields of regulation fall into five principal realms:
operators, flight, purpose, property and surreptitious use. Some of these
categories face practical difficulties, while others present constitutional
issues. Nevertheless, these five fields offer a framework to help make sense of
the legislation and regulation emerging around the use of drones.

Regulating Who Can Fly

Regulators might permit only certain people or entities to fly drones. As is the
case with cars, planes, and helicopters, regulations might provide that only
people with a valid, government-issued license can fly a drone. For example,
North Carolina recently enacted a law mandating a drone-license, and the FAA
already has a system for providing certifications and exemptions to authorize
government agencies and some private actors to fly drones. More broadly,
policies might permit only certain classes of people or entities to fly drones.
It is conceivable that some laws might allow private entities to use drones, but
not law enforcement entities - or vice versa. For example, Virginia has imposed
a moratorium on law enforcement use of drones.

Regulating The Flight Of Drones

Governments might regulate the flight of drones. As First Amendment lawyers, we
think of this category as "time, place, and manner" regulations. With respect to
"time," it is possible that regulations will limit drone-flight to certain times
of day. For instance the FAA's Roadmap for integrating drones (a report formally
titled "Integration of Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems in National Airspace
System Roadmap") suggests that its initial proposed regulations of small drones
will permit drones to fly only during daylight.

Regulations also will limit where drones fly. Some of those regulations will
impose permanent restrictions, while others might be temporary. Like planes and
helicopters, drones will not be permitted in restricted airspace. (In fact, the
FAA already is informing drone operators that they cannot operate in certain
airspace, like this past Saturday's football game at the University of
Michigan.) Historically, the FAA has asked hobbyists to fly model airplanes away
from congested areas. Some have suggested that guidance should become the law
for drones generally. Some laws already restrict drones from flying over certain
kinds of property. For example, an ordinance in Conoy Township, Pa., provides
that flying a drone over someone else's property is a summary offense. Other
laws impose restrictions based on how high a drone flies. The FAA asks hobbyists
to fly their model airplanes under 400 feet, while Oregon has enacted
legislation giving landowners a possible cause of action if someone flies a
drone over their property below 400 feet.

The law also might regulate the manner in which drones are flown. Regulators
might require small drones to be flown within visual line-of-sight, meaning an
operator must be able to physically see her drone as it flies - a position the
FAA already has suggested it will implement. And, laws will almost certainly
forbid drones from being flown recklessly. Indeed, the FAA has taken the
position that it already has the authority to punish reckless drone flight.

Regulating Based On Purpose Of The Flight

Some policies have sought to place limits on drones based on their intended use.
For instance, the FAA has long taken the position that drones cannot be used for
commercial purposes without specific authorization, but hobbyists are free to
use them. State legislatures have debated when government entities can use
drones, with some states imposing limits on government agencies' and law
enforcement authorities' ability to use them. Other states have sought to
curtail private use of drones by permitting them to be used only for certain
purposes, like selling houses or monitoring utilities. Still others are
considering legislation that would prevent drones from being used by hunters or,
alternatively by people to interfere with hunting.

Regulating Recording Based On The Property Involved

In considering regulations on drone filming or photography, one approach might
be to regulate drones' ability to record images based on the property involved,
treating different kinds of property differently. One possibility - drawing on a
well-established body of tort and criminal law - is to restrict drones from
recording people in places where they have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
Alternatively, they might allow recording in certain areas or certain kinds of
property, but not others. Some states have sought to distinguish between
recording over public and private property. Or, regulators might protect certain
kinds of property. For example, Louisiana restricts the ability to record or
photograph "targeted facilities," such as nuclear power plants and gas
refineries. Texas, meanwhile, has adopted a number of limits on where drones can
record, but allows them to record anywhere within 25 miles of the Mexican
border.

Regulating Surreptitious Use

Policymakers might seek to restrict the surreptitious use of drones. They might
try to accomplish this objective by requiring drone operators to obtain consent
before flying over private property or filming someone. Alternatively, drone
operators might be required to provide advance notice of where they are flying
or filming. Or, governments might require drones to be made more visible by
requiring them to be certain colors or sizes. In addition, there have been calls
for regulation that requires technology or some other system that identifies who
owns and is operating a drone.

* * * * *

Which of these areas policymakers choose to regulate and how they choose to
regulate within those areas will have significant ramifications for drone
operations and the future of the drone industry. The policy questions are
complex. For legislators and regulators, the answers have not come easily.
Tomorrow, we will survey the history of the FAA's piecemeal policy-making on
drones, a history that has left many issues unresolved for far too long. We also
will explain some of the recent regulatory developments at the FAA and the
resulting lawsuits.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


