                             1165 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Work and No Payoff

BYLINE: By ALEX WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1891 words


Like other 20-somethings seeking a career foothold, Andrew Lang, a graduate of
Penn State, took an internship at an upstart Beverly Hills production company at
age 29 as a way of breaking into movie production. It didn't pay, but he hoped
the exposure would open doors.

When that internship proved to be a dead end, Mr. Lang went to work at a second
production company, again as an unpaid intern. When that went nowhere, he left
for another, doing whatever was asked, like delivering bottles of wine to 27
offices before Christmas. But that company, too, could not afford to hire him,
even part time.

A year later, Mr. Lang is on his fourth internship, this time for a company that
produces reality TV shows. While this internship at least pays him (he makes $10
an hour, with few perks), Mr. Lang feels no closer to a real job and worries
about being an intern forever. ''No one hires interns,'' said Mr. Lang, who sees
himself as part of a ''revolving class of people'' who can't break free of the
intern cycle. ''Is this any way to live?''

The intern glass ceiling isn't limited to Hollywood. Tenneh Ogbemudia, 23, who
aspires to be a record executive, has had four internships at various New York
media companies, including Source magazine and Universal Music Group.

''In any given month, I'd say I apply to at least 300 full-time jobs,'' she
said, noting these attempts were to no avail. ''On the other hand, I can apply
to one or two internship positions a month and get a call back from both.''

Call them members of the permanent intern underclass: educated members of the
millennial generation who are locked out of the traditional career ladder and
are having to settle for two, three and sometimes more internships after
graduating college, all with no end in sight.

Like an army of worker ants, they are a subculture with a distinct identity,
banding together in Occupy Wall Street-inspired groups and, lately, creating
their own blogs, YouTube channels, networking groups and even a magazine that
captures life inside the so-called Intern Nation.

It is a young, rudderless community that is still trying to define itself. ''I'm
just wondering at what point how many internships is too many,'' said Lea, who
received a master's degree from Parsons, the New School for Design two years ago
and aspires to work as a magazine art director. (She was allowed to use only her
first name to avoid jeopardizing a current job application.) So far, her résumé
has been limited to three internships -- planning events for teenagers at the
Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, compiling news clippings for a public relations
agency in New York, and being the ''fetch-the-coffee girl'' at an art gallery.

While feeling trapped inside what she calls a ''never-ending intern life,'' Lea
satisfies her creative impulses by editing a food and drinks column at a
lifestyle blog, selling coral fan necklaces on Etsy, and starting a charity to
teach children about ''responsible'' street art. She wonders if she should
surrender to a fourth internship or settle for an office job outside her chosen
field.

''I'm 26 right now,'' she said. ''I know that everyone has their own pace, but I
don't really feel like a real adult right now.''

There was a time not long ago when internships were reserved for college
students. But that era is passing, with loosely defined internships -- some
paying a small stipend, some nothing -- replacing traditional entry-level jobs
for many fresh out of college.

The moribund economy is, without question, a primary factor behind the shift.
Even though the employment picture has brightened since the depths of the Great
Recession, few would describe it as sunny. The general unemployment rate inched
down to 6.6 percent last month, but the jobless rate for college graduates age
20 to 24 stood at 8 percent in 2013, compared with 5.1 percent in 2007,
according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

No one tracks how many college graduates take internships, but employment
experts and intern advocates say the number has risen substantially in recent
years. ''The postgraduate internship has exploded,'' said Ross Perlin, author of
the book ''Intern Nation: How to Earn Nothing and Learn Little in the Brave New
Economy.'' ''This was something that became a real mainstream experience after
the recession began.''

But the poor job market is not the only reason that recent graduates feel stuck
in internships. Millennials, it is often said, want more than just a paycheck;
they crave meaningful and fulfilling careers, maybe even a chance to change the
world.

That may explain why millennials like Breanne Thomas, 24, an aspiring
entrepreneur in Brooklyn, has bounced from internship to internship. Unlike her
parents' generation, it is not enough to find a steady job; she wants to follow
the path of Mark Zuckerberg, or at least to get in on the ground floor of the
next Facebook, the next Twitter.

'' 'Success' doesn't always mean financial success, but doing something you're
passionate about,'' said Ms. Thomas, who graduated with two bachelor's degrees
from the University of Oregon in 2012. ''It's kind of my goal one day to have my
own company, to be part of something that is going to do something great. That's
why I'm in tech.''

That kind of ambition comes with a price, however. Competition for salaried
high-tech jobs is fierce, so Ms. Thomas has had to settle for internships:
three, so far, including at a five-person food-delivery start-up, a beauty
products site and, currently, a well-known social-networking app that she asked
not to name.

While the idea of slaving away in two, three or four quasi jobs without a clear
path for advancement may seem unimaginable to an older generation, those in
their 20s seem to respond to their jobless fate with a collective shrug. To
them, internships are the new normal. ''For some people, being an accountant,
taking a safe route, is perfectly fine, but that's not where my values lie,''
Ms. Thomas said.

This is especially true in more creative fields, whether it is filmmaking or
publishing. ''It's fashion,'' said Dawn Joyce, 24, when asked why she has gone
through four internships since 2010. Those include unpaid stints at a major
fashion magazine, where she mingled with Zooey Deschanel and Julianne Moore at
photo shoots, and at a public relations firm, where she held front-row seats for
late-arriving celebrities like Selena Gomez. ''I consider myself to be pretty
jaded already.''

''I have seen a lot of people beside me quit,'' Ms. Joyce added. ''It's sort of
like, 'Let's see who lasts the longest.' ''

As their ranks have swelled, interns are beginning to see themselves as part of
a special class, albeit one with few privileges and perks. They share their own
brand of gallows humor, their own pride of purpose and their own battle-hardened
worldview tinged with a risk-taker's optimism.

This intern-centric culture has spawned numerous blogs, a place at the multiplex
(think of ''The Internship,'' from last year, with Owen Wilson and Vince Vaughn
playing a pair of 40-something Google interns) and even its own magazine.

Intern magazine, which came out in October, grew out of the frustrations of Alec
Dudson, 29, a former intern who toiled in London's publishing industry. ''I was
working 30 hours a week at odd jobs, on top of 40 hours a week at internships,
and I knew there wasn't a job at the end of it,'' said Mr. Dudson, who slept on
friends' sofas to help make ends meet. ''I needed to do something of my own.''

That something turned out to be a glossy, biannual magazine that is geared for
those with a design and creative bent, and looks like a fashion bible for the
Black Book crowd. The feature articles provide tips and inspiration for the
faceless drones who keep the style industries humming, including a first-person
piece by a Spanish photographer who cut his teeth by interning for Richard Kern
in New York.

''There is a culture of internships, a situation whereby it is completely normal
for young people to think that working unpaid is just part of the process,'' Mr.
Dudson said. ''Nobody even questions it. I wasn't the only one confused about
where the boundaries lie, how much of this stuff do you have to do before
someone takes you seriously.''

These days, there are no shortages of places, online and off, for interns to
gather and commiserate. Groups like FindSpark, a New York jobs network for
recent graduates, offer meetups and mixers with themes like ''Find and Follow
Your Passion'' and ''Your Personal Brand'' that draw hundreds. Interns who tire
of glad-handing their way through mixers with frozen smiles often vent their
frustrations on anonymous blogs like Fashion Intern Problems, the short-lived
Life of an Investment Banking Summer Slave and, for Hollywood's version of Roman
galley slaves, Anonymous Production Assistant Blog and Intern-Anonymous.

''I worked 32 hours a week and was treated like a minion,'' one commenter wrote
on Intern-Anonymous. ''I was then fired because they were afraid I would leak
information.''

Lately, however, long-suffering interns are starting to do more than complain.
They point to the Labor Department's six criteria for legal internships, which
stipulate that companies that do not pay interns must provide vocational
education and refrain from substituting interns for paid employees, among
others. Those rules have been highly open to interpretation and their
enforcement is sporadic.

In a much-publicized lawsuit in 2011, two unpaid interns sued the filmmakers of
''Black Swan'' alleging a violation of federal and New York State minimum wage
laws. Last June, a federal judge in New York ruled in favor of the interns. (The
case is on appeal.)

''It's an institutionalized form of wage theft,'' said Eric Glatt, 44, one of
the plaintiffs who has since helped form an Occupy-inspired group called Intern
Labor Rights. Last year, the group distributed fake swag bags and buttons that
read ''Pay Your Interns'' outside fashion shows in New York.

That ruling opened the floodgates to some 30 other lawsuits against companies
like Warner Music Group, Elite Model Management and, perhaps most notably, Condé
Nast. In that suit, one plaintiff, Lauren Ballinger, who interned at W while
still in college, conjured visions of ''The Devil Wears Prada'' with her stories
of toiling away on menial tasks like organizing jewelry for 12-hour shifts for a
stipend that she claimed broke down to $1 an hour.

While the plaintiffs in the Condé Nast suit had been students at the time of
their internships, such lawsuits have sent a chill through the Intern Industrial
Complex, affecting undergraduates and postgraduates alike as companies scramble
to adjust to the new legal landscape.

Some, like NBC Universal, have responded by paying interns. Other former intern
magnets are redefining the position (Gawker Media now calls its entry-level
workers ''editorial fellows'').

In some cases, however, the intern revolt may be backfiring.

Last October, Condé Nast announced that it was ending the internship programs
within its 25 magazines, which means that 20-something aspiring magazine editors
will have one less place to get a toehold for their ''meaningful'' careers.

''Can you hear it?'' one commenter wrote on a WWD article about the ending of
internships. ''It's my dream of a Vogue internship going straight out the
window.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/16/fashion/millennials-internships.html

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: From top, Breanne Thomas is interning for a tech company in New
York
Andrew Lang, in West Hollywood, Calif., is searching for a full-time job in the
entertainment industry
and Alec Dudson in the space in Manchester, England, where he edits Intern.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
STEPHANIE DIANI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 ANDREW TESTA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST14) DRAWING (DRAWING BY MICHAEL
MEISTER)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


