                             1160 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Closing In on Basic Mideast Principles

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 561 words


For months, Israelis and Palestinians, with American mediation, have been
working on a set of principles that would serve as the basis for negotiations on
a final peace agreement. By the end of March, the world is likely to know
whether they have been successful. If the two sides agree on basic principles --
a framework for further talks -- it will be an important step. But then comes
the even tougher task of translating principles into a final deal that would
recognize a Palestinian state alongside Israel.

The principles that Secretary of State John Kerry has been working on are often
seen as American ideas. But rather than being impossible demands imposed by
Washington, they will reflect what the administration thinks is possible -- its
best judgment on where the two parties are on the major issues and what they
might be able to agree to in a final deal. Even so, this does not guarantee
acceptance; the political pressures on both sides are immense, especially within
Israel.

Some mostly predictable details have leaked out. The framework is expected to
call for an end to the conflict and all claims, following a phased Israeli
withdrawal from the West Bank (based on the 1967 lines), with unprecedented
security arrangements in the strategic Jordan Valley. Israel will retain certain
settlement blocs and the Palestinians will be compensated with Israeli
territory; the American special envoy, Martin Indyk, has reportedly told Jewish
leaders that up to 80 percent of the Jewish settlers will be annexed to Israel.

There is less clarity on other core issues, including, crucially, the future of
Jerusalem. The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, has told The Times that as
part of a peace agreement Israeli soldiers could remain in the West Bank for up
to five years. He also promised that Palestine would be demilitarized, retaining
only a police force, and invited a NATO force to stay there indefinitely. That
Mr. Abbas has accepted Israel's concern about security and appears willing to
address it is a positive sign. American officials have also spoken of putting
drones and sensors along the border.

Mr. Kerry, to his credit, has been publicly forcing both sides to confront the
consequences they face if the process fails. At recent international
conferences, he has spoken about the stakes, including the potential for a new,
more virulent cycle of violence; the potential loss of Israel's identity as a
democratic state; and the peril from a growing international boycott against
Israel that could result in diplomatic isolation as well as economic losses.

All of this has touched some very tender nerves in Israel, where some criticism
of Mr. Kerry has been borderline outrageous. Naftali Bennett, the economy
minister and far-right leader, has effectively accused him of anti-Semitism.
Despite his three decades of support for Israel, Mr. Kerry has become a
convenient scapegoat for those in Benjamin Netanyahu's coalition government who,
like Mr. Bennett, are fundamentally hostile to a peace deal. The prime minister
could face the possibility of having to form a new coalition if he really wants
to move forward.

The framework is still a work in progress. There is a lot riding on Mr. Kerry's
ability to guide a process that will lead to negotiations on a final deal,
presuming Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas have the courage to follow through.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/10/opinion/closing-in-on-basic-mideast-principles
.html

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


