                             1198 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Salesman Swimming With Sharks

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 779 words


Trying to explain why young people should buy health insurance, President Obama
said his health care plan would cost consumers no more than their cellphone
bills. His host, Zach Galifianakis, looked bored. ''Is this what they mean by
drones?''

When Mr. Obama appeared on the popular online comedy show ''Between Two Ferns''
on Tuesday, the question wasn't whether the president could hold his own -- he
has already proved that he can keep up with pop culture.

Fans of ''Between Two Ferns,'' a mock celebrity interview show on the comedy
website Funny or Die, mostly wanted to see if the show's star, Mr. Galifianakis,
would treat the president as rudely as he treats his other guests.

He did.

With a straight face, Mr. Galifianakis asked Mr. Obama whether ''Ambassador
Rodman'' had gone to North Korea on his behalf, and if he would now send Hulk
Hogan to Syria -- or, he asked, ''is that more of a job for Tonya Harding?''

Mr. Obama played along, muttering, ''Zach, he's not our ambassador.''

''Between Two Ferns'' is a sendup of public-access shows, with tinny music and
misspelled captions, and the humor is webcam deadpan: Mr. Galifianakis solemnly
asks inane or cringingly rude questions that guests deflect with varying degrees
of awkward silence. (He once asked a stone-faced Natalie Portman: ''You shaved
your head for 'V for Vendetta.' Did you also shave your V for vagina?'')

More than any other president, Mr. Obama surfs the media, looking for new ways
to reach viewers who don't watch the news or even television. The president
doesn't seem worried about tarnishing the dignity of his office. As his tenure
nears its end, he seems more intent on being the salesman in chief.

Mr. Galifianakis seemed most intent on not giving his special guest special
treatment. It wasn't until the end that Mr. Obama finally got what he had gone
on the show for, a nonsatirical plug for healthcare.gov. That web address was
flashed after the credits for ''Between Two Ferns'' had rolled, as if to
maintain some distance: Comedians, it seems, take their integrity more seriously
than presidents.

But Mr. Obama is competitive, and he certainly has comedy show experience. He
has ''slow-jammed'' the news with Jimmy Fallon, traded barbs with Stephen
Colbert and answered questions from the basketball Hall of Famer Charles
Barkley.

Mr. Obama fell out of character only once. Mr. Galifianakis didn't answer his
question about the annual turkey pardon and instead stared back at him so
balefully that Mr. Obama cracked a smile.

Mostly, the president tried to keep up with his host by putting him down -- for
example, making fun of his flop sequel, ''The Hangover Part III'' -- and that
was not quite as funny as his silences.

When Mr. Galifianakis suggested that if Mr. Obama had a son, he would probably
be a nerd like his father, Mr. Obama took mock umbrage that sounded like a
''Tonight'' show joke, not web satire. ''Do you think a woman like Michelle
Obama would marry a nerd?'' he asked indignantly. His host asked if he could
speak to the first lady and Mr. Obama replied, ''I'm not going to let her near
you.''

Still, it took confidence to take his message to such an unwelcoming arena. The
caption under his name described him as ''community organizer.'' His host asked
if he would put his presidential library in Hawaii or his ''home country of
Kenya.''

When it came time for Mr. Obama to discuss health care, Mr. Galifianakis sighed
wearily. ''Here we go, O.K., let's get this out of the way, what did you come
here to plug?'' When Mr. Obama asked him if he had heard of affordable health
care, Mr. Galifianakis replied, ''That's the thing that doesn't work?''

The show dutifully flashed on screen the 800 number that callers can use to sign
up for health care, only the number was spelled out: ''one eight hundred three
one eight two five nine six.''

At the opening, Mr. Galifianakis shuffled his notes and while pretending to be
speaking to the president before the show officially began, mumbled, ''Sorry I
had to cancel a few times.''

(By late Tuesday afternoon, the video had been seen over six million times, the
site said.)

The interview looked as if it had been filmed in the ''Between Two Ferns''
no-frills studio. But at the end, Mr. Obama pushed a button, and the black
backdrop fell, revealing that the interview had actually been recorded in the
White House. Even those intimidating surroundings didn't daunt Mr. Galifianakis.
He asked Mr. Obama, ''What is it like to be the last black president?''

Mr. Obama countered: ''Seriously? What's it like for this to be the last time
you ever talk to a president?'' But that's not likely.

Mr. Obama set a precedent, but so did his host.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/12/arts/television/hosting-obama-two-ferns-star-p
ulls-no-punches.html

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Obama trading barbs on the comedy show ''Between Two
Ferns.'' (C1)
 President Obama and Zach Galifianakis parrying on the comedy show ''Between Two
Ferns.'' (C2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


