                             1153 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On Thursday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 742 words


8 P.M. (NBC) WINTER OLYMPICS Coverage of the 2014 Games from Sochi, Russia,
begins with the men's and pairs short programs in the inaugural figure skating
team contest, which combines results in men's, women's, pairs and ice-dancing
competition. Of the 10 competing teams, Canada, Russia and the United States are
favored. (Above, a member of the Russian team, Yevgeny Plushenko.) Other
segments feature women's moguls in freestyle skiing and men's and women's
slopestyle snowboarding. Shaun White has announced that he will drop out of the
first-time slopestyle event.

12:30 P.M. (Encore) ADAPTATION (2002) The director Spike Jonze and the writer
Charlie Kaufman (along with his imaginary twin, Donald, who is also credited
with the screenplay) journey into metafiction in this movie about the two
Kaufmans (Nicolas Cage, in both roles) and Susan Orlean (Meryl Streep), a New
Yorker writer whose book ''The Orchid Thief'' inspired the film. Chris Cooper
won an Oscar for best supporting actor for his role as an orchid obsessive; Ms.
Streep and Mr. Cage also received Oscar nominations. '' 'Adaptation' is, most
obviously, a movie about itself, as gleefully self-referential an exercise in
auto- deconstruction as you could wish,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York
Times. ''But it is also, more deeply, a movie about its own nonexistence -- a
narrative that confronts both the impossibility and the desperate necessity of
storytelling, and that short-circuits our expectations of coherence,
plausibility and fidelity to lived reality even as it satisfies them. Common
sense suggests that there could never be such a movie, but if there could, it
would have to be one of the slipperiest, most fascinating and, by any sane
reckoning, best movies of the year.''

7:30 P.M. (21) WLIW ARTS BEAT This new series celebrates culture on Long Island,
starting with a tour of the work of Sonic, a graffiti artist from Huntington; a
look at the Broadway show ''After Midnight''; an interview with the actor Bryan
Cranston; and a photography exhibition by the singer Graham Nash.

8 P.M. (13) NYC-ARTS Philippe de Montebello, the former director of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the journalist Paula Zahn host this program,
which looks at the photographs of Lynn Goldsmith; ''Richard Serra: New
Sculpture,'' at the Gagosian Gallery; Angélique Kidjo, at Town Hall; Rioult
Dance, at the 92nd Street Y Harkness Dance Center; ''Alta Moda by Mario
Testino,'' at the Queen Sofía Spanish Institute; ''Folk Couture: Fashion and
Folk Art,'' at the American Folk Art Museum; and BAMcinématek's Vengeance Is
Hers film series. In ''MetroFocus,'' at 8:30, Jenna Flanagan reports from
Syracuse, one of the six sites chosen by the Federal Aviation Administration to
test the safety of drones in public airspace. Rafael Pi Roman interviews Jane
Pauley about her book ''Your Life Calling: Reimagining the Rest of Your Life.''
Jared Bowen talks with the ''Downton Abbey'' actors Lesley Nicol (Mrs. Patmore),
Allen Leech (Tom Branson) and Phyllis Logan (Mrs. Hughes).

8 P.M. (CBS) THE BIG BANG THEORY Amy (Mayim Bialik) persuades Sheldon (Jim
Parsons) to join Howard (Simon Helberg) and Bernadette (Melissa Rauch) for a
Valentine's Day trip to Napa Valley. In ''The Millers,'' at 8:30, Nathan (Will
Arnett) is determined to surprise Carol (Margo Martindale) on her birthday. In
''The Crazy Ones,'' at 9, the daughter (Missi Pyle) of a dead jingle writer who
was not well liked asks Simon (Robin Williams) to give a eulogy. And in ''Two
and a Half Men,'' at 9:30, Alan (Jon Cryer) learns that Lyndsey (Courtney
Thorne-Smith) broke up with Larry (D. B. Sweeney) but didn't tell him, while
Walden (Ashton Kutcher) tries to prove that he's a man's man.

11:50 P.M. (MoreMax) PITCH PERFECT (2012) Beca (Anna Kendrick) joins a college
female a cappella group trying to sing its way back to respectability after
humiliating itself in a national competition in this musical comedy directed by
Jason Moore. Skylar Astin plays Jesse, a member of a rival male group, who
desires sweet harmony with Beca. Rebel Wilson and Anna Camp (from left above)
round out the chorus with Brittany Snow. '' 'Pitch Perfect' has a pitch
problem,'' Neil Genzlinger wrote in The Times. He added that it was ''loaded
with the plotting conventions of the Disney Channel's tweener shows,'' which
''makes it only occasionally funny and not at all illuminating about the rich
world of a cappella singing.'' KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/06/arts/television/whats-on-thursday.html

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BARBARA WALTON/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
 PETER IOVINO/UNIVERSAL PICTURES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


