                             1102 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 31, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Year That Will Be

BYLINE: By PETER FUNT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 658 words


Late December is traditionally a time to recap the year's news, but do we really
have the stomach for it in 2013? Let's look ahead, with a precap of news sure to
happen in 2014.

Jan. 1 A White House brunch ends abruptly as participants fail to agree on a New
Year's toast. Democrats reportedly favored ''Here's to health and prosperity,''
while G.O.P. leaders objected to the term ''health.''

Jan. 18 Bill O'Reilly's new book, ''Killing Literature,'' debuts at No.3 on the
New York Times best-seller list.

Feb. 2 At the Super Bowl, N.F.L. officials announce a new protocol for
evaluating possible concussions. Injured players will be required to recite
three gay slurs in 60 seconds before being allowed back on the field.

Feb. 10 Following months of protests by disgruntled workers, the Labor
Department finally cracks down on the nation's largest employer by demanding it
decide once and for all whether its name should be spelled Walmart or Wal-Mart.

March 11 Delta Air Lines clarifies that standing room at airport boarding areas
''will remain free for the foreseeable future,'' but that seats for passengers
waiting to board will now cost $25.

March 18 Hillary Rodham Clinton begins her 12-state ''Set the Record Straight''
tour, aimed at convincing voters that she has not decided whether she will seek
the presidency in 2016.

March 30 Hoping to silence critics, NBC's ''Saturday Night Live'' hires a female
cast member who is part black, part Native American and part Republican.

April 16 Kellogg's unveils a new breakfast cereal called Cholester-Os, ''A tasty
blend of sugar, oats and Lipitor,'' providing 90 percent of the new recommended
daily dose of statins.

April 21 The White House releases figures for its first ''National Online Easter
Egg Hunt.'' A total of nine children were able to log on -- four in
Massachusetts, three in California and two in New Jersey. A White House
spokesman, Jay Carney, tells reporters, ''This gives us something to build on.''

May 9 Google and Warner Bros. reveal that ''Gravity'' will have its mobile
device debut on Google Glass. For full effect, viewers will wear Google 3-D
contact lenses under their Google glasses.

May 22 The Gallup Organization says it is suspending congressional approval
polls, newspaper readership polls and Kanye West Q ratings, until data return to
''scientifically measurable levels.''

May 26 President Obama delivers a Memorial Day speech, with signing provided by
Cedric the Entertainer.

June 3 CNN changes the name of Anderson Cooper's show to ''AC 1,095.'' According
to a news release, ''The new title more accurately reflects the number of times
Mr. Cooper's show appears on CNN each year.''

July 4 Macy's kicks off the holiday season by having Santa ride in the final
float of its Fourth of July Parade.

Aug. 9 The police in Palo Alto, Calif., crack down on people begging for
bitcoins.

Aug. 12 Bill O'Reilly's new book, ''Killing Conversation,'' becomes the first
title delivered by Amazon's fleet of drones. The recipient, Edith Johnston of
West Palm Beach, Fla., is unharmed, but three Pakistani civilians at a wedding
are injured in the delivery.

Sept. 18 A Pew poll reveals, ''If the 2024 presidential election were held
today, Chelsea Clinton would get 54 percent of the undecided female vote.''

Oct. 4 Oregon becomes the first state to recognize business partnerships between
same-sex marijuana growers.

Nov. 4 Bowing to pressure from its authors, Macmillan announces that in 2015 it
will limit Bill O'Reilly to 16 new books per annum.

Dec. 31 In a year-end message to the nation via YouTube, Mr. Obama says he
''misspoke'' a week earlier when he promised, ''If you don't like your holiday
gifts, you don't have to keep them.'' The president concedes that ''a small
percentage of Americans will not be able to return socks and mittens from
grandparents.''

Peter Funt is a writer and television host.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/31/opinion/the-year-that-will-be.html

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY WILL STAEHLE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


