                             1108 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 3, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clemency for Edward Snowden?

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 507 words


To the Editor:

It was a pleasure to read your editorial suggesting that Edward J. Snowden, the
National Security Agency contractor who released classified documents about the
United States government's surveillance program, should be returned to United
States (''Edward Snowden, Whistle-Blower,'' Jan. 2). But I was disheartened to
read that you would even suggest that he should face criminal charges, reduced
or otherwise.

Your editorial clearly indicates that he exposed wrongdoing and criminality
among our government rulers. Mr. Snowden should not receive any punishment
whatsoever, and the people whose misdeeds he exposed should face their own
criminal charges. Far from being brought home under a cloud of shame, he should
be given a hero's welcome.

MARC VENEZIANO Milton, Ga., Jan. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

I disagree with clemency for Edward J. Snowden. Giving him a lighter sentence or
treating him as a type of hero is a giant step down a slippery slope.

Revealing state secrets in this case will encourage others to do potential
damage by divulging classified information, even if it is purely an act of
conscience. Would a defense worker who thought the drone program was illegal be
justified or even congratulated for revealing intelligence about that program?

Mr. Snowden had better options than revealing to the world huge amounts of
sensitive data.

JOHN VASI Santa Barbara, Calif., Jan. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

If Edward J. Snowden had been a Chinese dissident exposing nefarious activities
of the Chinese government, the United States would have immediately offered him
political asylum, Time magazine would have made him Man of the Year, and Fox
News would have had a field day with the story.

Your editorial makes it quite clear that the hypocrisy of the United States
government knows no limits, with all sorts of bogus claims that Mr. Snowden
should have gone through channels and that he would have been protected had he
done so.

JOHN JAROS Philadelphia, Jan. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

Even ''considering the enormous value of the information he has revealed, and
the abuses he has exposed,'' the reputations of tens of thousands of civil
servants and military personnel at the National Security Agency have been
sullied.

Whether or not Edward J. Snowden is guilty is ultimately for a court of law to
decide. While most Americans will be quick to render a decision on the fate that
Mr. Snowden deserves, due process and the rule of law should continue to trump
any and all privileges afforded by Mr. Snowden's tenuous celebrity status.

MARK M. SPRADLEY Chevy Chase, Md., Jan. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

With your usual logic and eloquence, you make your case for Edward J. Snowden.
Clearly, shouldn't someone from the United States government have met with him
over this period of time to explore ways in which to allow his return and, as a
quid pro quo, have him detail all of his activities during his time as a
National Security Agency contractor and his conversations with foreign
governments?

R. D. LANGER Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., Jan. 2, 2014

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/03/opinion/clemency-for-edward-snowden.html

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY KATHERINE STREETER)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


