                             1197 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Watches Warily as Hezbollah Gains Battle Skills in Syria

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1082 words


TEL AVIV -- Hezbollah's distracting and costly engagement in the Syrian civil
war has offered some practical benefit to Israelis. It has also been a source of
foreboding.

On the one hand, Hezbollah, the militant Lebanese Shiite organization that
fought a monthlong war against Israel in 2006, is preoccupied with shoring up
the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria in its struggle against
rebel forces, and is suffering losses.

But Hezbollah is also acquiring battlefield experience, and the only way for Mr.
Assad, a longtime Hezbollah ally, to repay the group is by supplying it with
sophisticated weapons, according to Israeli military officials and experts --
strengths that could eventually be used against Israel.

''Hezbollah has 4,000 to 5,000 soldiers today in Syria,'' a senior Israeli
military officer told reporters at army headquarters here last week. ''This is a
major burden for Hezbollah but also a major advantage.'' Speaking on the
condition of anonymity in accordance with Israeli Army rules, he added, ''I have
no doubt that Hezbollah gained much more self-confidence because of the Syrian
experience.''

Hezbollah fired thousands of rockets at Israel during the 2006 war, which began
after Hezbollah captured two Israeli soldiers on the Israel-Lebanon border. More
than 1,000 Lebanese and dozens of Israelis were killed in the fighting, which
ended with a United Nations-brokered cease-fire. The war was deemed a failure by
many Israelis, though experts say it restored a degree of deterrence.

Since then, Israel's border with Lebanon has been mostly quiet. But Israel is
preparing intensively for another possible round of fighting with Hezbollah,
which military planners here see as inevitable. In their view, the experience
gained by Hezbollah's commanders and fighters in Syria is likely to make that
next round more challenging for Israel.

''This kind of experience cannot be bought,'' said Gabi Siboni, director of the
military and strategic affairs program at the Institute for National Security
Studies at Tel Aviv University.

Mr. Siboni and other analysts said that Hezbollah's experience in Syria should
not be overstated since the group is fighting rebel forces like the Free Syrian
Army and jihadist groups, not a modern, regular army. Still, Mr. Siboni said:
''It is an additional factor that we will have to deal with. There is no
replacement for experience, and it is not to be scoffed at.''

While the Israeli military used to plan for conventional armored battle -- tanks
against tanks -- now its forces train to withstand fighters who have antitank
missiles and secret underground hide-outs.

Over the last two years, according to military officials, much Israeli Army
training has moved from the southern desert to the Galilee region in the north,
where the terrain is similar to that of Lebanon and Syria.

At the same time, the Israeli military is conducting a mostly covert campaign to
maintain a qualitative edge over Hezbollah and curb the buildup of the group's
weaponry. Israel has refused to confirm or deny involvement in about half a
dozen airstrikes over the past year, mostly in Syrian territory. But Israel's
leaders have said they will act to prevent transfers of sophisticated weapons to
Hezbollah from Syria, such as accurate, long-range rockets and shore-to-ship or
ground-to-air missiles. Israel is also concerned about Hezbollah's acquisition
of unmanned aerial vehicles, more commonly known as drones or U.A.V.'s.

''A Hezbollah with modern surface-to-air systems, with modern U.A.V.'s, with
modern cybercapabilities, well, this is a different Hezbollah,'' the senior
military official said, one that could have ''much more appetite to taste
another conflict with Israel.''

In a departure from its usual practice of remaining silent about the Israeli
airstrikes, Hezbollah openly accused Israel of striking one of its positions on
the Lebanon-Syria border on the night of Feb. 24, and it threatened to retaliate
at a time and place of its choosing.

Days later, in another unusual development, Israeli forces in the Golan Heights
fired artillery shells at a small squad of men across the Israel-Syria frontier
who were said to have been trying to plant an explosive device. The Israeli
military described the men as ''Hezbollah-affiliated terrorists.'' The official
Syrian news agency, SANA, said the Israeli fire wounded seven Syrian security
personnel and four civilians.

If the men were indeed affiliated with Hezbollah, the episode could indicate
that the group has started operating against Israel in a new arena, along the
decades-old cease-fire line between Israel and Syria.

Still, many Israeli analysts believe that for Hezbollah, the disadvantages of
its engagement in Syria outweigh the advantages, and that there is an upside for
Israel.

Fighting to help preserve the Assad government in Syria is ''almost
existential'' for Hezbollah, said Ely Karmon of the International Institute for
Counterterrorism at the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, Israel. Under the
Assad family's rule, all of Hezbollah's Iranian-supplied weapons passed through
Damascus, Syria's capital. And the group, Mr. Karmon said, has ''always needed
the strategic umbrella of Syria.''

Hezbollah has been amassing weaponry since 2006, years before the civil war in
Syria began. But Mr. Karmon said that Hezbollah's advanced weapons, supplied by
Iran, were intended mainly for use against Israel in the event of an Israeli
attack on Iran's nuclear program.

Under cover of the chaos in Syria, Israel has been freer to take action against
the weapons buildup without fear of retaliation, the assumption being that
Hezbollah, embroiled in Syria, is not in a position now to open another broad
front against Israel.

In addition, analysts here say, the Lebanese group's image at home and in the
broader Arab world has been severely damaged because it is fighting Sunni rebels
in Syria while its legitimacy rested on its role in fighting Israel.

Hezbollah's reputation is suffering further, according to Shaul Shay, a former
deputy head of Israel's National Security Council, because of the increasing
spillover from the Syrian conflict onto Lebanese soil in the form of a wave of
deadly bomb attacks.

Syria is Hezbollah's ''Vietnam, Afghanistan or Iraq,'' said Yoram Schweitzer, an
expert at the Institute for National Security Studies. Though Hezbollah is
acquiring battle experience, Mr. Schweitzer said, ''in my view, the price it is
paying is greater than the gain.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/11/world/middleeast/israel-watches-warily-as-hezb
ollah-gains-battle-skills-in-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Israeli soldiers trained in the Golan Heights last week. Israel
has been preparing intensively for another possible round of fighting with
Hezbollah. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MENAHEM KAHANA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


