                             1138 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

False Claims in Afghan Accusations on U.S. Raid Add to Doubts on Karzai

BYLINE: By MATTHEW ROSENBERG; Afghan employees of The New York Times contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1542 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- It was the kind of dossier that the Taliban often publish,
purporting to show the carnage inflicted during a raid by American forces:
photographs of shattered houses and bloodied, broken bodies, and video images of
anguish at a village funeral, all with gut-churning impact and no proof of
authenticity.

But this time, it was the government of President Hamid Karzai that was handing
out the inflammatory dossier, the product of a commission's investigation into
airstrikes on Jan. 15 on a remote village and the supposed American cover-up
that followed.

In an apparent effort to demonize their American backers, a coterie of Afghan
officials appears to have crossed a line that deeply troubles Western officials
here: They falsely represented at least some of the evidence in the dossier, and
distributed other material whose provenance, at best, could not be determined.

An examination of the dossier by The New York Times also revealed that much of
the same material was posted on a Taliban website last week, a rare instance of
the militant group's political speech matching that of the government it is
fighting to topple.

Mr. Karzai's growing antipathy toward the United States is no secret, and
civilian casualties have proved to be one of the most corrosive issues between
the allies. Yet the photographs and the video, handed out by Mr. Karzai's office
last week, have injected a new level of vitriol into the relationship and shown
how the Karzai government's political speech has been increasingly mirroring
that of the Taliban -- including the insurgents' habit of twisting facts, or
simply making them up when necessary.

The purpose of the dossier, according to other Afghan officials, was to justify
Mr. Karzai's stalling on signing a long-term security agreement with the United
States and to improve the chances for peace talks with the Taliban by showing
that he is no American stooge, as the insurgents have often derided him.

For American and European officials, the episode has reinforced a growing sense
that for all the talk of securing an enduring partnership, Mr. Karzai may have
no intention of ever signing the security agreement. Without an agreement, the
Obama administration has said, it will pull American forces from Afghanistan
when the NATO combat mission here ends this year.

''There is no overall partnership,'' a European diplomat said. ''We have some
Afghan partners, and we have a lot of Afghans in the government who want us to
leave. I think we're all beginning to realize that.''

The troubled relationship with Mr. Karzai has worsened to a point where the
Afghan leader, in his public statements, seems to blame the United States for
the war with the Taliban. He often portrays American intransigence as the main
obstacle to peace, not the Taliban's unwillingness. The sentiment underpinned a
statement Mr. Karzai made on Jan. 18 after the insurgents attacked a restaurant
in Kabul popular with Western civilians, killing 21 people. He drew equivalence
between the restaurant attack and the latest airstrikes, using the opportunity
as a chance to castigate the United States along with the Taliban.

Speaking to reporters on Saturday, Mr. Karzai implied that Americans wanted the
security deal to keep the war here going. He could not agree to any deal, he
said, if Americans ''expect Afghanistan to continue as a semi-war zone for many
years to come.''

He cited the dossier to drive home his point. ''Did you see the video?'' he
said. ''Did you see the woman whose face was missing? She was a member of this
nation.''

Mr. Karzai's remarks seemed in line with what Afghan officials close to the
president say is his current habit of seeking out negative information about the
Americans, and often disregarding more neutral or positive reports. One official
said he has told advisers that the United States is ultimately responsible for
all Afghan deaths, even though the vast majority of civilian casualties come in
Taliban attacks, according to the United Nations.

Western officials and some Afghan have begun to push back. On Jan. 17, after the
lead Afghan investigator looking into the airstrikes said at least 14 civilians
had been killed, Abdul Basir Salangi, the governor of Parwan Province, where the
strikes took place, offered a blunt retort. He said the death toll was in the
single digits and those claiming higher deaths tolls were ''supporters of the
Taliban.''

No one disputes that civilians died in the airstrikes, which hit Wazghar, a
remote village in a valley thick with Taliban fighters. But more than a week
after the raid, the death tolls offered by the American-led coalition and the
Afghan government differ starkly, as do their accounts of how the civilians
died.

The operation was planned and led by the Afghan Army, American officials have
repeatedly emphasized. They said the airstrikes were necessary to save dozens of
Afghan commandos and a handful of American advisers who were pinned down by
heavy Taliban fire; an American and an Afghan had already been killed in the
action.

The airstrikes destroyed the two compounds producing the heaviest Taliban fire,
and two children were killed in one of the houses, they said.

By contrast, the Afghan commission appointed by Mr. Karzai to investigate the
raid described the action as primarily American, with roughly eight hours of
indiscriminate and unprovoked bombing followed by a house-to-house rampage by
American soldiers. The commission has said that it can prove that 12 civilians
were killed, and that there were indications of two to five additional civilian
deaths.

''Villagers on the streets and even inside their houses were shot,'' said Abdul
Satar Khawasi, a member of Parliament from the area who led the investigation.
''Ten houses were destroyed.''

He said the bulk of the evidence came from two sources: accounts given by
villagers, and the photographs and video that were distributed last Sunday by
Mr. Karzai's office.

No commission members appear to have actually visited Wazghar. Instead, Mr.
Khawasi sent his driver and a bodyguard to conduct the interviews and take
photographs and video, according to Mr. Salangi, the provincial governor.

But at least two of the images distributed in the dossier could not have shown
casualties from the Wazghar strikes, because the photos are more than three
years old.

One was taken at the funeral of victims of a NATO airstrike in northern
Afghanistan in 2009, which killed at least 70 civilians. It was distributed by
Agence France-Presse and Getty Images and published in The Times on Sept. 5,
2009, along with an article about the airstrike.

The origins of the second misrepresented photograph are murkier. It shows the
bodies of two boys wrapped in burial shrouds, and has been used for years on
websites assailing civilian deaths in American drone strikes in Pakistan.

Now both the Afghan government and the Taliban are using it: It was posted on
the Taliban's website two days before the government began handing out a CD-ROM
with images said to be from Wazghar.

Aimal Faizi, a spokesman for Mr. Karzai, said the commission assembled the
dossier and a reporter's query was ''the first time I am hearing'' that some of
the material was misrepresented.

American officials would say only that they thought the doubts about the dossier
spoke for themselves.

The CD-ROM contains nine other photographs, all of which appear to be frames
from a video clip on the disk. The video purports to show the funeral of
villagers who were killed in the airstrikes and houses that were destroyed. The
graphic images include some of a woman whose face is gone.

The Times' examination found no physical clues in the video that would help
determine where or when it was shot. The file's creation date is Dec. 18, nearly
a month before the raid, though it may not be accurate; digital time stamps on
the accompanying photos say they were created in April 2014, and the video's
embedded data could be similarly unreliable.

Even if the video is actually of a funeral in Wazghar, some Afghan and Western
officials said there was no way to tell from it whether an airstrike or some
other gunfire or explosion had killed the people seen being buried, or who was
responsible.

''There wasn't an investigation,'' said one commission member, who requested
anonymity to avoid being seen to publicly challenge Mr. Karzai.

The commissioner said some officials complained to Mr. Karzai about the
inquiry's conduct and conclusions, but he dismissed their objections in favor of
Mr. Khawasi's account. ''The president himself knows who is biased,'' the
commissioner said.

He was referring to Mr. Khawasi's well-documented anti-American sentiments. In a
video recorded two years ago, for instance, Mr. Khawasi is heard urging a crowd
of angry Afghans to wage a holy war against Americans, saying, ''Anyone who sits
silent is a traitor.''

Briefing reporters last week about his investigation, Mr. Khawasi called the
airstrikes ''cowardly bombardment.'' Americans, he said, ''are heartless
people.''

The Taliban have since posted the purported funeral video on their website. The
civilians were ''killed mercilessly,'' the narrator says, and the images of the
bodies show ''actions that have documented American savagery.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/world/asia/government-dossier-accusing-us-in-c
arnage-amplifies-doubts-about-karzai.html

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: An image of a funeral in Afghanistan that the government tied
to a recent American airstrike actually took place in 2009. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A6)
 A young man reportedly killed in the airstrike. The authenticity of the images
is under question. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AFGHANISTAN PRESIDENTIAL PALACE, VIA
ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


