                             1180 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chlorine

BYLINE: By JEANNETTE CATSOULIS

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; MOVIE
REVIEW; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 251 words


A line of cocaine disappears up a nostril in what turns out to be an apt
introduction to a movie about curdled characters seeking empty distractions. But
''Chlorine,'' Jay Alaimo's sour tale of suburban greed and marital
disappointment, can't even deliver a temporary high; mired in the blahs, the
blues and the midlife crazies, this poor man's ''American Beauty'' slowly sucks
your will to live.

Saddest of all is watching the exceptional Vincent D'Onofrio -- after a decade
of spicing up the formulaic recipe of ''Law & Order: Criminal Intent'' --
reduced to the dramatic gruel of Roger, a spineless banking drone. Roger has a
grasping, unhappy wife (Kyra Sedgwick) and two miserable children; he also
belongs to a country club where the dysfunctional ecology of the neighborhood
plays out in microcosm. While his wife explores biker-chick fantasies and
guzzles beer in the garage, Roger despairs of raising the capital to invest in a
crooked land deal. Even his sad-sack belly looks deflated.

After a long and painful birthing process, ''Chlorine,'' shot mostly in the New
Jersey suburbs, has emerged bruised and misshapen. Tantalized by flickers of the
movie that might have been, the actors strain to bring life to stereotypes --
the lecherous tennis pro; the sexually precocious teenager; too many bored
housewives to count -- stalled by cynicism and depression. Why keep up with the
Joneses when the Joneses hate themselves?

Opens on Friday in Manhattan. Directed by Jay Alaimo 1 hour 33 minutes; not
rated

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/28/movies/chlorine-stars-kyra-sedgwick-and-vincen
t-donofrio.html

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


