                             1154 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Tribes to Take Lead in Falluja Fight, U.S. Says

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and DURAID ADNAN; Michael R. Gordon reported from
Washington, and Duraid Adnan from Baghdad.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 943 words


WASHINGTON -- The Iraqi Army is planning to cordon off a key Sunni city now
occupied by jihadists so that Sunni tribes can lead the mission to secure it one
neighborhood at a time, a senior State Department official told Congress on
Wednesday.

''The plan is to have the tribes out in front, but with the army in support,''
said Brett McGurk, the State Department's top official on Iraq, describing
preparations to try to oust the jihadists from the city of Falluja, in Anbar
Province.

The Iraqi strategy to take on the militants has been developed with advice from
American military officers, including General Lloyd J. Austin III, the head of
the United States Central Command, who met in Baghdad last week with Iraqi
officials and military commanders.

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki said in a weekly address on Wednesday that
''the battle is about to end in Anbar.'' But Mr. McGurk told the House Foreign
Affairs Committee that General Austin had been urging ''patience and planning.''

''We're helping the Iraqis develop a plan,'' Mr. McGurk said.

As described by American officials, the Iraqi plan reflects a recognition that
having the Shiite-dominated Iraqi Army mount a frontal assault on a Sunni city
that has long been wary of outsiders could lead to an especially violent round
of urban warfare and fan sectarian tensions.

The jihadist strategy appears to be to provoke the Iraqi government to carry out
just such an assault. On Jan. 26, Mr. McGurk said, the militant group, known as
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, captured about a dozen Iraqi
soldiers near Falluja, paraded them through the city in a truck flying the black
flag of Al Qaeda, then videotaped their execution the next day.

''Falluja is the scene of a tense standoff,'' Mr. McGurk said.

In 2004, American forces took control of Falluja from insurgent forces at a
considerable cost in American lives. After the ''surge'' of American troops in
2007 and 2008, American officials portrayed the city as something of a success
story.

But on Jan. 1 of this year, Islamic State of Iraq and Syria militants drove into
Falluja and the nearby city of Ramadi in as many as 100 trucks equipped with
heavy machine guns and antiaircraft guns, Mr. McGurk said. The jihadists moved
quickly to control key intersections and destroy local police stations.

Though Al Qaeda, whose clout is diminishing, has broken with the jihadist group,
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria remains a formidable foe. The group, Mr.
McGurk said, has about 2,000 fighters in Iraq, and its longer-term objective is
to establish a base of operations in Baghdad. The group is led by Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, who has been officially designated as a global terrorist by the
State Department.

The jihadist fighters in Falluja, Mr. McGurk said, are well equipped, and
include snipers armed with .50-caliber rifles, making for potentially difficult
street-to-street fighting.

Adding to the difficulties facing the government, some of the Sunni tribes in
western Iraq are so alienated from the Shiite-dominated central government in
Baghdad that they have aligned themselves with the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria extremists in Falluja. Other Sunni tribes are sitting on the fence.

American officials have been pressing the Maliki government to build ties with
the tribes by giving them the same benefits that Iraqi soldiers receive and
promising to integrate them into the security forces.

Another challenge is a military one. When Mr. Maliki's forces took Basra in
2008, they did so with the help of American air power. But the Obama
administration has not offered to assist the Iraqi forces that are preparing to
retake Falluja with American-operated drones or airstrikes.

Iraq's air power, which is very modest, includes three Cessna turboprop planes
equipped with American Hellfire missiles, unarmored Bell helicopters and four
recently purchased Russian Mi-35 attack helicopters. Coordinating the Iraqi
military's air power, artillery fire and mortars with the Sunni tribal fighters
is also likely to be a considerable challenge.

Only about 100 American military officers are attached to the United States
Embassy, including, Mr. McGurk said, about a half-dozen ''special operators.''
They have been involved in advising the Iraqis and facilitating American arms
sales, but have no direct role in military operations in Iraq.

The Apache attack helicopters that the Obama administration wants to provide to
the Iraqis will not arrive in time for the battle for Falluja. The United States
plans to lease six Apaches in the late summer or early fall. The Iraqi
government is buying 24 more, but the delivery time can be as long as three
years. The first of the F-16 fighters that Iraq is buying from the United States
are to be delivered next fall.

In the meantime, the United States is planning to sell up to 500 Hellfire
air-to-ground missiles to supplement the 75 already delivered.

On Wednesday, it was the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria that was on the
offensive. The group took three villages in a northern province, Salahuddin,
which is adjacent to Anbar. It also continued its attacks in Baghdad. For the
second consecutive day, the international zone, which is the seat of diplomatic
and government offices, was attacked. Two dozen people were killed when suicide
bombers and a vehicle packed with explosives detonated at or near entrances to
the zone, according to the Interior Ministry.

In a separate attack on Wednesday, two car bombs exploded near a public market
in southern Baghdad, killing 12 people and wounding 23. Two rockets, identified
as Katyushas, struck the international zone on Tuesday, killing a soldier.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/06/world/middleeast/iraqi-army-to-cordon-off-fall
uja-before-tribes-try-to-retake-control-us-says.html

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Two dozen people were killed in blasts near the international
zone in Baghdad on Wednesday, according to the Interior Ministry. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AHMED SAAD/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


