                             1105 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

North Korean Leader Boasts of Strength After Purge

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 683 words


SEOUL, South Korea -- The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, on Wednesday called
for improving relations with South Korea and boasted of his regime's tightened
grip on power in his first public speech since the purge and execution of his
uncle, Jang Song-thaek, last month.

''North and South Korea should create a mood to improve relations,'' Mr. Kim
said in a nationally televised New Year's Day speech. ''It's time to end useless
slandering, and the North and the South should no longer do things that harm
reconciliation and harmony.''

Mr. Kim began delivering a New Year's Day speech after coming to power two years
ago, reviving the practice of his grandfather Kim Il-sung. During the rule of
his reclusive father, Kim Jong-il, the country's main state-run newspapers
issued a joint editorial to mark the day.

Analysts waited for this year's speech with unusual interest because it would be
the first since the purge of Mr. Jang, long considered Mr. Kim's mentor and the
regime's No. 2 figure. Mr. Jang was executed on Dec. 12 on charges of building a
faction within the ruling Workers' Party in a plot to overthrow Mr. Kim's
government.

''We took decisive actions to remove factional filth,'' Mr. Kim said Wednesday
in an apparent reference to the purge of Mr. Jang and his associates. ''Our
party has tightened its revolutionary ranks by making a timely decision to
ferret out and purge the anti-party, anti-revolutionary factional clique.''

The purge was the biggest political upheaval in North Korea in recent years.
Some analysts have said it indicated the further consolidation of Mr. Kim's
rule. But others speculated that he had failed to establish the kind of absolute
authority that his father and grandfather wielded and that the purge signaled a
power struggle in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.

South Korean policy-makers have warned that North Korea may attempt military
provocations against the South to build internal unity after the domestic
political trouble.

In his speech, Mr. Kim repeated his government's traditional condemnation of the
United States and South Korea for conducting war games on the divided Korean
Peninsula. The exercises ''created a situation where a trifle military skirmish
can spread into a full-blown war,'' he said. ''If there is another war on this
land, it will bring about a nuclear catastrophe, and the United States won't
escape it, either.''

Mr. Kim had also called for an end to ''confrontation'' with South Korea during
his last New Year speech, after his country launched a rocket in December 2012.
Washington condemned it as a test of long-range missile technology. Mr. Kim's
government further raised tensions by conducting its third underground nuclear
test in February.

In most of the first half of 2013, the North issued a torrent of threats of
missile and nuclear attacks at South Korea, the United States and its bases
around the Pacific. But it has since expressed a willingness to re-engage in
dialogue.

Under Mr. Kim, North Korea adopted the simultaneous development of the economy
and the nuclear weapons program as a key party line. Yet years of tightening
sanctions have made reviving the moribund economy even harder. South Korean
intelligence officials said Mr. Jang's purge was partly the result of a
factional struggle over the spoils of the country's few sources of foreign
currency, like exports of coal.

On Wednesday, Mr. Kim echoed the themes of previous New Year messages,
emphasizing that improving the living standards of North Koreans and
rejuvenating agriculture were main priorities. But he also reiterated a call for
strengthening the military through the development of advanced weapons like
drones.

North Korea has often called for improved ties with the South in its New Year
messages. It hopes for the return of billions of dollars of South Korean
investment, aid and trade, which had flowed during an era of reconciliation
between 1998 and 2008.

South Korea's president, Park Geun-hye, a conservative, says her nation will not
provide aid until the North wins the South's ''trust'' by moving toward
denuclearization.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/01/world/asia/north-korean-leader-says-he-wants-b
etter-ties-with-south.html

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kim Jong-un, seen at the new  Masik Pass resort, also called
for better relations with South  Korea in a New Year speech. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
RODONG SINMUN, VIA EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


