                             1134 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2014 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Make Legal Memos Public

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 263 words


To the Editor:

You are right to argue that the Obama administration needs to do more to make
public the critical legal opinions of the administration (''What Happened to
Transparency?,'' editorial, Jan. 8).

As a general matter, lawyers need some privacy protection to provide candid and
thoughtful advice to their clients. That privilege is well established. But
lawyers working for the federal government also have an obligation to the public
on whose behalf they serve.

And lawyers in the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel have the
authority to issue opinions that have the force of law. For these reasons,
previous heads of the Office of Legal Counsel have recommended that such
opinions be made publicly available. But this administration, like the previous
one, has been reluctant to follow this advice.

On a range of matters, from warrantless wiretapping to drone strikes and the
National Security Agency's Prism program, in which the emails and other online
activity of foreigners are collected, the government is hiding legal
justifications and creating secret law.

If the courts are unwilling to correct this trend, Congress needs to amend the
Freedom of Information Act to limit the scope of privilege for legal memos. In
those instances where the Justice Department expects others to follow its
advice, the analysis that supports its conclusions should be made public.

MARC ROTENBERG JULIA HORWITZ Washington, Jan. 8, 2014

The writers are, respectively, president of the Electronic Privacy Information
Center and coordinator of the center's Open Government Project.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/21/opinion/make-legal-memos-public.html

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


