                             1170 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Border's New Sentinels Are Robots, Penetrating Deepest Drug Routes

BYLINE: By FERNANDA SANTOS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1149 words


NOGALES, Ariz. -- Tom Pittman has made a career as a Border Patrol agent here
guarding this city's underground drainage system, where the tunnels that carry
sewage and storm runoff between the United States and Mexico are also busy
drug-smuggling routes. Over the years, he has crawled and slithered past putrid
puddles, makeshift latrines and discarded needles left behind by drug users,
relying on instincts, mostly, to gauge the risks ahead.

It is a dirty and dangerous business, but these days, there is a robot for that.

Three robots, out of four in use by the agency along the entire southern border,
are newly assigned to the Border Patrol station here. The reason is in the
numbers: Most of the tunnels discovered along the border lead from Nogales,
Mexico, to Nogales, Ariz., out of sight of the agents, cameras and drones that
blanket the ground above. This month, federal agents closed the largest one
found so far, a 481-foot passageway aired by fans and lit by lamps hanging from
wires that ran along the tunnel's walls.

The robots are just the latest tactic in a vexing battle by the federal
authorities to try to stem the flow of drugs through the tunnels, considered
prime pieces of real estate by the smuggling groups that build and control them.
Border Patrol agents have tried dumping concrete inside the tunnels to render
them unusable, and installing cameras and motion detectors to alert them of
suspicious movement underground. But still the tunnel diggers persist.

The robots, valued for their speed and maneuverability, can serve as the first
eyes on places considered too risky for humans to explore.

''If anyone is going to get hurt, it better be that robot,'' said Mr. Pittman, a
supervisory agent here.

Along the southern border, drug smuggling has remained stubbornly prolific, with
seizures happening not just in the tunnels, but also at legal ports of entry and
among illegal border crossers carrying bales of marijuana in their backpacks.
Some 2.9 million pounds of drugs, mostly marijuana, were seized by Customs and
Border Protection agents in the past fiscal year; 1.3 million of those pounds
were seized in Arizona, the largest amount among the four states that border
Mexico, according to agency statistics. Of the 45 cross-border tunnels found in
the Southwest in the past three fiscal years, 25 were in Nogales -- not counting
the partly finished tunnels the agents found -- and three more have been
uncovered this year.

The tunnels are part of a sophisticated enterprise. The groups that control the
smuggling routes in the Mexican Nogales -- the Sinaloa cartel on the east side
of the city, the Beltrán-Leyva cartel on the west -- have an understanding: One
side pays the other to use the areas it holds, both ''above ground and
underground,'' said Special Agent Alex Garcia of Homeland Security
Investigations, who leads the border tunnel task force here.

A senior American law enforcement official said Saturday that the leader of the
Sinaloa cartel, Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the world's most-wanted drug lord, had
been captured.

Many of the tunnel diggers are believed to come from the copper mines of
Cananea, Mexico, about 45 miles southeast of Nogales. They use tools with short
handles because, in the tunnels here, there is no room to stand up straight, Mr.
Garcia said.

That does not bother the tunnel-detecting robots. They have cameras that look
up, down and sideways, in front of them and behind them. Controlled remotely by
joysticks, they glide, bump and scrape along dark, cramped areas, where the air
is not safe for humans to breathe for long. One model sounds and looks like the
remote-controlled Humvees sold in toy stores. The other, with its bullet-shaped
body and shiny blue and silver shell, seems as if it had been pulled right off a
sci-fi movie set.

Among the daily duties shared by Mr. Pittman and a small group of agents
certified to search confined spaces is to comb through Nogales's drainage lines,
which the smugglers often tap into to push their loads north. The agents look
for signs of disturbance, like a patch of plastic on a steel pipe or scarring
where the metal should be smooth.

To get ready for this work, the human agents ''have to put on kneepads, elbow
pads -- we've got to put on helmets, gloves,'' said Kevin Hecht, the deputy
patrol agent in charge of the Border Patrol station in Nogales and one of the
agency's foremost experts on illicit tunnels. ''Sometimes we have to put on
Tyvek suits,'' he said, referring to the coveralls that protect against the
hazards that can lurk below drainage lines.

The robots, on the other hand, need no preparation other than the flick of a
switch.

They scour the tunnels much faster than the agents can, and in the complicated
work of securing the border underground, to waste time is to risk losing ground
to the smugglers. Eric S. Balliet, assistant special agent in charge of Homeland
Security Investigations in Nogales, said the agents in the tunnel task force had
closed, on average, one tunnel a month in Nogales since October 2010. (The
Border Patrol and its parent agency, Customs and Border Protection, and the Drug
Enforcement Administration are also part of the task force.)

''At any given moment, there's a tunnel being planned, under construction or in
operation in and around this city,'' Mr. Balliet said.

The large tunnel found here this month linked an abandoned home in Mexico to an
occupied house not far from the border. The drugs were taken from there in
hollowed-out couches or inside washing machines, according to the criminal
complaint; three men were arrested on drug-conspiracy charges.

Many of the tunnels that are found end in inconspicuous places like this. One of
them, discovered in December, exited into a backyard shed. Another, found last
February, ended at an embankment behind the border fence, near a spot where a
different tunnel had been closed in March 2012.

Nogales, Ariz., recently banned parking on a section of International Street,
which runs parallel to the fence, after a tunnel exit was found there, less than
100 feet from a border crossing. Smugglers inside the tunnel had used a
jackhammer to raise a piece of concrete cut from the pavement. Then they pushed
bales of marijuana through the fake bottom of a refrigerated truck parked right
above the hole.

Task force agents sometimes observe a tunnel for months before moving in. A
whiteboard in the bunker from which they operate in Rio Rico, a town just north
of Nogales, listed the nine open investigations they have had since January
2013. An inquiry might start with a tip from a disaffected tunnel digger or a
breach found by one of the robots along the drainage lines in the United States.

''At the end of the day,'' Mr. Balliet said, ''there's an organizational
structure behind these tunnels, and that's what we're after. The end game of
every tunnel investigation is in Mexico.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/us/borders-new-sentinels-are-robots-penetratin
g-deepest-drug-routes.html

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Kevin Hecht, above, the deputy patrol agent in charge of the
Border Patrol station in Nogales, Ariz., demonstrated an ARA Pointman robot.
Below, an agent entered the city's drainage system to conduct robot
surveillance. More photographs are at nytimes.com/national. (A16)
 Robots like this one in a Nogales, Ariz., drainage tunnel can save time and
explore places considered too risky for agents. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAMANTHA SAIS
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A19)   MAPS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


