                             1184 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pressure Rising as Obama Works to Rein In Russia

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER; Jonathan Weisman contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1509 words


WASHINGTON -- As Russia dispatched more forces and tightened its grip on the
Crimean Peninsula on Sunday, President Obama embarked on a strategy intended to
isolate Moscow and prevent it from seizing more Ukrainian territory even as he
was pressured at home to respond more forcefully.

Working the telephone from the Oval Office, Mr. Obama rallied allies, agreed to
send Secretary of State John Kerry to Kiev and approved a series of diplomatic
and economic moves intended to ''make it hurt,'' as one administration official
put it. But the president found himself besieged by advice to take more
assertive action.

''Create a democratic noose around Putin's Russia,'' urged Senator Lindsey
Graham, Republican of South Carolina. ''Revisit the missile defense shield,''
suggested Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida. ''Cancel Sochi,'' argued
Representative Mike Rogers, the Michigan Republican who leads the Intelligence
Committee, referring to the Group of 8 summit meeting to be hosted by President
Vladimir V. Putin. Kick ''him out of the G-8'' altogether, said Senator Richard
J. Durbin of Illinois, the Democratic whip.

The Russian occupation of Crimea has challenged Mr. Obama as has no other
international crisis, and at its heart, the advice seemed to pose the same
question: Is Mr. Obama tough enough to take on the former K.G.B. colonel in the
Kremlin? It is no easy task. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany told Mr. Obama
by telephone on Sunday that after speaking with Mr. Putin she was not sure he
was in touch with reality, people briefed on the call said. ''In another
world,'' she said.

That makes for a crisis significantly different from others on Mr. Obama's
watch. On Syria, Iran, Libya and Egypt, the political factions in Washington
have been as torn as the president over the proper balance of firmness and
flexibility. But as an old nuclear-armed adversary returns to Cold War form, the
consequences seem greater, the challenges more daunting and the voices more
unified.

''It's the most important, most difficult foreign-policy test of his
presidency,'' said R. Nicholas Burns, a career diplomat who became under
secretary of state in the George W. Bush administration. ''The stakes are very
high for the president because he is the NATO leader. There's no one in Europe
who can approach him in power. He's going to have to lead.''

Mr. Obama came to office with little foreign-policy experience and has been
repeatedly tested by a new world in which the main threats are Islamic extremism
and civil war. While increasing drone strikes and initially building up forces
in Afghanistan, he has made it his mission to pull out of two long wars and keep
out of any new ones.

But the limits of his influence have been driven home in recent weeks, with
Syria pressing its war against rebels and Afghanistan refusing to sign an
agreement allowing residual American forces. Now the Crimea crisis has presented
Mr. Obama with an elemental threat reminiscent of the one that confronted his
predecessors for four decades -- a geopolitical struggle in the middle of
Europe. First, the pro-Russian government in Kiev, now deposed, defied his
warnings not to shoot protesters, and now Mr. Putin has ignored his admonitions
to stay out of Ukraine.

Caught off guard, Mr. Obama is left to play catch-up. With thousands of
reinforcements arriving Sunday to join what American officials estimated were
6,000 Russian troops, Mr. Putin effectively severed the peninsula, with its
largely Russian-speaking population, from the rest of Ukraine.

''Russian forces now have complete operational control of the Crimean
peninsula,'' a senior administration official said on the condition of
anonymity.

No significant political leaders in Washington urged a military response, but
many wanted Mr. Obama to go further than he has so far. Senator Bob Corker of
Tennessee, the top Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, has already
devised language to serve as the basis for possible bipartisan legislation
outlining a forceful response, including sanctions against Russia and economic
support for Ukraine.

The president has spoken out against Mr. Putin's actions and termed them a
''breach of international law.'' But he has left the harshest condemnations to
Mr. Kerry, who on Sunday called them a ''brazen act of aggression'' and ''a
stunning willful choice by President Putin,'' accusing him of ''weakness'' and
''desperation.''

In addition to Ms. Merkel, Mr. Obama spoke with his counterparts from Britain
and Poland on Sunday and won agreement from all the other G-8 countries to
suspend preparations for the Sochi meeting and find ways to shore up the
economically fragile Ukrainian government. The administration also canceled a
trade mission to Moscow and a Russian trip to Washington to discuss energy while
vowing to also scrap a naval-cooperation meeting with Russia.

In television interviews, Mr. Kerry suggested that the United States might
impose sanctions, boycott the Sochi meeting in June and expel Russia from the
G-8. Germany, however, publicly expressed opposition to expulsion, an ominous
sign for Mr. Obama since any meaningful pressure would need support from Berlin.

But Mr. Obama offered Russia what aides called an ''offramp,'' a face-saving way
out of the crisis, by proposing that European observers take the place of
Russian forces in Crimea to guard against the supposed threats to the
Russian-speaking population cited by the Kremlin as justification for its
intervention.

Mr. Obama's aides said that they saw no evidence of such threats and considered
the claim a bogus pretext, and that they wanted to call Mr. Putin's bluff.
Privately, they said they did not expect Mr. Putin to accept, and they conceded
that Mr. Obama probably could not reverse the occupation of Crimea in the short
term. They said they were focusing on blocking any further Russian move into
eastern Ukraine that would split the country in half.

Some regional specialists said Mr. Obama should ignore the talk-tough chorus and
focus instead on defusing a crisis that could get much worse. Andrew Weiss, a
national security aide to President Bill Clinton, said the Obama administration
should be trying to keep Ukraine and Russia from open war. ''For us to just talk
about how tough we are, we may score some points but lose the war here,'' Mr.
Weiss said.

The crisis has trained a harsh spotlight on Mr. Obama's foreign policy, with
critics asserting that he has been too passive.

Mr. Corker traced the origins of Mr. Putin's brash invasion to September when,
in the face of bipartisan opposition in Congress, Mr. Obama pulled back from
plans to conduct an airstrike on Syria in retaliation for a chemical-weapons
attack on civilians. Instead, he accepted a Russian offer to work jointly to
remove the chemical weapons.

''Ever since the administration threw themselves into the arms of Russia in
Syria to keep from carrying out what they said they would carry out, I think, he
saw weakness,'' Mr. Corker said of Mr. Putin. ''These are the consequences.''

Of course, had Mr. Obama proceeded with an attack, he would have paid a
different price for ignoring the will of Congress and the grave misgivings of an
American public weary of war. Republicans who opposed confrontation in Syria
insist this is different.

Mr. Rubio, who opposed authorizing force in Syria, agreed that that conflict had
serious ramifications for American interests. But he said the showdown in Crimea
was about freedom itself and the hard-fought American victory over
totalitarianism in the Cold War. In that sense, even Republicans who opposed Mr.
Obama in Syria were pushing for a hard line against Mr. Putin.

''The very credibility of the post-Cold War world and borders is at stake
here,'' Mr. Rubio said in an interview.

Obama aides reject the notion that he has underestimated Mr. Putin. From the
beginning, they said, he had a cold-eyed assessment of the possibilities and
limitations of engagement with Mr. Putin. And they noted that neither President
Bush's reputation for toughness nor his courtship of Mr. Putin stopped Russia
from going to war in 2008 with another neighbor, the former Soviet republic of
Georgia.

While Mr. Obama has not gone as far as many in Washington want him to go, the
president has been less focused on immediate actions than on making sure he and
America's traditional allies are on the same page. Working from the Oval Office
over the weekend, wearing jeans and a scowl, he called several of his G-8
counterparts to ''make sure everybody's in lock step with what we're doing and
saying,'' according to a top aide.

Administration officials said Mr. Putin had miscalculated and would pay a cost
regardless of what the United States did, pointing to the impact on Russia's
currency and markets. ''What we see here are distinctly 19th- and 20th-century
decisions made by President Putin to address problems,'' one of the officials
said. ''What he needs to understand is that in terms of his economy, he lives in
the 21st-century world, an interdependent world.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/03/world/europe/pressure-rising-as-obama-works-to
-rein-in-russia.html

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama on Friday. On Sunday, he spoke with allies and
decided to send Secretary of State John Kerry to Ukraine. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PABLO
MARTINEZ MONSIVAIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


