                             1191 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Israeli Airstrike Kills 2 Palestinians in Gaza

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 237 words


JERUSALEM -- An Israeli airstrike killed two Palestinian men in the Gaza Strip
and wounded two children on Monday evening, according to the Israeli military
and Palestinian health officials, continuing the increased violence between
Israel and Gaza this year.

Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israel Defense Forces, said the
strike had eliminated a ''real-time threat,'' targeting a group that was
preparing to launch rockets into southern Israel.

Palestinian witnesses and officials said a missile fired from a drone into the
northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun had killed Musab Zaanin, 25, and wounded
Yousef Nasser, 22, who died hours later. The militant movement Islamic Jihad
said that Mr. Zaanin was a member of its military wing.

A spokesman for the Health Ministry in Gaza said a boy, 7, and a girl, 12, had
been wounded in the attack.

Despite a 15-month cease-fire between Israel and Hamas, the militant Islamic
movement that rules the Gaza Strip, strikes on both sides have been at a steady
simmer over the past two months.

The Israeli military counted 33 rockets fired from Gaza in the first five weeks
of 2014, compared with 60 in all of last year. Palestinian officials say nine
Gazans have now been killed by Israeli forces so far this year, after the
Israeli military resumed its practice of targeted assassinations and cracked
down on weekly protests near the border fence that separates Gaza and Israel.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/world/middleeast/israeli-airstrike-gaza.html

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


