                             1167 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Amid Efforts to Expand Marine Preserves, a Warning to Focus on Quality

BYLINE: By KATE GALBRAITH

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; GREEN COLUMN; Pg.

LENGTH: 967 words


SAN FRANCISCO -- A generation ago, when Tommy Remengesau Jr. went fishing off
the beautiful island nation of Palau, the seas were so rich, he said, that ''I
could see great stocks of fish.'' Such bounty has since dwindled, in Palau and
worldwide.

''Reckless and destructive fishing practices, overfishing, and illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing have robbed us of our resources,'' Mr.
Remengesau, now Palau's president, told the United Nations General Assembly this
month. ''They must be stopped.''

That grim pronouncement lies behind a new plan by Palau to ban commercial
fishing in a vast area off its coast. The reserve will cover 230,000 square
miles, which is about the size of Ukraine.

Palau is far from alone -- other nations are also engaging in efforts to create
marine reserves. New Zealand, which already has a number of protected areas, is
establishing a new conservation area in its far southern region that is
off-limits to fishing, mining and oil exploration, though it is smaller, at
1,680 square miles. Over all, 2.8 percent of the world's oceans have been
committed to conservation reserves, according to the International Union for
Conservation of Nature, a global environmental group. That remains far short of
an international goal of 10 percent. The reserves are often called marine
protected areas, or M.P.A.s.

''There is a trend toward creating more M.P.A.s in recent years,'' said Samantha
Murray, director of the Pacific program at the Ocean Conservancy, an
environmental group. But the percentage of ocean territory that is protected is
far lower than the comparable figure for land, she said.

A big problem is that the quality of the reserves varies. A new study in the
journal Nature found that of 87 marine protected areas surveyed, 59 percent
''were not ecologically distinguishable from fished sites.'' The reality may be
even more dismal, because the survey included some of the world's most effective
reserves.

A different study, to be published next week in the journal Aquatic
Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, finds that countries often seek
to create marine reserves in areas that are the least used, rather than focusing
on maximizing biodiversity. Achieving targets for protecting a certain amount of
the ocean could therefore result in a ''false sense of achievement for
conservation,'' it warns.

''It's almost universal, the fact that whenever there's negotiations over marine
protected areas, the areas with most fish are retained by the fishing areas,''
said Graham Edgar, a professor at the Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies
at the University of Tasmania in Australia. Professor Edgar was involved in both
studies.

Relatively few marine protected areas include a blanket ban on fishing and other
commercial activities. Some may allow only certain types of fishing. Most have
been created relatively close to coastlines, rather than in the open ocean.

According to the Nature study, reserves are more successful if they are large
(at least 100 square kilometers, or almost 40 square miles) and enduring
(established for at least 10 years). In addition, effective reserves generally
include -- and enforce -- a ban on fishing and other activities harmful to
marine life, like mining and drilling. Ecological isolation of the reserves, for
example by sand barriers, also helps so that fish do not swim away.

Marine areas with all of these characteristics contained 840 percent more large
fish, measured by mass, than comparable areas open to fishing, the Nature study
found. They also contained an impressive 1,990 percent more shark mass.

Some of the world's most effective protected areas, according to the Nature
study, surround small ocean islands. These include the seas around Cocos Island
National Park in Costa Rica, which are frequented by sharks and turtles and
other large creatures; an area around Malpelo Island, a few hundred miles off
the Pacific coast of Colombia; and, in the South Pacific, areas near the
Kermadec Islands of New Zealand and Middleton Reef off Australia.

Conservationists hope several more large areas will win protection soon. In the
southeastern part of the Pacific, excitement is building around proposed
protections near the Pitcairn Islands, controlled by Britain, and also Easter
Island, controlled by Chile. In the Atlantic, parts of the Sargasso Sea and also
a large area around Bermuda are under consideration. So is an area in the Ross
Sea in the Antarctic Ocean, though objections from Russia and Ukraine are
proving hard to surmount. Reserves on the high seas, outside nationally
controlled waters, generally need international approval and may be administered
by groups of governments.

But large, remote areas may face a particular challenge in enforcing fishing
restrictions, according to Ms. Murray of the Ocean Conservancy. Regions where
restrictions vary from one section to another, like a patchwork, also are
difficult to police.

Illegal fishing is ''a huge problem'' and affects a majority of marine protected
areas, Dr. Edgar said. Still, he added, enforcement ''doesn't necessarily have
to have patrol boats going past; it can be the good will of the local
community.''

Technology can help. Vessel monitoring systems for big boats and digital
photography are two tools. Palau, a tiny nation with just one patrol boat to
police its vast offshore territory, has tested drones as a means of spotting
illegal activity.

Mr. Remengesau, Palau's president, says his nation will focus on drawing
tourists to its still-wondrous seascape, while hoping that other countries will
join the preservation effort.

''I return again and again to a question my forebears never conceived of,'' Mr.
Remengesau told the General Assembly. ''How much will Palau's efforts matter if
the world is not on the same page?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/20/business/amid-efforts-to-expand-marine-preserv
es-a-warning-to-focus-on-quality.html

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


