                             1149 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Wonderful Country

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 880 words


TEL AVIV -- One of the most popular shows on Israeli TV is called ''Eretz
Nehederet'' or ''A Wonderful Country.'' It's a comedy show that lives to make
fun of Israeli politicians and the absurdities of life here. It recently opened
its 2014 season with a cartoon graphic of a beautiful, multicolored,
flower-filled garden with a butterfly fluttering across the screen. Then,
suddenly, a concrete wall rises up all around the garden, which was an image the
producers used last year. But this season not only does the wall emerge but a
glass dome rises out of the wall and seals off this Garden of Eden from above as
well.

This scene is noteworthy for a couple of reasons: I've long believed that the
Israeli-Arab conflict is to the wider global war of civilizations what Off
Broadway is to Broadway. It is the small laboratory where trends get tested out
first, or are perfected, and then go global -- from airline hijacking to suicide
bombing to the attempt, through force and rebuilding, to create a negotiating
partner out of a traditional foe (Israel in Lebanon 1982 and with the
Palestinians in the Oslo process; America in Iraq and Afghanistan).

So it is useful to ask: What's playing Off Broadway now? What do you see? You
see Israel, as in the ''Eretz Nehederet'' skit, literally trying to wall itself
off from the multiplying threats around it and contending with all the ethical
dilemmas that entails. And you see a wider region that is no longer divided
along pro-U.S. and pro-Soviet lines, socialist or capitalist, secular or
religious. You see instead a region increasingly divided between ''the world of
order'' and ''the world of disorder.''

What Israel, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Kurdistan, Turkey, the Gulf states and even
to a lesser degree the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank all have in common
is that they are islands of order, where at least there is someone to answer the
phone, it doesn't come off the wall when they do and there is a minimum of human
security.

That is less and less true today in Syria, Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Lebanon and
Iraq, not to mention nearby Somalia, Eritrea and northern and southern Sudan.

Guess how many African migrants, mostly from South Sudan, Eritrea and Uganda,
have entered Israel in recent years and are here illegally: 54,000! Stroll
around the Central Bus Station in Tel Aviv, where many have found shelter, and
you'll see African men on cellphones on every street. They sailed, walked or
drove to Israel's borders and either slipped in on their own or were smuggled in
by Bedouins across Egypt's Sinai Desert. That's why the latest fence Israel has
built is along the Israel-Sinai frontier. The Sinai is so out of control that
last week Islamist militants shot down an Egyptian military helicopter there
with a surface-to-air missile believed to have been smuggled in from Libya after
Muammar el-Qaddafi's arsenals were broken into during his overthrow.

I chatted with a Christian Eritrean -- ''Mark,'' age 26 -- who opened a
makeshift clothing and Internet shop near the bus station. Sitting under a Bob
Marley poster, he told me that he had fled from Eritrea's brutal government to
Ethiopia, then to Sudan, then to Libya, tried to sail to Italy but got turned
back and eventually walked to Israel. He's now living here illegally with his
father, he said, because Israel has the ''most security.''

I wonder if the torrid pace of technological change, the rising education
demands for running a successful economy, the superempowerment of individuals to
organize as militants or come together against corrupt governments and
environmental and population stresses aren't putting unbearable pressure on
fragile states -- particularly multisectarian and multitribal ones -- and
literally blowing them apart. And there is no Soviet Union or America to hold
them together as in the Cold War.

The PowerPoint maps that Israeli military briefers use for Sinai, Gaza, Lebanon
and Syria today consist of multicolored circles, and inside each are clusters of
different armed groups. Israel is like a Petri dish of the new world, with
nonstate actors, armed with rockets, dressed as civilians and nested among
civilians on four out of its five borders: Sinai, Gaza, Lebanon and Syria.

I understand why all this makes even some moderate Israeli military leaders more
wary about any West Bank withdrawal. But the status quo is not neutral. Israel
needs to do all it can to avoid turning itself into a kind of forced binational
state -- with a hostile minority in its belly -- by permanently holding onto the
West Bank and its 2.5 million Palestinians. That's exactly the kind of states
blowing up in the world of disorder. And it's why the success of John Kerry's
peace mission is so important for Israelis, and Palestinians.

You don't want to be in these wars. This is not your grandfather's battlefield.
When the enemy is nested in homes and apartments and no one wears a uniform but
everyone has a cellphone camera, you have a real strategic and moral challenge
-- as the U.S. has discovered with its own drone wars. It's hard to defeat this
enemy without killing a lot of civilians. It's no accident that every Israeli
brigade now has a legal adviser.

This is what's playing Off Broadway. Take note. It may be coming to a theater
near you.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/02/opinion/sunday/friedman-a-wonderful-country.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


