                             1133 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Deadly Bomb Blast Rocks Pakistan Military Compound

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 306 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- A bomb exploded inside a vehicle at a Pakistani military
compound in the country's northwest on Sunday, killing at least 20 members of a
paramilitary unit and wounding 30 more, a security official said.

A unit of the Frontier Corps was moving from the compound in Bannu to Razmak in
the volatile North Waziristan tribal region when a bomb planted in their vehicle
exploded, said the official, who insisted on anonymity because he was not
authorized to speak to the news media.

The official said a road curfew was in place on Sunday to secure the
transportation of troops to and from the tribal region, where military convoys
have been hit by roadside bombings and ambushes.

The troops, the official said, were to be ferried in an unmarked vehicle. ''The
vehicle was rented from a local bazaar. We have a shortage of vehicles,'' the
official said. ''Most probably, the bomb was already planted inside the vehicle.
The driver of the vehicle has also been killed.''

Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, an umbrella organization representing Pakistani
militant groups, took responsibility for the bombing.

A government official who also spoke on the condition of anonymity said that
paramilitary and other security forces routinely rented unmarked vehicles as a
cover to hide the identity of the passengers.

There has been a surge in terrorist attacks after a brief lull following the
death in a drone strike of a militant commander, Hakimullah Mehsud, in November.
A security official said there were 42 attacks this month in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa
Province in the northwest, including the bombing on Sunday.

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's government is seeking a peace dialogue with
militant groups in the tribal region, but Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan has
resisted, saying it will not talk to a government subservient to the United
States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/20/world/asia/pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


