                             1192 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel's Choice

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 627 words


In Washington this week, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel sounded two
different notes about peace negotiations with the Palestinians, which are
nearing a critical juncture. In a speech to the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee, the pro-Israel lobby, he enthusiastically advocated a peace agreement
as a means to improve Israel's ties with its Arab neighbors and ''catapult the
region forward'' on issues like health, energy and education.

But at other moments, a more familiar skepticism was apparent. He demanded that
Palestinians recognize Israel as a Jewish state with ''no excuses, no delays.''
In response, a senior Palestinian official, Nabil Shaath, accused Mr. Netanyahu
of putting an end to peace talks because Palestinians have already rejected that
designation. (Palestinians recognize Israel as a state, but not as a Jewish
state because they believe that that would undercut the rights of Palestinian
refugees.) And, on Monday, at the White House, Mr. Netanyahu asserted that while
Israel has worked hard to advance peace, the Palestinians have not.

How much of this is posturing before the two sides face tough choices in their
negotiations is unknown. But as President Obama noted in an interview with
Bloomberg View, time is running out, and not just because the Americans will
soon release a set of principles that are to serve as a framework for further
talks on a final peace deal. Mr. Netanyahu and the Palestinians will have to
decide whether to move forward on the basis of those principles, negotiated over
months with the mediation of Secretary of State John Kerry, or reject them.

In remarkably blunt comments, Mr. Obama said that he had not heard a persuasive
case for how Israel survives both as a democracy and a Jewish state absent a
negotiated two-state solution, since in Israel and the West Bank ''there are
going to be more Palestinians, not fewer Palestinians, as time goes on.'' He
also warned that given Israel's aggressive settlement construction -- 2,534
housing units were begun in 2013 compared with 1,133 the previous year --
Palestinians may soon decide that a contiguous state is impossible and America's
ability to help manage the consequences will be limited. Meanwhile, the
Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, who is committed to nonviolence, is aging;
no one knows who will succeed him. These are the hard facts that need to be
broadcast widely.

Negotiators have largely kept silent on details of the talks. But there are
fears that the principles might tilt toward Israel, which would mean the final
negotiations simply won't get off the ground. For instance, there was a
troubling report in the Palestinian newspaper Al Quds that said one proposal
would give Palestinians just the neighborhood of Beit Hanina in East Jerusalem
as their capital. The Palestinians have long claimed East Jerusalem, which was
captured by Israel in the 1967 war, as their capital in a peace deal.

The framework is expected to call for an end to the conflict and all claims,
following a phased Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank (based on the 1967
lines), with extensive new measures like drones and sensors in the Jordan Valley
to address Israel's security concerns. Israel will retain certain settlement
blocs and the Palestinians will be compensated with Israeli territory.

President Obama is scheduled to meet with Mr. Abbas at the White House on March
17 and then go to Saudi Arabia, an important player in rallying Arab support for
Mr. Abbas and the peace effort. In his Aipac speech, Mr. Netanyahu declared,
''I'm prepared to make a historic peace with our Palestinian neighbors.'' But,
really, what other just and durable choice does he have? What is his long-term
answer for Israel, if not a two-state solution?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/06/opinion/israels-choice.html

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


