                             1111 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mystery in Hezbollah Operative's Life and Death

BYLINE: By ANNE BARNARD; Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1367 words


BEIRUT, Lebanon -- As a little girl, Noor did not know exactly what her father,
Hassane Laqees, did for Hezbollah, but even then, she knew she might lose him
early. During his long absences, she recalled recently, she would gaze at a
photo of him lying asleep and imagine that she was seeing his corpse.

Last month, Mr. Laqees was gunned down in a southern Beirut parking garage by
unknown assassins, and Noor, now 28 and an English literature teacher, learned
along with the rest of the country who he was: Hezbollah's master technician and
logistics expert, eulogized by its leader, Hassan Nasrallah, as a beloved friend
and one of the group's ''bright minds.''

Mr. Laqees joined Hezbollah at its founding in the 1980s as a 19-year-old with a
penchant for technology, and he helped build an arsenal more sophisticated than
those of many national armies, transforming the Shiite militia into a force that
successfully challenged Israel in battle. He helped set up systems of
surveillance drones and independent telecommunications, and he used secret bases
inside Syria to store the long-range, sophisticated missiles that analysts say
are now being funneled into Lebanon.

Israel's Mossad spy agency put Mr. Laqees on a hit list years ago, identifying
him as one of the five men it most wanted dead. From 2008 to 2011, four perished
in cloak-and-dagger style. A car bomb in Damascus, Syria's capital, killed
Hezbollah's military leader, Imad Mughniyeh. A sniper shot a Syrian general on a
beach in Tartus. A Hamas official was strangled in a hotel room in Dubai, United
Arab Emirates, by assassins who, in an embarrassment for Mossad, were
photographed by elevator cameras. And an Iranian general was killed in an
explosion at a Tehran missile depot.

Mr. Laqees was the last on that list to die.

Lebanese and Israeli analysts say that Israel, working through proxies, is the
most likely suspect. Yet as Hezbollah shifted course over the past two years,
sending its forces into Syria to support the government, its ally, against an
armed uprising joined by foreign jihadists, Mr. Laqees earned new enemies. Even
among some Shiites there were whispers of disapproval and concerns that the
group had aggravated sectarian tensions and opened them up to retaliation.

So Mr. Laqees's assassination has become a political whodunit infused with all
the complexity of a convulsing region's tangled and shifting alliances and
enmities. Saudi intelligence officers, Lebanese Sunni militants, fighters from
Al Qaeda, Syrian insurgents -- all have been floated as possible killers.
Analysts say that because of the secrecy of Mr. Laqees's work and the
professional nature of the killing, an intelligence service was probably
involved. But even those least likely to have killed him have been eager to take
credit.

Mr. Laqees stood in the cross hairs of several forces that have increasingly
found common cause. Sunni-led Saudi Arabia, the Syrian insurgency it backs
against President Bashar al-Assad, and Israel all find themselves in opposition
to Hezbollah and its patron, Shiite-led Iran. Hezbollah and the Syrian
government accuse Saudi Arabia of participating in a ''Wahhabi-Zionist
conspiracy,'' a reference to the austere Wahhabi sect of Sunni Islam. Israeli
and Saudi analysts agree that their countries share an interest in checking
Hezbollah and Iran.

Mr. Nasrallah, Hezbollah's leader, blamed Israel for the killing of Mr. Laqees,
saying that early claims of responsibility by what most observers believe was a
fictitious Sunni group were attempts to sow sectarian strife.

But Iranian officials also pointed fingers at a Qaeda-linked militant group led
by a Saudi fugitive recently captured in Lebanon. Adding to the uncertainty and
mystery, that group, the Abdullah Azzam Brigades, claimed last week that Mr.
Laqees actually died in the bombing of Iran's Beirut embassy in November.

Syrian rebels claimed that they had killed him in Syria and that the Beirut
crime scene was a cover-up. There were even rumors that he was killed by
Hezbollah comrades in an internal dispute or betrayal, both of which would be
unusual in the highly disciplined organization.

Ali Rizk, Beirut news director of Press TV of Iran, said that Mr. Laqees's death
showed that the atmosphere of hostility toward Hezbollah created opportunities
for its enemies. Ronen Bergman, an Israeli security expert and a contributing
writer for The New York Times Magazine who detailed Mossad's hit list in his
book ''The Secret War With Iran,'' said Israel often uses local proxies in
countries too risky for its own agents.

Mr. Laqees also lived on the fault lines of the unease in Lebanon over
Hezbollah's intervention in Syria, something that emerged as his death revealed
rare glimpses of a senior Hezbollah operative's character and personal
background.

The group frowns on sharing such details, preferring to portray its warriors, as
Mr. Nasrallah did Mr. Laqees, as people who have ''no other life,'' who are
''dissolved in the resistance.'' But perhaps because his death was a cathartic
moment for a community that has had to remain quiet as many of its fighters have
died in Syria, some opened up, just a crack, about him.

Mr. Nasrallah spoke of their youth together in Baalbek, where a picture of Mr.
Laqees as a grinning, curly-haired teenager hangs on a cemetery wall. A street
lined with houses, a blacksmith shop and pomegranate trees is called Laqees
Alley after his family, a Baalbek merchant clan that made fortunes in Liberia
and built a mosque and a downtown shopping mall.

Mr. Laqees was known as a generous, modest man nicknamed Hajj Hassane who ran an
electronics shop called Digicon.

''It's not only the party who was sad for him,'' said one relative who is not a
member, ''but all of Baalbek.''

People knew he was connected to Hezbollah, but never suspected his importance;
he never traveled with bodyguards. One acquaintance said that recently he seemed
more cautious, declining to visit when strangers were present. Another said
cousins in Hezbollah had told him that Mr. Laqees once had ambitions to succeed
Mr. Mughniyeh, the slain commander, and that he had a cousin who had been
central to the capture of Israeli soldiers that sparked the 2006 war.

Baalbek is a religiously mixed town where a significant minority of Shiites is
less loyal to Hezbollah than to tribal clans or other parties, and where
extended families, including Mr. Laqees's, include people on both sides of that
divide. Some openly question Hezbollah's choice to use its militia, which the
government tolerates as a deterrent to Israel, against fellow Arab Muslims.

As part of Hezbollah's technical cadre and not its religious or political
leadership, Mr. Laqees was socially comfortable with such independence,
residents related to or friendly with the family said.

A brother-in-law, Hikmet Awada, praised him on Facebook while contrasting their
politics, writing, ''My only care is Baalbek; his borders start from Lebanon and
go to the wide land of God, from Palestine to Iran, Iraq, I don't know where.''

The other relative said that she had often tried to provoke Hezbollah relatives
and friends into revealing their feelings about Syria, to no avail; she said the
fighters would call their wives from the battle in Qusayr, just over the border,
then come home ''as if they had been on a picnic.''

Mr. Laqees was known for educating his daughters and ''spoiling them more than
the boys,'' she said. His eldest, Noor, was part of a group of young female
teachers at a Hezbollah school who sometimes questioned, among themselves, the
costs of the Syria mission that had killed so many young men, a relative of one
teacher said, emphasizing that he did not know Noor's views.

At a condolence ceremony, Noor, an open-faced, poised woman, glowed with pride
in her father. His death was a great loss, she said, recalling how her son, his
favorite grandchild, used to rush into his arms on his visits. But, she said,
she supported his commitment.

Asked about Syria, she said sharply, ''I don't care about that,'' then quickly
added, ''I can only talk about my father.''

Asked if Syria had anything to do with his death, she said, ''Hajj Hassane had
only one enemy: Israel.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/04/world/middleeast/mystery-in-hezbollah-operativ
es-life-and-death.html

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A photograph of Hassane Laqees, a logistics expert for
Hezbollah, was displayed at his funeral last month in Lebanon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MOHAMED AZAKIR/REUTERS) (A1)
Hussein Laqees, center, the son of Hassan Laqees, was flanked on Dec. 20 at a
memorial ceremony for his father by Sayyed Hashem Safieddine, left, head of the
Hezbollah Executive Council, and Ghazanfar Roknabadi, the Iranian ambassador to
Lebanon. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHARIF KARIM/REUTERS)
   A Hezbollah flag helps to cordon off the area in a southern Beirut  garage
where Mr. Laqees was gunned down on Dec. 4. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HASAN
SHAABAN/REUTERS) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


