                             1177 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 26, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Syria, Diplomacy Needs Force

BYLINE: By MICHAEL IGNATIEFF.

Michael Ignatieff is a professor of practice at the Harvard Kennedy School.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 809 words


CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- THE conventional wisdom about Syria is that nothing can be
done. It is said that military action would be either perverse -- bringing the
jihadists in the opposition to power -- or futile, failing to tip the balance
against the government of President Bashar al-Assad. Using force, it is argued,
would also jeopardize other strategic objectives, like securing a lasting
nuclear deal with Syria's supporter Iran.

The trouble is that the conventional wisdom may be fatalism parading as realism
and resignation masquerading as prudence.

Any realist needs to face two facts. First, absent the credible application of
force against the Syrian regime, a negotiated transition leading to Mr. Assad's
departure is not going to happen. Despite the efforts of the United Nations
envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, the peace talks in Geneva between the Syrian government
and the opposition coalition have become a waste of time. The opposition forces
have been weakened by military defeats, and Mr. Assad's strategic advantage
gives him no incentive to concede anything.

Second, if Mr. Assad is allowed to prevail in this conflict, he will reimpose
his tyranny, and his forces will surely exterminate the remaining Sunni
insurgents who make up most of the opposition. Obliterating his enemies,
however, will not bring lasting peace. It will only further inflame hatreds.
Sooner or later blood will flow again.

Though nominally committed to Mr. Assad's overthrow, the United States, in doing
so little to bring it about, is becoming complicit in his survival. Is there a
realistic alternative?

Arming the rebels is not the answer. Providing weapons, as nations like Saudi
Arabia and Qatar have done with their fundamentalist proxies in Syria, appears
to have only increased civilian suffering without shifting the conflict in favor
of the insurgents.

Neither is the solution to create humanitarian corridors or safe zones to
protect civilians. Doing so will not succeed unless Western governments commit
ground forces, and that won't happen.

The only remaining option is to use force to deny Mr. Assad air superiority.
Planes, drones and cyber operations could prevent his forces from using barrel
bombs, cluster munitions and phosphorus weapons on civilian targets. An air
campaign should not be used to provide support for rebel groups whose goals the
West does not share. The aim would be to relieve the unrelenting pressure on the
civilian population and force Mr. Assad to return to Geneva to negotiate a
cease-fire.

Last year, the threat of force persuaded Mr. Assad to get rid of his chemical
weapons. Applying force now could deny him the chance to bomb his way to
victory. Mr. Assad can endure only if he crushes the insurgents. If he is denied
victory, his eventual departure into exile becomes a matter of time.

A cease-fire in Syria would likely unleash a chaotic struggle for power, but it
is better than slaughter. Syria is bound to look like Libya. International
peacekeepers will be needed to prevent revenge killing by the opposition and
former Assad allies alike.

The conventional wisdom holds that there are no ''good guys'' in the opposition,
no one we actually want to win. There weren't many good guys among the Balkan
politicians in the late 1990s, either, but by working with them as a special
presidential envoy, Richard C. Holbrooke did help bring a stop to the killing.
If force were applied to leverage diplomacy in Syria, as the United States did
in Bosnia, the dying could stop, refugees could return and negotiations could
eventually lead either to partition or to a constitutional transition.

Given the near certainty that Russia would veto any United Nations Security
Council authorization of air power, and that the United States Congress, if
asked to authorize force, would likely turn President Obama down, stopping the
war in Syria will stretch domestic and international legality. But if legality
is not stretched, the killing will go on indefinitely.

Every piece of this proposal -- using air power, forcing a cease-fire, putting
in international peacekeepers -- would be a test of presidential nerve and
resolve. Military action risks confrontation with the Russians and is unpopular
with a recession-weary public in the United States.

Above all, using force would make the president ''own'' the Syrian tragedy. So
far he has tried to pretend he doesn't have to. The fact is he owns it already.
American inaction has strengthened Russia, Hezbollah and Iran. It has turned
Syria into the next front in the war with Islamic extremism. And it has put in
jeopardy the stability of Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and Turkey and risks leaving a
failed state next door to Israel.

If the president already owns the deadly consequences of inaction, it is only
prudent now to back diplomacy with force so that the consequences do not become
deadlier still.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/26/opinion/with-syria-diplomacy-needs-force.html

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


