                             1199 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cleaning Tips Mama Never Told You

BYLINE: By DWIGHT GARNER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; BOOKS OF THE
TIMES; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 856 words


MY BOYFRIEND BARFED IN MY HANDBAG ... AND OTHER THINGS YOU CAN'T ASK
MARTHASubtitle

By Jolie Kerr238 pages. Plume. $15.

My wife and I aren't much on housecleaning. We don't let things get foul. But we
mostly agree with Phyllis Diller, who said that cleaning your house while your
kids are still growing is like shoveling your walk before the snow stops. Plus
we have enough animals to outfit a petting zoo.

Occasionally, I become ashamed of our filth. Last year, I went into a friend's
basement to grab a bottle of wine, and it was so tidy, in comparison to ours,
that it felt like a moral rebuke. It was like an adorable little country
hardware store down there. We have to, I thought, change our ways.

There's only one book to own if you want to be serious about your housekeeping:
Cheryl Mendelson's magisterial ''Home Comforts'' (1999). But her jumbo-size
classic is also daunting; picking it up can make your forehead sweat. It's the
''Middlemarch'' of domestic handbooks.

Sometimes you merely want the Lorrie Moore short story, or the Tina Fey memoir,
of cleaning tutorials. Which is just about what Jolie Kerr has given us in her
wise and funny new book, ''My Boyfriend Barfed in My Handbag ... and Other
Things You Can't Ask Martha.''

Ms. Kerr is a graduate of Barnard College and the author of a column called
''Ask a Clean Person'' that appears weekly on Deadspin and Jezebel. She won me
over pretty early in her book when she described one onerous chore, cleaning a
radiator, as ''basically yoga with dirt.''

Ms. Kerr covers the usual territory here. You'll learn about the care of linens,
the scouring of ovens, the de-stinking of gym clothes, the rescuing of scorched
pots. The author wants us to be better than we are. She knows about those
''stacks of doggy-lookin' magazines'' we've got piled everywhere, including the
bathroom, where they become vile.

She comments about her gentle nagging: ''This is for your own good; it hurts me
more than it hurts you; I'm not mad, I'm just disappointed.''

Ms. Kerr's book differs from most cleaning books in its millennial generation,
best-girlfriend tone (''Jolieeeeeeeeee! How do I mooooooooop?''). It's clearly a
book best suited for the young. It also differs from most cleaning books in that
it goes places they most assuredly will not.

What other book will advise you to wash your sex toys -- your unmotorized ones,
at any rate -- in the top rack of the dishwasher? Or will note that STP Fuel
Injector & Carburetor Treatment helps remove certain lube stains? Or will have a
trick up its sleeve for getting bong water out of a carpet? These are not the
sort of insights one picks up in home ec.

Ms. Kerr is cheerful in the face of revolting duty. Before discussing any
gruesome and difficult task, she tends to advise: ''Next up, put on some music.
This is crucial to the process in that it will help to keep you from killing
yourself.''

Her book is stuffed with offbeat tips -- some you've heard before, but some not.
Tabasco is handy for polishing copper. White wine, lo and behold, gets out red
wine stains. Meat tenderizer and saliva remove bloodstains. There's advice about
cleansing seatbelts because, as the author remarks, ''Seatbelts are filthy.''

Ms. Kerr's go-to cleaning supplies are vinegar and water and a few of ''those
plastic beach pails we all had as kids,'' in part because they have handles. But
she also recommends, among other products, Windex for glass, Scrubbing Bubbles
for the bathroom, Mötsenböcker's Lift Off #3 for nail polish disasters and an
artisanal silver polish from a New Orleans store called As You Like It Silver
Shop.

Ms. Kerr's strictures can go a bit far, at least for this semi-clean person. She
will have you squeegeeing shower walls, vacuuming your bathroom floor every
other day, cleaning the interior roof of your car and swabbing pumice stones. If
I ever get to the point where I am found cleaning a pumice stone, I hope my wife
will have pity and call in a drone strike.

This book seems to return again and again, like Leonardo DiCaprio in ''The Wolf
of Wall Street,'' to the bedroom. Take cleaning your sheets seriously, Ms. Kerr
advises -- there's blood and sweat and drool and worse in them.

Ms. Kerr's book lacks the frame of reference you'll find in Ms. Mendelson's
''Home Comforts.'' In that book, Ms. Mendelson observes that ''modern
housekeeping, despite its bad press, is among the most thoroughly pleasant,
significant, and least alienated forms of work that many of us will encounter.''

If Ms. Kerr, or Ms. Mendelson, cannot encourage you to up your cleaning game,
the writing of Geoff Dyer can perhaps serve as inspiration. In an essay called
''Sex and Hotels,'' printed in his book ''Otherwise Known as the Human
Condition,'' he pointed out that ''cleanliness might not be next to godliness,
but it is certainly adjacent to horniness.''

Perhaps your house can become, like the room Mr. Dyer once stayed in at St.
Martins Lane in London, ''so white it's like it has been designed as a
camouflage for cocaine.'' The great good thing about cleanliness, Mr. Dyer told
us, is that it's ''a flagrant inducement to -- what else? -- filthiness.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/14/books/my-boyfriend-barfed-in-my-handbag-offers
-aid-on-filth.html

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY CENICOLA/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


