                             1147 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

You Are Like the People These Guys Make Up

BYLINE: By JASON ZINOMAN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1067 words


''TJ and Dave,'' the hourlong improv show by the Second City veterans TJ
Jagodowski and David Pasquesi, the premier improv duo working today, unfolds so
seamlessly that it makes you wonder: Are these guys really making all this up on
the spot?

It's not scripted, but these eerily in-sync performers have been working
together since 2002 and it's hard not to question whether they lean on the same
tropes, plot devices, jokes.

To find out, I watched them perform four nights in a row last week in Manhattan.
(Though based in Chicago, where they put on a weekly show, they visit the Barrow
Street Theater in New York a few times a year.) Their shows did indeed vary
wildly in structure, setting and pace. Yet while inventing new hours of material
is impressive, what really makes ''TJ and Dave'' so thrilling is what their
shows have in common: A playful verbal wit, stubborn refusal to go for the cheap
laugh and most of all, an empathetic streak that gives their comedy resonance
and depth.

None of the 20 or so characters they created were unsympathetic; ''TJ and Dave''
doesn't use villainy or clichéd stupidity for easy laughs. The comedy was rooted
in relatable relationships and psychological insight into ordinary people, often
in crisis: struggling in a new job, breaking up, trying to find love or
grappling with childhood trauma. Unlike so much improv, these shows never seem
in a rush to find the joke. At their best, the laughs emerge organically in
modest narratives that are not entirely resolved.

Mr. Jagodowski, 42, and Mr. Pasquesi, 53, always begin the same way, entering in
business-casual clothes to a propulsive rock song. Peering over his hands, Mr.
Jagodowski scans the crowd, often letting out a broad chuckle, while his
partner, more overtly intense, paces the stage, sometimes muttering to himself.
Unlike most improvisers, they do not ask for a suggestion from the audience. One
of them says, ''Trust us, this is all made up,'' the title of a documentary
about them by Alex Karpovsky, the lights go off and on, they look at each other
and the scene begins.

Their conversations unfold slowly, dominated by what at first seem like tangents
and teasingly oblique statements. But these disparate details are also building
blocks to a puzzle they piece together in unexpected ways. Mr. Pasquesi, a
forceful, bold actor who favors pregnant pauses, invading his partner's spaces
and dramatically shifting volume, establishes a setting with a joke.

''Essential oils?'' he says, skeptically. ''That's a pretty bold claim.'' That
tells us we might be in a spa (we are) and that this guy is a blowhard (well,
not exactly). Scenes run for many minutes before you know exactly where the
characters are. The wait can be frustrating, but also creates tension that can
pay off during a big reveal.

Mr. Pasquesi often fills time questioning figures of speech or clichés. Whether
he's playing a park ranger or an office drone, he picks apart sayings (''It's
like nobody's business?'') or asks about pronunciations (''Is it abhors or
abors''?). Mr. Jagodowski, who has more delicate features and a pitch-perfect
ear for expressions of passive aggression, is also sensitive to language,
favoring silly-sounding words (gazebo) or abbreviations (''automobile'' becomes
''automo'').

So much of the dialogue is semantic wordplay that it can sound like an Edward
Albee play. At some point, however, they cut to the emotional heart of a scene.
Much improv comedy gets laughs by the accretion of jokes, turning situations
increasingly wacky. ''TJ and Dave'' raises the stakes by examining realistic
relationships.

In their final New York show on Monday, Mr. Pasquesi played a man dealing with
regrets over his wasted life by leaving his wife (Mr. Jagodowski), who
communicates in offhand slights and stoic sighing. When she helps him find
listings for new apartments, it's not because she's fed up with him. She clearly
loves him but is just being practical, presumably her role in what could only be
a long-term relationship. Her helpfulness is also a bizarre way to remind him
what he's losing. The dynamic is so instantly recognizable it requires no
exposition.

While the drama there is in the present, ''TJ and Dave'' scenes can also hinge
on a buried secret or something outside the room. In the first show, they played
new animal-shelter employees who get lost discussing their difficult families.
Mr. Jagodowski asks Mr. Pasquesi if it's true he lives with his mother. Mr.
Pasquesi responds: ''My mother died. I moved into her house.''

In this moment, you can see the two comics engaging in a creative debate. Living
with your mother is probably a safer comedic choice, but Mr. Pasquesi decided to
go darker, as he often does, and in this case, it didn't work. The scene ground
to a halt. This will happen when you take ambitious risks without a script to
fall back on. It's why ''TJ and Dave'' is always riveting, even if the quality
varies.

The most fully realized show was the one set at a spa, which they performed on
Saturday. Unlike the other shows, this one was just a single scene. After Jerr
(Mr. Jagodowski) and Dave (Mr. Pasquesi) have received massages, Dave says the
masseuse, Veronique, touched him more than any of his girlfriends had over the
last five years, leading to an absurd debate about whether he referred to amount
of contact or parts of body covered. Jerr had his own sexual tension with
Terrence, a gay spa employee (Mr. Pasquesi), who anticipates every request these
men have with such alacrity that he seems to be spying.

The blurring of lines between new-age spa and creepy big brother is the comic
engine of the situation and provided some huge laughs, but the heart of the
scene is in how these characters gradually reveal their own vulnerabilities.
Even Terrence, who at first seems to be a one-joke device, is fleshed out with
some poignancy: a sad veteran of unrequited love. With subtle gestures, Mr.
Jagodowski created a defensive character haunted by an incident in his past that
we never find out about but is perhaps funniest unexplained.

When the show ends with Dave saying he will ask Veronique to marry him, he seems
both deluded and hopeful. It's a funny surprise, but the more startling part is
that you care what happens to him. In the most ephemeral art form, ''TJ and
Dave'' creates characters rich enough that you can almost believe they have a
past and a future.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/01/arts/tj-jagodowski-and-david-pasquesi-improv-a
rtists.html

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   TJ Jagodowski, left, and David Pasquesi in their improv show
at the Barrow Street Theater. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER GREGORY FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES) (C6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


