                             1144 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Daredevil Works on Its Brand

BYLINE: By NICK WINGFIELD

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1051 words


SAN MATEO, Calif. -- Inside the headquarters of GoPro, the video camera maker,
there is a racing car, a collection of motorcycles, and drones outfitted with
the company's products. All of them are reminders of the niche that GoPro has
carved out as the camera of choice for recording skiing, surfing and other
experiences too gnarly for dainty smartphones.

For its next act, GoPro wants to also be known as a media company.

It is not a terribly far stretch. In the last decade, GoPro has built a large
and passionate following on YouTube and other Internet sites with its
adrenaline-soaked and professionally made videos of surfers riding through
barrels of waves and skiers parachuting off snow-covered cliffs. Customers have
independently uploaded millions of their own videos, too. And many happily label
the clips with the term GoPro, which has become a sort of shorthand for action
shots.

''I think GoPro is producing some of the best short-form content out there
today,'' said Nicholas Woodman, the company's founder and chief executive, who
owns and has piloted the racing car and motorcycles now parked in the building
here. ''There's a phenomenal opportunity for us to leverage GoPro as a media
brand.''

There are other companies with media ambitions similar to GoPro's, most notably
Red Bull, the energy drink maker. Red Bull has become synonymous with extreme
sports and stunts by sponsoring high-altitude sky divers and downhill ice
skating races, among other events. GoPro also sponsors athletes, including the
surfer Kelly Slater, the snowboarder Shaun White and others who shoot footage of
themselves in action using GoPro cameras, which they then send to the company
every month for use in its online videos.

But GoPro has a long way to go in video to catch up to Red Bull. The energy
drink maker has 3.3 million subscribers to its YouTube channel and over 700
million views for its videos, compared with 1.7 million subscribers for GoPro's
channels and over 400 million views. And Red Bull TV, the company's
entertainment network, recently became available on Apple TV. Those are the
types of deals GoPro is now also after.

''It's a tough environment,'' said Michael J. Wolf, a former MTV Networks
executive and managing director of Activate, a media consulting firm. ''If they
can truly stand for action sports, and they can have quality video that people
want to watch, then they can succeed.''

Building up its media business could help fortify the company in a market where
smartphones and tablets have devastated dedicated cameras. One of the best known
casualties of the business was the Flip Video digital camera, which Cisco
Systems bought in 2009 for $590 million and shuttered two years later. Mr.
Woodman said he thought GoPro cameras and smartphones filled different needs,
and that smartphones were ill-suited to the kinds of rugged, hands-free uses for
which GoPro is designed.

Pointing to an iPhone he placed on a desk in front of him, he said, ''This gets
in the way of that experience.''

GoPro has just begun to venture beyond YouTube, where its biggest audience is
found, to seek out new distribution channels for its content. In October, Virgin
America introduced a GoPro channel on its in-flight entertainment system
featuring a two-and-a-half hour string of GoPro videos that are refreshed every
two months. In its latest deal, the company reached an agreement with Microsoft
for a GoPro channel that will be available to users of Microsoft's Xbox game
consoles.

The finalization of these new distribution deals is falling on the shoulders of
Adam Dornbusch, who recently joined GoPro after working in television and film.
Mr. Dornbusch said the company was in discussions with many other partners, many
of whom are other makers of Internet-connected devices for television. GoPro is
also ''kicking around ideas with larger television networks'' about possible
co-production deals, he said.

''Some of the distributors are begging for our content,'' Mr. Dornbusch said.
''It's that entertaining. It's that aspirational.''

Sales of its cameras, which run from $199 to $399, are brisk. The company has
said before that it expected to roughly double its 2012 sales in 2013, which
would have put it around the $1 billion level, though it will not confirm that
figure now. The company is widely expected to file for an initial public
offering in the coming year, which will further raise its profile.

''GoPro's biggest advantage is fundamentally they are a media device,'' said
Noah Brier, co-founder of Percolate, a technology firm in New York that helps
large companies, including Red Bull, create content for the Internet. ''It
couldn't be much more baked into the DNA of the company.''

GoPro's videos are often catnip for share-happy online audiences, flooding
social networks with the latest daredevil creations. Many videos are produced by
GoPro itself, like a recent clip featuring Kevin Richardson, who calls himself
the Lion Whisperer, as he snuggles with several big cats on a reserve in South
Africa. The GoPro cameras Mr. Richardson wears during the encounter offer a far
more intimate view of the lions than normal wildlife documentaries.

But some of the most popular videos on GoPro's distribution channels are shot by
independent users of the cameras. One of the biggest hits, with nearly 20
million views, is a tear-jerking two-minute clip of a firefighter in Fresno,
Calif., discovering an unconscious kitten in a burned-out home and then reviving
it with an oxygen mask and splashes of water. GoPro received permission from the
firefighter before professionally editing the video and putting it on its
channel.

GoPro is cagey about whether its media plans include selling advertising on its
videos to other companies. For now, its videos primarily advertise the GoPro
camera itself in one form or another. Even the videos its customers create and
upload to YouTube themselves help spread the company's marketing message by
showing, in vivid detail, the exhilarating moments people can capture with the
devices.

''What their product produces is so compelling, it doesn't feel like
advertising,'' said Michael Mott, general manager of Xbox apps and developer
ecosystem at Microsoft. ''It's a genuine expression of the creativity and
craziness of what their users are capturing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/31/technology/gopro-works-on-its-brand.html

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A still shot from a GoPro video of Kevin Richardson, a South
African zoologist, approaching a lioness in Pretoria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GOPRO)
The Hero 3 is the company's latest go-anywhere video camera. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
DAVID BECKER/GETTY IMAGES) (B1)
Left, NicholasWoodman, the chief executive of GoPro, says he sees an opportunity
to leverage GoPro as a media brand. Right, Marshall Miller parachuted off a rock
ledge wearing a GoPro. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 GOPRO) (B5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


