                             1142 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Military Plans Reflect Afghanistan Uncertainty

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 835 words


WASHINGTON -- American and NATO military planners, facing continued political
uncertainty about whether foreign troops will remain in Afghanistan after
December, have drawn up plans to deploy a force this summer that is tailored to
assume a training mission in 2015 but is also small enough to withdraw if no
deal for an enduring presence is reached, alliance officials said.

With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan refusing to sign security agreements
approving a presence for American and NATO troops after 2014, allied military
planners have been forced to prepare for both sudden success and abject failure
of proposals for a continuing mission to train, advise and assist Afghan forces
after combat operations officially end this year.

The decision on whether to extend the foreign military presence is a political
one, and it will be decided first by Mr. Karzai and then by President Obama and
the elected leaders from NATO nations. The process has brought vitriol in Kabul,
the Afghan capital, and deep concern in Washington and allied capitals.

The delays have complicated military planning, since the governments of nations
that contribute troops must approve any sustained deployments -- and the
required financing -- months in advance, with a number of notional deadlines for
finishing an agreement already long passed.

In preparing the mechanics of this summer's regular troop rotation, American and
NATO military commanders have set in motion a plan intended to give the
alliance's political leadership maximum flexibility, according to senior NATO
officials.

These deployment plans would put in place a coalition military force sufficient
to carry out a training mission beginning on Jan. 1, 2015, if Mr. Karzai
relents, and small enough for an exit by Dec. 31 of this year if political
stalemate results in the so-called zero option, alliance officials said.

As of Friday, there were about 36,500 American troops in Afghanistan, and about
19,000 other allied forces.

The alliance has approved the concept for a post-2014 training and assistance
force of 8,000 to 12,000 troops, two-thirds of them American, based in Kabul and
in four hubs in each compass corner of Afghanistan to carry out a follow-on
mission, named Resolute Support.

This summer, as the United States and coalition nations send in troops for the
next round of deployments, a force of that size, based in those locations and
having the required skills, will be put in place as part of the overall alliance
presence to complete the official combat mission this year.

''We will use the arrival of forces in July to tailor the force so it looks like
what it needs to look like in that Resolute Support mission,'' a senior NATO
official said. ''So it's going to be there.''

The total allied deployment in the summer months will perhaps remain 10,000
troops larger than designs for a post-2014 mission, so ''between July and
October we will shed weight,'' the NATO official said. ''We will start to shrink
the perimeter, figuratively speaking, and we will get to the Resolute Support
number.''

Mr. Obama, delivering his State of the Union address on Tuesday night,
reiterated his administration's policy. If the Afghan government signs a
security agreement, the president said, then ''a small force of Americans could
remain in Afghanistan with NATO allies.'' He described the potential follow-on
deployment as intended ''to carry out two narrow missions: training and
assisting Afghan forces, and counterterrorism operations to pursue any remnants
of Al Qaeda.''

The current and potential missions in Afghanistan were atop the agenda at NATO
headquarters in Brussels last week as alliance military chiefs met. Senior NATO
officials described internal deployment planning on the condition of anonymity
because of the delicacy of the effort.

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who attended
the NATO session, did not discuss specifics of future deployments, but described
a broad goal to assure that military planning gives as much flexibility as
possible to the alliance's civilian leadership.

''It's our job to make sure that the elected leader never runs out of options,''
General Dempsey said.

But he warned that a continued delay by Mr. Karzai in signing the bilateral
security agreement carried risk. ''The options will become more expensive and
could become somewhat constrained the longer this languishes,'' General Dempsey
said.

Many nations are watching with concern as Mr. Karzai demurs on signing a deal
with Washington -- a requirement for a similar deal with NATO -- because the
efficient and lawful disbursement of billions of dollars of pledged
international assistance is viewed as dependent on oversight by foreign troops
in a country known for corruption.

American intelligence agencies are also concerned that if United States troops
are pulled out of Afghanistan, they could lose their air bases for drone strikes
against Al Qaeda in Pakistan and for responding to a nuclear crisis in the
region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/30/world/asia/us-and-nato-afghanistan.html

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Soldiers in Kandahar, Afghanistan, last week. Allied officials
have drawn up plans for a force small enough for a quick exit. (PHOTOGRAPH BY I.
SAMEEM/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


