                             1122 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2014 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

The Whole World Gets Into the Groove

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 955 words


''Are you ready to party with us?'' asked Baloji, a Congolese singer, songwriter
and rapper, as he kicked his band into a sunny, danceable three-chord soukous
groove during Globalfest 2014 at Webster Hall on Sunday night. The song bounded
along with lyrics in Lingala. Eventually, in English, Baloji gave instructions
for a dance step: ''Run for cover -- protect yourself, because the army is
shooting on you, you, you, you and your people,'' he said. ''So if you want to
stay alive, stay down, down, down,'' he continued, cuing the audience to crouch.

It was a sly reminder of language barriers, cultural expectations and the fact
that musical styles come from particular places and histories. The 11th annual
Globalfest -- a five-hour, 12-act world-music showcase -- was full of fusions
both geographical and temporal: local and far-flung, old and new. What fortified
nearly every performance was the sense that the music still comes from some
place like home.

That was true for the Como Mamas, three women from Como, Miss., singing familiar
gospel songs with a cappella gusto. Each one took the lead while the other two
sang responses, working the repetitions up to raspy affirmations; then one woman
would preach a little while the other two caught their breath.

And it was true for DakhaBrakha, which means give-take in old Ukrainian. Formed
at an avant-garde theater in Kiev, DakhaBrakha brought measured drama and
dynamics to each of its mournful songs. It's a four-member group that plays
cello, percussion and assorted accordions: small and large, with buttons or
keyboards. Its three women wore white dresses, tall woolen hats and, like
Britney Spears, headset microphones. The songs are steeped in Ukrainian folk
tradition but not bounded by it; they deploy the piercing vocal harmonies of
Balkan music, the drones and systematic unfolding of Minimalism and the drive of
African and dance music. The songs built from lament to catharsis -- and
sometimes, just as meticulously, returned to lament.

Noura Mint Seymali, from Mauritania, comes from an ancient family of griots, and
she has a commanding, wide-open voice. She played an electrified ardine -- a
kora-like harp -- backed by guitar, bass and drums with rhythms out of rock and
funk; the pentatonic melodies of her songs had something in common with the
blues. But her fusion was particular and selective. Her vocal inflections came
straight from the Sahara: arabesques, quavers, ululations. And her guitarist and
husband, Jeiche Ould Chighaly -- also from a griot family -- played his electric
guitar with the staccato stutters of an African lute. She only meets American
music on her own terms.

Fanfare Ciocarlia, a leading Serbian brass band, pushes its tradition to
extremes. Its oompah is revved up to thrash-metal speeds; bass lines from two
tubas made the floor shake; its trumpets and saxophones raced through melodies
like bullet trains taking hairpin turns. It was brutally exhilarating. A
bouncier horn section -- part mariachi, part soul band -- buttressed the songs
of Sergio Mendoza y la Orkesta, from Tucson, which played Mexican-style cumbias,
polkas and mambos (and Fleetwood Mac's ''Tusk'') with a few twists, like guitar
solos out of psychedelia and surf-rock. The singer Salvador Durán delivered them
with old-fashioned romance and near-operatic vibrato.

Kuenta i Tambú, a group from Amsterdam with members from the Dutch Antilles,
wants the wider world to hear tambú, an African-rooted percussion-and-vocal
tradition from Curaçao. Its set mingled tambu with the simpler, more familiar
rhythms and pop refrains of electronic dance music, soca and hip-hop, with its
lead vocalist, Diamanta von Lieshdeck, rapping in both English and the Antillean
language Papiamentu. The six-beat complexity and metal percussion of tambú
arrived, strategically, as peaks of momentum.

Globalfest's other Caribbean representative was Brushy One-String, a solo
performer from Jamaica who has had millions of views on YouTube. He made himself
a vocal menagerie: soul belter, rapper, scat-singer, reggae crooner, dub toaster
and cackling character actor. That put considerable variety into kindly songs
that he accompanied, skeletally, with bass lines from a guitar with just one
string.

Some of Globalfest's fusions weren't as completely jelled. Yasmine Hamdan, a
Lebanese singer based in Paris, was aiming for a blend of Arabic pop and
psychedelia, but squandered her supple, enticing voice through electronic
effects. Hassan Hakmoun, the Moroccan musician based in Brooklyn who plays the
sintir -- a lute used for propulsive riffing -- introduced a new group that
hasn't yet forged its own sintir-driven jazz-rock. Bombay Royale, a merrily
costumed Australian group attempting to mingle vintage Bollywood styles with
surf-rock, came across as a novelty act.

The Wu-Force is the latest country-and-eastern project from Abigail Washburn, a
banjo virtuoso and singer who has long been drawn to Chinese music; it's a trio
with another American, Kai Welch, and the Chinese guzheng (zither) player Wu
Fei, who also sang and dressed in Chinese opera style for a few songs. Its
songs, like ''Uighur Gaga,'' came with explanations, and the plucked-string
blend of guzheng and banjo was promising. But the delicacy of the music couldn't
withstand a chattering audience.

Baloji was no purist, either. ''This is not global; this is our music,'' he
declared. Working the stage with the physicality of a soul man or an African
dancer, he had grooves out of Congo, Zimbabwe and Memphis. ''I came to reinvent
the bush blues,'' he vowed in ''Karibu Ya Bintou,'' over stark, marchlike guitar
chords. ''Alternating between modern and tradition, it stays fresh as long as we
catch the pattern.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/14/arts/music/at-globalfest-music-speaks-many-lan
guages.html

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 2014



CORRECTION: A critic's notebook article on Tuesday about Globalfest at Webster
Hall misidentified the nationality of a brass band that performed, Fanfare
Ciocarlia. It is Romanian, not Serbian. The error also appeared in an
accompanying picture caption.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Noura Mint Seymali of Mauritania during her set at Globalfest
in Manhattan. (C1)
 Baloji the Congolese singer, top, and Fanfare Ciocarlia, a Serbian brass  band,
above, epitomized the variety onstage Sunday at Globalfest (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRIAN
HARKIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


