                             1152 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Republicans Spar on Leaks and Surveillance, Underscoring Partisan Shake-Up

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE; Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 813 words


WASHINGTON -- House Republicans on Tuesday offered sharply divergent views about
secret government surveillance programs and the leaks that made them public,
underscoring the unsettled nature of a political debate that has scrambled the
usual partisan lines.

Representative Mike Rogers of Michigan, the chairman of the House Intelligence
Committee, suggested at a hearing that reporters who published articles based on
leaked National Security Agency documents may be criminals ''fencing stolen
material.''

At a parallel hearing on surveillance matters related to the leaks by Edward J.
Snowden, the former N.S.A. contractor who disclosed the documents,
Representative Robert W. Goodlatte of Virginia, the chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee, expressed skepticism about the agency program that collects
records of all Americans' phone calls -- and about President Obama's stated
intention to overhaul it. The program came to light as a result of an article in
The Guardian based on a leaked document.

The different approaches reflect a split that has opened in Congress between the
judiciary panels, which tend to be centers of libertarian privacy concerns and
skepticism about the surveillance programs, and the intelligence committees,
which are focused primarily on national security and have defended the N.S.A.

At the Intelligence Committee hearing, Mr. Rogers -- who has repeatedly
speculated that Mr. Snowden may be an agent of the Russian spy service, without
offering any evidence to support that charge -- led the director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, James B. Comey, in a colloquy about journalism and
criminality.

''So if I'm a newspaper reporter for -- fill in the blank -- and I sell stolen
material, is that legal because I'm a newspaper reporter?'' Mr. Rogers asked.
''If I'm hawking stolen, classified material that I'm not legally in possession
of for personal gain and profit, is that not a crime?''

Mr. Comey responded cautiously. He said that if a reporter was ''hawking stolen
jewelry,'' it would be a crime, but that publishing classified information was a
more complicated issue because of constitutional protections for press freedom.

''I think that's a harder question because it involves a news-gathering
function'' and ''could have First Amendment implications,'' he said, declining
to answer Mr. Rogers's questions ''in the abstract.''

Mr. Rogers did not mention any names during the hearing. But when he was
speaking to reporters afterward, according to Politico, he made clear that he
was referring at least in part to Glenn Greenwald, the former Guardian
journalist who broke the story of the bulk call records program.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Greenwald said that Mr. Rogers and others were
''trying to bolster a climate of fear imposed on the news-gathering process,''
and that Mr. Rogers's theory ''would criminalize any kind of freelance
journalism'' about national security matters.

Several lawmakers at the Judiciary Committee hearing expressed skepticism about
Mr. Obama's support for measures that would preserve the capabilities of the
data collection program but put the bulk records in the hands of phone companies
for the N.S.A. to access.

Mr. Goodlatte emphasized, as did other lawmakers, that the program had never
thwarted a terrorist attack. And, citing hackers' recent breaches of the private
data of Target and Yahoo customers, he suggested that changing the program so
that the data was stored by private companies ''could raise more privacy
concerns than it solves.''

Lawmakers from both parties pressed James M. Cole, the deputy attorney general,
to weigh in on proposed legislation designed to end the bulk collection of phone
records. The bill is co-sponsored by Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the
Democratic chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and Representative Jim
Sensenbrenner, Republican of Wisconsin.

Mr. Cole declined to do so, saying the Obama administration had not yet reached
an official position.

In a further sign of the breach of partisan lines on the issues of national
security and government powers, Alberto R. Gonzales, the attorney general under
President George W. Bush, published a law review article on Tuesday about the
Obama administration's decision to kill Anwar al-Awlaki, an American citizen and
radical Muslim cleric, in a drone strike in Yemen in 2011. The Wall Street
Journal wrote about Mr. Gonzales's article on Tuesday.

Mr. Gonzales said it had been legal to kill Mr. Awlaki, but called on Congress
to impose greater checks on any future executive-branch decisions to kill
citizens.

In a commentary published alongside Mr. Gonzales's article, Stephen I. Vladeck,
a law professor at American University, said the article was hypocritical, given
Mr. Gonzales's role in Bush-era counterterrorism policies, but praised its
support for independent review of targeted killings.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/05/us/politics/republicans-spar-on-leaks-and-surv
eillance-underscoring-partisan-shake-up.html

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Representative Mike Rogers of Michigan, center, the chairman of
the House Intelligence Committee, at a hearing on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GARY
CAMERON/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


