                             1132 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's Happening With the Air Force?

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 452 words


If the Air Force cheating scandal disclosed last week were a singular event, it
would be easier to accept Pentagon assurances that America's nuclear deterrence
and military readiness have not been compromised. But it is the latest in a
series of breaches that have raised alarms about discipline and competency in
the Air Force.

On Wednesday, the Air Force said that 34 officers responsible for launching
land-based nuclear missiles were pulled off the job and their security
clearances suspended for cheating, or failing to report cheating, on tests that
assess their knowledge of how to operate and launch nuclear weapons. They are
based at Malmstrom Air Force Base in Montana, home to 150 Minuteman 3
intercontinental ballistic missiles. The cheating was discovered during an
investigation into illegal drug possession in which 11 officers, including two
accused in the cheating scandal, were under suspicion.

Air Force Secretary Deborah Lee James called the behavior ''absolutely
unacceptable'' -- as is the continuing pattern of misconduct. Last month, an Air
Force inquiry revealed that the general who oversaw some of the nation's nuclear
weapons was dismissed for drunken antics during an official trip to Moscow last
summer.

Last year, the service removed 17 officers assigned to stand watch over the
missiles in Minot, N.D., after finding safety violations, potential violations
in protecting codes and other problems. The setbacks for the nuclear mission go
back to 2008, when there was an inadvertent cross-country transport of six
nuclear-tipped missiles on a B-52 bomber whose pilot did not know they were
aboard. Then Defense Secretary Robert Gates fired the top two Air Force
officials, but problems have persisted.

A RAND Corporation study, reported by The A.P. in November, found ''burnout''
among launch officers and broader behavioral issues, like sexual assaults and
domestic violence. It said that in 2011 and 2012, court-martial rates in the
nuclear missile force were more than twice as high as in the overall Air Force;
written reprimands for rule violations and other misbehavior were also higher.

The nuclear force is afflicted by morale problems because its mission has lost
cachet in an era when the nation's focus is on terrorism and cyber threats.
Experts say the Air Force has made it hard for missile operators to transfer
into cyber, drone or space operations, which have more potential for promotion.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel is willing to consider additional incentives to
bolster these troops. The scandals should force America to think more broadly
about the purpose of its vast and increasingly obsolete nuclear arsenal, and how
the nation could be safer with far fewer weapons.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/20/opinion/whats-happening-with-the-air-force.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


