                             1163 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Conservative Group Enters Michigan Fray on Side of Tea Party

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS CONFESSORE

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Washington; Pg.

LENGTH: 597 words


One of the country's most influential conservative political organizations
announced Wednesday that it was diving into a bitter Republican primary in
Michigan, its first such intervention into the broader battle between the party
establishment and Tea Party conservatives.

The group, Americans for Prosperity, will spend about $230,000 on advertisements
thanking Representative Justin Amash for fighting against President Obama's
signature health care law, officials there said -- a shot at establishment
donors who are rallying behind his challenger, Brian Ellis.

The ads do not attack Mr. Ellis, but the decision to get into a hotly contested
primary on behalf of one of Congress's most outspoken lawmakers hints at the
delicate line the group is trying to walk. It is supporting conservatives
seeking to reshape the party without committing itself to an expensive
internecine struggle in the Senate that could endanger the party's prospects for
regaining control of the chamber this year.

''Congressman Amash has been a rock-solid vote for free-market issues in the
House, and has been a leader on efforts to stop Obamacare,'' said Tim Phillips,
the president of Americans for Prosperity. ''A.F.P. is well known for holding
members accountable when they vote the wrong way; we think it's also important
to thank those who do the right thing and stand up against big -government laws
like Obamacare that are hurting so many American families.''

Americans for Prosperity, co-founded by the billionaire David H. Koch, has spent
about $27 million in recent months, most of it attacking Democratic candidates
for the Senate over health care. In the process, the group has become the party
leadership's most critical ally in the battle to win control of the Senate. And
unlike other conservative groups that have assailed the party establishment,
such as the Senate Conservatives Fund and the Club for Growth, Americans for
Prosperity has so far steered clear of contentious Senate primaries in states
like Kentucky and Texas.

But in backing Mr. Amash, the group is siding with an outspoken lawmaker who has
repeatedly clashed with his own leadership in the House. Mr. Amash -- whose
libertarian politics are often compared to those of former Representative Ron
Paul of Texas -- has pushed to strip financing for the National Security
Agency's data-mining efforts and to restrict the use of drones. He has voted
against the most austere budget proposals offered by Republican leaders, arguing
that they do not go far enough in restraining the government, and last year he
voted against a spending bill negotiated by Republican leaders that ended the
two-week government shutdown.

In November, a group of prominent donors from Michigan's business community
announced that it would support Mr. Ellis, citing Mr. Amash's tactics on the
shutdown, among other issues. Mr. Amash has also drawn criticism from Karl Rove,
the Republican strategist.

But Mr. Amash also has prominent allies. Chief among them are the DeVos family
of Michigan, the state's most influential Republican donors. Some of the family
members have given generously to Mr. Amash's congressional campaigns as well as
to Americans for Prosperity.

Mr. Amash is also being backed by other right-leaning groups. FreedomWorks, a
grass-roots conservative group, has endorsed Mr. Amash through its political
action committee and has pledged to match business-lobby money spent on behalf
of Mr. Ellis. Last month, the Club for Growth began airing ads attacking Mr.
Ellis as a ''big-taxing, big-spending, corporate-welfare-loving politician.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/13/us/politics/conservative-group-enters-michigan
-fray-on-side-of-tea-party.html

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


