                             1146 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Framework' for Talks on Mideast in Progress

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 732 words


WASHINGTON -- Seeking to jump-start peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians, the Obama administration hopes to complete a ''framework'' accord
within a few weeks, which would set the terms for a final negotiation, a senior
State Department official said in a conference call with Jewish leaders on
Thursday.

Among the elements under consideration, a participant in the call said, is a
plan to compensate descendants of Jews who were forced to flee Arab countries
after the State of Israel was created in 1948. That could give Israelis more of
a motive to support a new Palestinian state.

The official, Martin S. Indyk, the special envoy for Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, told the Jewish leaders that if the framework were to be accepted
by both sides, the peace talks could be extended beyond the nine-month time
frame set last summer by Secretary of State John Kerry. The new goal, he said,
would be to sign a treaty by the end of 2014.

Mr. Indyk declined to comment on the call, which the State Department's
spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said was an off-the-record briefing for Jewish groups.
''Given this is an ongoing process and these decisions have not yet been made,''
Ms. Psaki said, ''at no point did Ambassador Indyk make a prediction of the
final contents of a framework.''

State Department officials cautioned that the process could take longer than a
few weeks, and they said the issue of how to treat families of Jewish refugees
had not been settled.

Still, the call suggests that the Obama administration is preparing the ground
with important constituencies before it formally presents the document. As
secretary of state, Mr. Kerry has traveled to the region 10 times to keep the
negotiations alive. He did not put Israel on the itinerary for his latest trip,
to a security conference in Munich.

The United States first broached the idea of a framework for negotiations last
fall, as a way of narrowing differences between the Israelis and Palestinians
and persuading them to push for a final deal. Critics have characterized the
effort as a way to buy time.

While American officials have said little about the framework, its elements are
being hotly debated in Israel, where they could affect the ability of Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to hold together his coalition government.

Mr. Netanyahu clashed bitterly this week with a right-wing member of his
cabinet, Naftali Bennett, over suggestions from the prime minister's office that
Jews living in outlying settlements might someday live under Palestinian
sovereignty. Mr. Netanyahu has signaled that he will not sign on to every
element in a framework.

In the call, Mr. Indyk said both sides could ''lay down reservations'' to parts
of the framework while agreeing to use it as a basis for talks. The document
will address the core issues that have long consumed negotiators: borders,
security for Israel, the status of Jerusalem, mutual recognition and a right of
return for Palestinian refugees.

Mr. Indyk told the callers that some of those issues would be dealt with in
greater detail than others. An example, the person involved in the call said, is
that the framework foresees the creation of a security zone along the Jordan
River that would be fortified with high-tech fences, electronic sensors and
unmanned drones, to protect Israel from attacks.

Mr. Indyk did not discuss how many years Israeli soldiers would patrol that zone
-- another issue that has divided Israelis and Palestinians. The president of
the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, said this week that he could accept an
Israeli military presence in the West Bank for a three-year transition period.

The framework, Mr. Indyk said, will not deal specifically with the political
status of Jerusalem, which is claimed as a capital by both Israelis and
Palestinians.

In his briefing, Mr. Indyk emphasized the huge cost of a peace agreement, saying
the countries would have to contribute to support different pieces: Palestinian
economic development, the cost of redeploying Israeli soldiers, resettling
Palestinian refugees in the new Palestine, as well as compensating the
descendants of Jewish refugees.

Middle East analysts are divided on the value of a framework. Some say it is
merely a mechanism to keep the talks going beyond the time frame set by Mr.
Kerry. Others said it was a modest sign of progress in a process that has so far
yielded little.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/31/world/middleeast/framework-for-talks-on-mideas
t-in-progress.html

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


