                             1155 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Boehner on Fantasy Island

BYLINE: By GAIL COLLINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 781 words


House Speaker John Boehner has his good moments. For instance, I always enjoy it
when he brushes off a question by saying: ''If ands and buts were candy and
nuts, every day would be Christmas.''

Also, there was the time he dressed down one of his members, Steve King of Iowa,
for describing Dreamers -- young people who were illegally brought into the
country when they were children -- as a generation of drug mules. (''... and
they've got calves the size of cantaloupes because they're hauling 75 pounds of
marijuana across the desert.'')

Plus, Representative Joaquin Castro of Texas says that when he thanked Boehner
for standing up to King, Boehner responded. ''What an ass.'' I'm editing, but
you get the idea.

So, a lot to appreciate when it comes to Boehner on the subject of the great
melting pot. Until Thursday, when the speaker pretty much tossed the idea of
immigration reform over a railing. This was a metaphorical railing and not the
one that the congressman from Staten Island threatened to throw a reporter over.

But it's sad. The immigration bill that was passed by the Senate last year would
have done a lot of good, both in giving millions of undocumented residents a
better life and in rationalizing the way we decide who gets to come here legally
and who doesn't.

For a while it looked as if the House was going to pass a modest version of the
same. But that was long ago. Back, um, last week. That was when the Republicans
came up with a series of principles for reform during a group retreat.
Principles that, Boehner said, ''our members by and large support, put together
by the leadership team. And they believe it.''

He made that last comment Thursday, about three seconds before he announced that
nothing was going to happen.

Pop Quiz. Complete the following sentence: John Boehner dropped the plan to pass
immigration reform in 2014, and blamed his sudden, abrupt, U-turn on:

A) The people who closed down the George Washington Bridge without Gov. Chris
Christie ever knowing a single thing about it.

B) Russian oligarchs.

C) Justin Bieber.

D) President Obama.

Yes! Everybody got this one right! John Boehner says the House Republicans won't
pass the plan they came up with last week because Barack Obama ruined
everything.

''Listen, there's widespread doubt about whether this administration can be
trusted to enforce our laws,'' he told a press conference. ''And it's going to
be difficult to move any immigration legislation until that changes.''

Let us consider the Obama administration's record on enforcing immigration laws.
Under this president, half of all federal crime prosecution involves immigration
crime. The government now spends more on enforcing immigration laws than it
spends on the F.B.I., Drug Enforcement Administration, Secret Service, U.S.
Marshals Service and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
combined.

We have more than 650 miles of fencing along the Mexican border. Plus, don't
forget all the drones. And 21,391 border patrol agents. Given the plummeting
numbers of people actually trying to illegally cross into the country, let us
hope that a lot of those agents are good at meditation.

A sizable chunk of Obama's own base is furious over the all-time high rate of
deportations -- nearly two million so far in his tenure and way ahead of the
record of George W. Bush. The government now automatically goes through the
fingerprints of people who are arrested and sifts out the ones who are here
illegally.

Immigrant advocates say the system breaks up families and viciously punishes
people who may be guilty of nothing more than a minor traffic violation. The
administration says it's all about targeting the real criminals. This is an
argument we need to continue, but, however it turns out, the answer is not going
to be that Barack Obama refused to enforce the immigration laws.

So what do you think John Boehner's real motive is for dropping immigration
reform? Do you think his members are worried that if illegal immigrants get a
path to citizenship, they'll use their franchise to vote Democratic? (''G.O.P.
Crafts Plan to Wreck the Country, Lose Voters,'' said the headline in a blog
from the ever-popular Ann Coulter.)

Maybe the House is just short of time. There's a post office somewhere that
needs renaming, and Obamacare to repeal.

''Well, we got a lot of things on our plate,'' said Boehner. He mentioned fixing
Medicare payments for doctors and flood insurance. That's one heck of an agenda,
but maybe they could fit in just a little more by expanding their 2014 schedule
beyond the current 97 more working days.

Too hypothetical. Press Boehner on that one and he'll feel obliged to tell you
about candy and nuts again.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/08/opinion/collins-boehner-on-fantasy-island.html

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


