                             1161 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 12, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Extrajudicial Killings

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 243 words


To the Editor:

Re ''U.S. Debates Drone Strike on American'' (front page, Feb. 11):

The so-called war on terror has become a pre-emptive war. We are not punishing
people who have attacked us. Instead, we are seeking out people we view as bad
guys and who, we think, might one day try to harm us.

Reasonable people can disagree on the wisdom of this strategy, but reasonable
people cannot dispute that the government may not lawfully punish or kill United
States citizens before they have done something illegal unless they pose an
immediate and significant threat, nor can United States citizens be punished for
past acts without adhering to the legal standards of due process.

If we have learned anything since 9/11, it is that the president is often wrong,
despite being certain. We saw this in the absence of weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq.

Although the Obama administration insists that it is adhering to a careful
process in deciding whether to assassinate United States citizens overseas, no
amount of legalese can obscure the central fact that this process is entirely
nonjudicial and ultimately comes down to the decision of a single man.

Nobody knows whether extrajudicial assassinations save American lives, but any
student of American constitutional history knows that the Obama administration's
policy of killing United States citizens is utterly lawless.

DAVID R. DOW Houston, Feb. 11, 2014

The writer is a law professor at the University of Houston.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/12/opinion/extrajudicial-killings.html

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


