                             1121 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

James Bond, Sherlock Holmes, Hercule Poirot: Why Do We Keep Resurrecting the
Same Literary Characters?

BYLINE: By JAMES PARKER and PANKAJ MISHRA

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; BOOKENDS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1474 words


Each week in Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books.
This week, James Parker and Pankaj Mishra discuss why certain literary
characters never seem to die.

By James Parker

So we're doomed, then, to reboots of reboots of 'Columbo,' drifting ever farther
from the source like a damaged battle cruiser in space?

Not to get too portentous about it, but this question for me points like a
flaming golden arrow to a much larger question, which has to do with the health
of our collective imagination. That is, are we caught in a diminishing loop of
derivative creativity, some kind of stranglehold of the secondhand? Have we
wandered deeper into Eliot's Waste Land -- the fragmented panoramas, the ''heap
of broken images,'' only now with more zombies -- than the poet himself could
have foreseen? Can it be that our highest form of cultural expression is the
YouTube mash-up?

''The originators, the exuberant men, are extinct,'' Evelyn Waugh wrote in 1957,
''and in their place subsists and modestly flourishes a generation notable for
elegance and variety of contrivance.'' We do not have Tolkien, in other words:
We have J. J. Abrams. Or Steven Moffat, lead writer of ''Doctor Who'' since 2009
and co-creator (if that's the right word) of the new BBC/Benedict Cumberbatch
version of Sherlock Holmes. Nothing against Abrams and Moffat; they're both
clearly brilliant -- zanily gifted reorganizers and rewirers of material.
''Elegance and variety of contrivance,'' yes indeed, by the bucketload. My point
is that the material, for the most part, is not theirs. They work in tropes,
memes, brands, jingles, known quantities, canned reactions, market-tested
flavors, whatever you want to call them. The cultural critic Simon Reynolds has
named this phenomenon ''retromania'': He published a fascinating book about it
in 2011. Tolkien, too, was of course drawing on his sources, his own scholarly
vaults of inspiration, his Kalevalas and Nibelungenlieds and all that. But he
was closer to the root, to the first fictive impulse. Which makes ''The Lord of
the Rings'' a rather juicier and more self-sustaining ''subcreation'' -- to use
Tolkien's terminology -- than, say, ''Star Trek Into Darkness.''

We shouldn't discount the commercial factor here: the enormous built-in timidity
of the culture industry, which will always be happier with a remake than a new
thing. Once you've assembled a hero, a hero that works, you should keep using
him. Those weird '70s movies about nobody in particular, with bad lighting and
sort of a bummed-out feel at the end -- who wants to watch them anymore? And
there's something to be said, I suppose, for reinvestigating the great fictional
characters -- for casting a cold postmodern or post-Freudian eye on fussy little
Poirot, or druggy Holmes, or numbed-out Bond. We're no wiser than their authors,
but we are, in a sense, older -- or at least we have a more developed set of
preoccupations. We seem to enjoy locating (or inventing) the wounds of our
heroes. We have to give them something, a niggle, a neurosis, some baggage of
private pain. Bond goes all stubbly and alcoholic in ''Skyfall''; Willy Wonka
had an evil dentist father in Tim Burton's ''Charlie and the Chocolate
Factory.'' Who can touch the deep sorrow of Wolverine? And so on.

So we're doomed, then? To etiolation, flimsification, more superheroes, reboots
of reboots of ''Columbo,'' drifting ever farther from the source like a damaged
battle cruiser in space? Not entirely. Impoverished as we are in this
flattened-out, open-source age, we can take credit for at least two great and
durable additions to the primary stock, two fully imagined novelties: Jason
Bourne and Tony Soprano. Actually, let's make that three: the Terminator. Four,
even: SpongeBob SquarePants! Five: Nurse Jackie. See what I mean? The
imagination coins these characters unstoppably. We just have to get out of its
way.

James Parker is a contributing editor at The Atlantic and has written for Slate,
The Boston Globe and Arthur magazine. He was a staff writer at The Boston
Phoenix and in 2008 won a Deems Taylor Award for music criticism from the
American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.

â--+ â--+ â--+

By Pankaj Mishra

Non-Western markets matter too much now for 007 to be able to fulfill
neo-imperialist fantasies of power and domination.

Marx once pointed out that ''all great world-historic facts and personages
appear, so to speak, twice'': ''the first time as tragedy, the second time as
farce.'' He was referring to the discrepancy between the original Napoleon
Bonaparte and the wannabe Napoleon III. You can guess what he would have said of
our culture of remakes.

Neither the doggedly literalist Sherlock Holmes of Guy Ritchie's films nor the
BBC's strenuously contemporized version escapes a touch of camp. This is largely
because they don't engage with the original myth of Holmes -- one that addressed
particular psychological and emotional needs within his ultrarational culture.
To readers trapped in secular Victorian certainties about science and reason,
Holmes's suave imaginative logic made their iron cage of modernity look
attractive. ''Depend upon it,'' he insisted, ''there is nothing so unnatural as
the commonplace.'' Not surprisingly, the visionary empiricism of this truly
international figure also electrified many aspiring geeks in India, China and
Turkey who were struggling to reconcile the ''two cultures'' of science and the
romantic imagination.

Ian Fleming's James Bond, on the other hand, was a product of Britain's
post-imperial bleakness. Outwitting menacingly acronymed conspirators in warm
countries, Bond stoked a fantasy of national potency and significance at a time
when, as Dean Acheson remarked, Britain had lost an empire but not yet found a
role. (Appropriately, the Conservative prime minister Anthony Eden recuperated
at Fleming's Caribbean villa after the Suez disgrace of 1956.)

Shorn of their historical context, sequels and remakes today seem no more than
rebranding exercises in an age of socioeconomic crisis, widespread uncertainty
and creative stasis. Unlike most novelists, those refurbishing James Bond or
Philip Marlowe can count on a ready-made store of readerly understanding and
good will. As they do with the numerous renderings of the Ramayana and
Mahabharata in India and Indonesia, audiences respond to familiarity spiced with
the right measure of novelty and strangeness. Such tickling of the mass
unconscious can be remunerativetoo: Unfocused nostalgia has a powerful lure in
postindustrial cultures that seem to have a recurrent present but few clear
traces of the past nor an avid anticipation of the future.

Naming the recent remakes of Bond in his witty book ''The Man Who Saved
Britain,'' Simon Winder blurts out, ''I'm sorry: I just can't go on it's all so
terrible. They're roughly the same, come out at irregular intervals and tend to
have the word 'Die' in the title.'' The increasingly pained-looking Bond played
by Daniel Craig seems to concur.

Britain is geopolitically too insignificant, and non-Western markets -- as well
as political sensitivities -- matter too much now for 007 to be able to fulfill
neo-imperialist fantasies of power and domination. The artless seducer of women
with names like Pussy Galore and Octopussy, a man who once charmingly hoped for
sex to have ''the sweet tang of rape,'' also risks driving away a crucial
demographic from the theaters. It is surely a sign of the times that in
''Skyfall'' a non-misogynist Bond retreats to his family estate in
secession-minded Scotland, improbably preoccupied with a childhood trauma after
what seems to have been a wholly unexamined life.

''Relax. You need to relax!'' the film's villain taunts him. In the age of Jason
Bourne, the C.I.A.'s intriguingly mislaid human drone, and Edward Snowden, Bond
does look ready for a long sabbatical. Fans need not despair, however. William
Boyd's Graham Greene-reading Bond in the novel ''Solo'' hints that recycled myth
can occasionally construct a fresh relationship with history. Assigned to
protect the interests of oil companies in a nasty West African civil war in
1969, Bond appears to himself as ''insubstantial and weak,'' even ''unmanned'':
a fleeting glimpse of the commonplace, everyday tragedy of life --
disappointment, failure and decay -- that might suit remakes better than thickly
costumed farce.

Pankaj Mishra is the author of several books, including ''The Romantics: A
Novel,'' which won the Los Angeles Times Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction,
and ''From the Ruins of Empire,'' a finalist for the Orwell and Lionel Gelber
Prizes in 2013. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and
contributes essays on politics and literature to The New York Review of Books,
The New Yorker, The Guardian of London and The London Review of Books.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/12/books/review/james-bond-sherlock-holmes-hercul
e-poirot-why-do-we-keep-resurrecting-the-same-literary-characters.html

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY R. KIKUO JOHNSON)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


