                             1217 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Look Out! That Song Is Going to Hit You Right in the Head!

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 600 words


Kraftwerk, the German band whose music predicted pop's electronic future back in
the 1970s, hasn't forgotten an old-fashioned precept: A concert is a physical,
spatial event. Even as all sorts of experiences -- arts, communication, commerce
-- migrate to two-dimensional computer screens, ''An Evening With Kraftwerk: 3-D
Concert'' played up the sensations of a particular performance in a particular
room. Kraftwerk's current tour found an ideal setting on Tuesday night as the
band started a two-night stand at the ornate United Palace Theater in Washington
Heights.

The band members themselves, in grid-patterned suits, stood impassively behind
identical-looking consoles. Behind them was a large video screen; concertgoers
had been equipped with 3-D glasses. As the band played its songs -- or generated
them, since it was impossible to tell how much was live -- larger-than-life
three-dimensional projections towered over the stage and moved into the
audience.

Kraftwerk, founded in 1970, invented itself through a fascination with
technology. It has billed itself as ''the man-machine,'' and its songs are
equally enthralled and wary of the emotionless precision and pervasive reach of
computers, media, high-speed transportation and other inventions with unintended
consequences. ''Business, Numbers, Money, People,'' flashed in midair in
''Computer World,'' a song released in 1981 that was tersely prescient about big
data and surveillance.

There were giant robotic simulacra of band members for ''The Robots,'' and a
welter of numbers flickering and rippling and flying forward in ''Numbers.''
There was a multilayered barrage of neon signs in ''Neon Lights'' and a shadowy
train plunging through darkness in ''Trans-Europe Express'' -- literalistic, but
compelling. During ''Spacelab,'' set in a spaceship cockpit so retro its
equipment included reel-to-reel tapes, a drone seemed to be hovering above the
theater's front rows; then it revealed itself as a long-needled probe and
plunged suddenly into the audience, which gasped. There were surround-sound
speakers, too, with voices and bits of synthetic melody popping up from multiple
directions.

The songs were methodically grouped by topic: computers, city life,
transportation (including extended excursions through ''Autobahn,'' ''Tour de
France'' and ''Trans-Europe Express'') and music itself. They were not new;
Kraftwerk's most recent album was ''Tour de France Soundtracks'' in 2003. Many
of the video images were familiar from Kraftwerk's 2012 stint at the Museum of
Modern Art, where it played through its catalog of studio albums.

Instead of unveiling new material, Kraftwerk has been continually tinkering with
its repertory. In various songs, it has beefed up what once were brittle
low-resolution sounds, made stiff rhythms funkier and extended some tracks with
remixes that incorporate elements of the electronic dance music -- hissing
high-hat cymbals, a firm four-on-the-floor thump -- that Kraftwerk presaged.
Images were tweaked, too; ''Radioactivity,'' one of the few Kraftwerk songs that
is unmistakably a warning, now mentions Fukushima alongside Harrisburg, Pa., and
Chernobyl.

The songs clicked and blipped, pulsed and swooped, throbbed and crackled.
Despite Kraftwerk's dour robotic image, underlined by Ralf Hutter's
electronically altered vocals, its songs are still pop, stacking up layers of
riff and hook and, particularly in its transportation songs, letting long melody
lines rise above the beat. All of its gizmos and programming are still geared to
human pleasures -- though new songs would be a pleasure, too.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/03/arts/music/kraftwerk-in-concert-at-the-united-
palace-theater.html

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kraftwerk: From left, Ralf Hutter, Henning Schmitz, Fritz
Hilpert and Falk Grieffenhagen, members of this German electronic band,
performing Tuesday at the United Palace Theater in Washington Heights.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


