                             1278 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Volunteers Provide Backup to the Uniformed Ranks

BYLINE: By DAVID WALLIS

SECTION: Section F; Column 0; Retirement; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1429 words


DELRAY BEACH, Fla. -- BERNARD ZARETSKY, 82, co-coordinator of the Delray Beach
Police Department's Volunteer Program, devotes about 100 hours a month to
preventing discord in the resort community, but his duties have the added
benefit of keeping the peace in his nearly 60-year-long marriage.

''You get on each other's nerves if you are around too often,'' Mr. Zaretsky
said in his office, chuckling. He continued, over the squawk of a police
scanner, ''Having worked since I'm 8 years old, I couldn't sit around doing
nothing.''

Ninety percent of the roughly 330 volunteers in the Delray Beach program are
retirees, Mr. Zaretsky, a former manufacturing executive, estimates. Like most
volunteer law enforcement officers, they are armed only with police radios.
Volunteers patrol neighborhoods in official cars, but are not permitted to leave
the vehicles and must call for backup from full-time officers if the need
arises. They perform other tasks too, including issuing parking tickets,
directing traffic and educating older people about swindles.

They are among the legions of retirees nationwide who enlist in what might be
called the unarmed forces of the uniformed ranks. They are welcomed as
volunteers by the Civil Air Patrol (an affiliate of the Air Force), the Coast
Guard Auxiliary, and many police departments.

Retirees make up 10 to 20 percent of the reserve and auxiliary police officers
in the country, whose ranks range from 250,000 to 750,000, said David M.
Rayburn, president of the Volunteer Law Enforcement Officer Alliance, a
nonprofit. A 2013 survey of 226 police departments found that about 83 percent
reported having older volunteers, said Elizabeth C. Bartels, author of
''Volunteer Police in the United States: Programs, Challenges and Legal
Aspects.''

Aside from altruism, the motivations of the volunteers, retired or not, are
varied. Many cite the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks as inspiring their
service, some are veterans seeking an encore engagement, and others regret
missing out on the military when they were younger. Still others consciously or
unconsciously hope to recapture a lost sense of authority after retirement.

In military parlance, volunteers are ''force multipliers,'' said Adm. Robert J.
Papp Jr., commandant of the United States Coast Guard. ''Given our worldwide
responsibilities, we get spread pretty thin,'' he said. ''So when you have
30,000-plus volunteers who step forward wherever they can -- any organization
would love to have a similar group that size and that talented.''

The Coast Guard Auxiliary was formally established in 1939 and mobilized
recreational boaters during World War II. Its members hunted for enemy
submarines, spotting a few, according to John A. Tilley, author of ''The United
States Coast Guard Auxiliary, 1939-1999.'' Now, auxiliary members cook on ships,
make ice-spotting flights in winter and do courtesy inspections of private
boats, among other tasks. They do the ''the dirty work that nobody really wants
to do,'' Mr. Tilley said.

Peter Lombardo, 58, of Deer Park, N.Y., an aircraft commander in the Coast Guard
Auxiliary and a semiretired electrical contractor, typically transports
active-duty personnel in the twin-engine Piper Seneca he owns. After TWA Flight
800 crashed off Long Island in 1996, he flew a Navy captain over the wreckage
site and then was invited into the hangar where the plane was being
reconstructed. ''I got to see a lot of firsthand stuff,'' he recalled.

After Sept. 11, he picked up chaplains arriving at East Coast airports, on their
way to ground zero to perform rites. Though Mr. Lombardo is reimbursed for some
expenses, he pays for many flight costs out of pocket. Volunteers even have to
pay for uniforms, and formal benefits are few. ''I have become a philanthropist
to the U.S. government,'' Mr. Lombardo said. He estimates his volunteer work
saves the Coast Guard $2,300 an hour in flight costs. ''That is your tax
dollars,'' said Mr. Lombardo.

January Parker, a retired flight attendant from Atlanta, regretted being ''one
of the only members of my family that didn't go into the military.'' She yearned
to become a fighter pilot, but at the time the military barred female pilots
from combat, a policy that ended in 2003. Ms. Parker's flight attendant work,
however, paid for training as a private pilot and flight instructor.

The Sept. 11 attacks prompted her to join the Civil Air Patrol. ''I had been a
flight attendant for United. I could have been on one of those flights,'' she
said.

Formed just before the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Civil Air Patrol ''filled a
massive gap in the nation's coastal defenses'' during World War II, said Frank
A. Blazich, the organization's senior historian. Like the volunteer boaters,
pilots were on the lookout for German submarines and proved a ''powerful
deterrent''; the sight of even small airplanes caused U-boats on the surface to
dive immediately and cut patrols short. After the war, the organization turned
to search-and-rescue operations, cadet programs and aerospace education.

Ms. Parker occasionally searches for missing aircraft and assesses hurricane
damage from the air. But she spends most of her time with the Civil Air Patrol
in ''very intense'' war games in a program called Green Flag Training, in which
she pilots Cessnas to imitate Predator drones above a battlefield.

''We fly with the F-16s,'' she said in an email. ''What we train them to do
saves the lives of our American kids.''

But she has met resistance while volunteering, occasionally encountering a lack
of respect from male pilots. ''When you are the little demure submissive,
everybody loves you,'' Ms. Parker, who declined to give her age, said. She does
not advertise her past as a flight attendant to colleagues, to avoid
belittlement. ''It's their sandbox,'' she explained.

In Delray Beach, Mr. Zaretsky said crime had gone down 82 percent in the Lake
Ida neighborhood from 2009 to 2011 since volunteers started patrolling. He wears
navy pants and a royal blue short-sleeve shirt with rows of multicolored
military-style decorations above the right pocket. An Army sergeant during the
Korean War, he now holds the rank of volunteer major, though some subordinates
call him simply ''Chief.''

He contrasts his challenging unpaid work with the pastime of neighbors who sit
by swimming pools and chatter about ''doctors and restaurants and the problems
in the community that they don't want to do anything about.''

Some volunteers become enamored with the military trappings: ribbons, and rank.
''Sometimes you get a wannabe who wants to be a police officer,'' said Martin
Tencer, 78, a retired car dealer and Korean War veteran who oversees the Delray
Beach program with Mr. Zaretsky. ''We can't tolerate that.''

Dilip V. Jeste, a psychiatrist and director of the Sam and Rose Stein Institute
for Research on Aging at the University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, understands why volunteer jobs that confer power (and a uniform) might
attract some retirees. Retirement, particularly when forced, can inflict ''a
serious injury to one's ego,'' he said in an email. ''This may be equivalent to
a total loss of self-esteem for some people. One way to get that sense of
self-esteem back is to return to a position of perceived authority.''

Though Mark Elkins voluntarily retired from his job as a computer engineering
professor at the City University of New York, he acknowledges that the loss of
his professional status contributed to his choice of a volunteer career. He now
serves as board president of the New York City Parks Enforcement Patrol Mounted
Auxiliary Unit and occasionally maintains order from atop a sizable draft horse.

''Maybe it explains why I have spent eight years as board president. Or at least
why I picked a volunteer position that had an 'authority' image to it,'' said
Mr. Elkins, 68.

Though some might dismiss retirees in police and paramilitary roles as
fantasists, they take real risks, as Mr. Elkins knows firsthand. One of his
horses, Monty, accidentally rolled on him several years ago. ''Cost me five
ribs,'' said Mr. Elkins. Volunteer officers who suffer catastrophic injuries are
eligible for the Justice Department's Public Safety Officers' Benefits Programs,
while death in the line of duty qualifies survivors for benefits.

The blog of the Officer Down Memorial Page, a nonprofit, offers another sobering
reminder of the dangers in volunteer policing: a list of 131 volunteers killed
in the line of duty under the title, ''Auxiliary Officers: Making the Ultimate
Sacrifice for $0 Per Year.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/15/business/retirementspecial/volunteers-provide-
backup-to-the-uniformed-ranks.html

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CITIZEN PATROLS: Bernard Zaretsky, left, and Martin Tencer
oversee volunteers who work with the police in Florida. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER W.
CROSS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


