                             125 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 25, 2014 Friday 2:41 PM EST

Amazon employee admits to drone fly-by at Seattle's Space Needle;
He eagerly showed the video to Seattle Police, then agreed to stop flying the
drone in public.

BYLINE: Abby Phillip

LENGTH: 263 words


Trips to Seattle should probably come with a warning: Caution, drones in use.

On Thursday night, security guards at the Seattle Space Needle called city
police after tourists reported a drone buzzing outside the window of the
attraction's observation deck -- a full 520 feet in the air. They claimed the
drone crashed into the observation deck window.

The white, camera-equipped, four-propeller device then glided back into the
fifth floor window of a nearby hotel.

When police caught up with the drone's owner, it turned out to be an Amazon
employee who eagerly showed them video of the drone's flight, which didn't
indicate that it had struck the Needle during its journey, according to a
Seattle Police Department blog post.

And, no, this wasn't a test-drive of Prime Air, which Amazon (whose chief
executive, Jeffrey P. Bezos, owns The Washington Post) recently announced it's
working to develop. If the Federal Aviation Administration plays along -- and so
far, it hasn't -- drone delivery service could offer same-day, human-free
delivery to your front door.

Seattle, where Amazon is headquartered, has had a spate of drone-related
incidents in recent months. Collectively, they suggest that the general
population isn't quite ready for the drone-powered future.

Police say the Amazon employee (whose identity wasn't disclosed) has agreed to
abide by Seattle's drone regulations and will no longer fly the drone in public.

The Space Needle folks, by the way, couldn't resist cracking a joke about the
situation:

@SeattlePD We are...but still waiting for our @amazon package to arrive

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


