                             1273 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Concerts of Mystery and Imagination

BYLINE: By JAMES R. OESTREICH

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 700 words


Spring for Music, the annual festival of North American orchestras at Carnegie
Hall, was created in large part to encourage adventurous programming and has in
its four years produced odd juxtapositions within concerts, typically with some
thematic goal in view. But when it comes to juxtaposing whole programs, anything
goes, and the results can be mind-bending.

Such was the case with the stark shift from the Rochester Philharmonic
Orchestra's offering on Wednesday evening, a concert version of Howard Hanson's
fusty 1933 opera, ''Merry Mount,'' to that of the Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra on
Thursday, an up-to-the-minute collection of works by Canadian composers.
Stretching to find a connection, you might point to denatured traces of American
Indian music in ''Merry Mount'' alongside more vital adaptations of native
Canadian culture in Derek Charke's ''13 Inuit Throat Song Games'' and Vincent
Ho's percussion concerto ''The Shaman,'' but that would be about it.

Thursday's program began with the Symphony No. 1 in C minor by the dean of
Canadian composers, R. Murray Schafer, 80. Mr. Schafer, who had long avoided
writing symphonies, finally relented in 2010, working on commission for the
Toronto Symphony Orchestra. Though tonal enough to be assigned a key, the
three-movement work is not conventionally symphonic, its episodic outer
movements seeming more concerned with color than with structure. The middle
movement (marked Mysteriously) is the most symphonic in its thematic
development, its broad scope and its heft and gravity.

It is there, too, that Mr. Schafer most boldly exhibits his trademark
theatricality, assigning the string players to whistle tunes in unison. But even
that stroke paled compared with the thoroughgoing theatricality of the rest of
the program, as supplied mostly by the soloists for whom the works were
tailored: Tanya Tagaq, the throat singer, and the ever wizardly percussionist
Evelyn Glennie in ''The Shaman.''

Coming soon after a New York appearance by Tuvan throat singers, Ms. Tagaq's
performance held particular interest, but it was frustratingly hard to take in.
Her vocalization seemed less a matter of drones and overtones, like those of the
Tuvans, than one of grunts and heavy breaths manipulated with a microphone.

The vocal games are traditionally played by two women, Mr. Charke's program
notes indicate, but instead he set Ms. Tagaq's voice against massed instruments,
writing first for the Kronos Quartet and now for the Winnipeg Symphony. Alas,
even with amplification, it was hard to separate out the voice from the rich
sonorities of the orchestra, with its Celtic-like fiddling and more vigorous
outbursts, or to determine precisely what sounds Ms. Tagaq was making: a sad
loss.

Perhaps Alexander Mickelthwate, the orchestra's music director, who conducted
expertly elsewhere, could have held the ensemble back a bit, or perhaps the
amplification could have been greater without debasing the sound completely.
More likely, it seemed, the piece may simply not work with such large forces in
so big a hall.

In any case, there was no such problem with the percussion dynamo Ms. Glennie in
Mr. Ho's brilliant and compelling concerto.

''Merry Mount,'' which had an acclaimed premiere at the Metropolitan Opera in
1934, now seems a period piece. Based on a Hawthorne short story, it centers on
a Puritan preacher's crisis of faith in a New England village, but atop this
intimate personal struggle are laid the trappings of grand opera, all out of
scale.

The workmanship is remarkable for a first-time (only-time) opera composer;
inspiration of lasting import is another matter. Nevertheless, the Rochester
Philharmonic's revival of a major work of its hometown hero is admirable, and
the 250 or so performers (including the Eastman Rochester Chorus and the Bach
Children's Chorus of Nazareth College) gave it all it was worth.

The orchestra lacks a music director at the moment, but Michael Christie, who
conducted here, offered a well-prepared and meticulously executed performance.
Richard Zeller and Sara Jakubiak sang the lead roles ardently and effectively.

Spring for Music runs through Saturday at Carnegie Hall; 212-247-7800,
carnegiehall.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/10/arts/music/spring-for-music-a-festival-of-orch
estras-plays-carnegie-hall.html

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Spring for Music, with Evelyn Glennie, percussionist, and the
Winnipeg Symphony at Carnegie Hall. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUBY WASHINGTON/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


