                             1261 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hey, Jack, You're Back! Anything New?

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1051 words


There is a Persian custom that could probably improve television.

It's Taarof, which makes a virtue of insincerity. For example, a host is
expected to offer hospitality three times, each time more pressingly, but the
guest should humbly refuse. Tempting as it might have been for the creators of
''24'' to resurrect their show, they would have been wiser to walk away after
the third invitation.

Instead, this groundbreaking action-adventure series is returning to Fox on
Monday for an encore season, starting up again four years after the finale of
Season 8 in 2010. And while there are some new faces and updated plot points,
this ''24'' is a revival, not a do-over. Subtitled ''Live Another Day,'' the
show is more of the same that filled all the days that came before, and that's
not always desirable. Sometimes it's better to start over completely or let a
series end for real, for good.

Effort and enthusiasm aren't enough to sustain even shows that were once
unrivaled in the ratings and at the water cooler. For its 13th season,
''American Idol'' has new judges, a faster pace and all kinds of lures for young
viewers, including song requests on Twitter (#IdolRequest) and contestant
selfies on Instagram. But the ratings of ''Idol'' continue to sink far below
those of its rival singing competition ''The Voice.'' And the sad thing is that
''American Idol'' isn't bad; most viewers have just moved on.

''24'' made its debut in 2001 and lasted long enough to play off two
presidencies and the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. It examined some of the
graver issues of the time, notably torture and civil liberties, without
interrupting the flow of comic-book suspense.

The writing was often prescient: The series was written before the Sept. 11
attacks; the president in the first season was black; and in the last season,
Moscow was behind some of the most heinous attacks on Western interests.

Most of all, ''24'' paved the way for many other smart political thrillers.

''Homeland,'' on Showtime, was created by some of the writers and producers who
cut their teeth on ''24.'' The homage did not go both ways: The team behind this
ninth season didn't try to slow down the frantic pace of ''24'' and make room
for some of the sophistication and complexity of ''Homeland.''

And now ''The Americans,'' an espionage thriller on FX, set during the 1980s
Cold War, has the creative momentum. That series, about Soviet spies working
undercover as an American suburban couple, builds suspense -- and a devoted
audience -- with an intriguing, layered story line and complicated characters,
not top-of-the-line gadgetry or dazzling cinematography. Espionage on ''The
Americans'' is primitive, mostly phone taps and bugs planted in the walls. There
is no Internet: The K.G.B. is trying to get its hands on an early prototype
developed by the military, Arpanet.

''The Americans'' feels new because it resuscitates the old in fresh, creative
ways.

For the return of ''24,'' the writers rejiggered the usual elements, blending
one-dimensional heroes and villains with complicated cinematic stunts and
sophisticated acts of violence. The superagent Jack Bauer (Kiefer Sutherland),
who has been off the grid and on the run ever since he went on a final killing
spree at the end of Season 8, is back. And he is once again risking his freedom
to save an ungrateful world from a global disaster.

The setting, London, is new, but not much else. Chloe (Mary Lynn Rajskub), one
of the most gifted, if crankiest, of computer savants, is back, though she is
now sporting an asymmetrical goth hairdo. One of Jack's old flames, Audrey (Kim
Raver), has also returned, along with her father, James Heller (William Devane),
a former secretary of defense who is now president.

Once again, there is a White House chief of staff who seems intent on concealing
things from the commander in chief. Fiendish international terrorists are back
in the business of stealing top-secret weapons and threatening national
security. The president could once more be a target for assassination.

There are some new elements that incorporate recent headlines, though. The
premiere includes hackers and cyber insurgents in the mode of Julian Assange, as
well as military drones that target terrorist suspects in Afghanistan. But some
older issues are still in play, including the use of torture by sinister
intelligence operatives who refer to their methods as ''enhanced
interrogation.''

Most important, and mercifully, the trademark 24-hour day has been shrunk --
there will be just 12 episodes, each representing a different hour on the
ticking clock -- and not every hour will be included. That's a real improvement,
because even when ''24'' was at its peak, the effort to sustain a one-day crisis
over 24 episodes stretched plots and plausibility to silly-putty extremes.

But so much of what seemed new when the series began now seems dated. Even the
over-the-top political melodrama that ''24'' introduced has been co-opted by
other shows. On the ABC drama ''Scandal,'' Borgia-like conspiracies coil around
every Washington operative, and even the president and the vice president are
ruthless killers. Shows like ''Crisis'' and ''The Blacklist'' (both on NBC)
offer savage terrorist plots and ingenious counterterrorist maneuvers. ''Person
of Interest'' (CBS) is entirely about government surveillance run amok.

Even ''The Good Wife'' (also on CBS), a romance-leaning legal drama, has tapped
deep into the public's fear of unchecked National Security Agency eavesdropping.

''24'' changed television drama, but it hasn't changed, and television has moved
on.

24: Live Another Day

Fox, Monday nights at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.

Produced by 20th Century Fox Television, Teakwood Lane Productions and Imagine
Television. Created by Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran; directed by Jon Cassar;
Howard Gordon, Evan Katz, Manny Coto, David Fury, Mr. Cochran, Brian Grazer, Mr.
Cassar and Kiefer Sutherland, executive producers.

WITH: Kiefer Sutherland (Jack Bauer), Mary Lynn Rajskub (Chloe O'Brian), Kim
Raver (Audrey Boudreau), William Devane (James Heller), Benjamin Bratt (Steve
Navarro), Yvonne Strahovski (Kate Morgan), Tate Donovan (Mark Boudreau), Michael
Wincott (Adrian Cross), Gbenga Akinnagbe (Erik Ritter) and Giles Matthey (Jordan
Reed).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/arts/television/kiefer-sutherland-returns-in-2
4-live-another-day.html

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: 24: Live Another Day: After four years, Kiefer Sutherland
revives his Jack Bauer role on Fox this Monday. (C1)
 Mary Lynn Rajskub, with Michael  Wincott, reprises her computer savant  role in
''24: Live Another Day.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANIEL SMITH/FOX) (C7)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


