                             1294 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

It's Cheap, but Is It Overpriced?

BYLINE: By JOHN PEARLEY HUFFMAN

SECTION: Section AU; Column 0; Automobiles; AROUND THE BLOCK; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 749 words


TESTED 2014 Mitsubishi Mirage

WHAT IS IT? A subcompact four-door hatchback.

HOW MUCH? Base DE, $13,805; ES as tested, $16,890.

WHAT'S UNDER THE HOOD? A full 3 cylinders of mumbling misery, making 74 tortured
horsepower.

IS IT THIRSTY? Equipped with a continuously variable transmission, the Mirage
has an E.P.A. rating of 37 miles per gallon in the city and 44 m.p.g. on the
highway.

ALTERNATIVES Ford Fiesta, Honda Fit, Greyhound bus tickets, hitchhiking.

Low expectations don't guarantee happiness, but at least there isn't much
disappointment. The reborn Mitsubishi Mirage lowers expectations, strangles them
and buries their remains in a deep unmarked grave. If this car wasn't
disappointing, it wouldn't be anything at all.

Built in Thailand, the reborn front-drive Mirage is an innocuous-looking thing,
sort of a cross between a six-year-old Toyota Yaris and a 7-month-old pug.

Mitsubishi has used the Mirage name on cars in various markets since 1978, but
this new one is unrelated to its predecessors. It's designed with second- and
third-world markets in mind, though there's no reason their standards should be
lower than those in developed countries.

The 14-inch wheels are pushed out to the car's four corners and wrapped in tires
only 22 inches tall. That means the wheel wells in which they reside can be
small too, so they don't intrude much into the interior.

It's the same basic formula that Sir Alec Issigonis applied in designing the
original and revolutionary Austin Mini that went on sale 55 years ago.

It's still a good formula, and is used by virtually every manufacturer of
entry-level small cars. It's Mitsubishi's execution of the formula that is so
poor. The Mirage has big doors so it is easy to get in and out of, but they are
flimsy and close with a twang.

The interior is roomy -- there's even acceptable legroom for the back seat, but
the seats are lightly padded and upholstered in what feels like nylon burlap.

The controls are straightforward and logical, but the dashboard is made of
cheesy plastic. There's even a visible 1990s-style seam around the passenger air
bag's cover, something that virtually all other cars have managed to hide. There
are a few nice visuals -- a bit of piano black in the center of the dash, some
silvery trim -- but nothing feels substantial.

At least the optional navigation system works well with a seven-inch LCD touch
screen that responds quickly to inputs. The problem is, even if the Mirage knows
where it's going, it will be a brutal journey getting there.

You settle into the top-of-the-line Mirage ES behind a nonadjustable steering
wheel. When you push a starter button -- illogically, on the left side of the
dash -- the 1.2-liter 3-cylinder clatters to a rocking and raucous idle.

A hint of the engine's gargle can be felt through the thin padding of the
steering wheel, and the tachometer needle seems to bounce irregularly. The
engine doesn't sound self-destructive, but it seems reluctant to wake up and
eager to go back to sleep.

A 5-speed manual transmission is standard, but $1,000 buys the continuously
variable unit. C.V.T.s are easy to hate, but this one is particularly loathsome
in operation. As the engine slogs to its peak torque of 4,000 r.p.m., the C.V.T.
seems to be trying to smother it. Once at the peak, the powertrain settles into
a bleak drone as the car grimly builds something like speed. The sound is
flatter than the electroencephalogram of a dead hamster.

Car and Driver magazine measured the Mirage crawling to 60 m.p.h. in 10.9
seconds. It's the sort of acceleration that adds terror to every highway
entrance and daring to any passing maneuver. A sense of peril is your constant
driving companion.

The lack of speed is a benefit to the Mirage, because the suspension tuning is
awful. The body seems to flit along, making random movements unrelated to the
road. Stab at the brakes and the nose dives while the tail unloads and wags
disconcertingly.

The steering is numb, the front tires lose their grip in corners, and there's no
driver engagement. Parole hearings are more entertaining, and prison bunks may
be more comfortable.

Mitsubishi's ads claim the Mirage DE starts at $12,995, though that excludes the
mandatory $810 destination charge. At $16,890, my ES test car came in at a price
point where the eager Ford Fiesta, the charming Honda Fit or a lifetime supply
of Merrell hiking boots would be better choices.

Disappointment this profound shouldn't come with 60 months of financing.

JOHN PEARLEY HUFFMAN

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/25/automobiles/autoreviews/its-cheap-but-is-it-ov
erpriced.html

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: REAPPEARANCE: The latest Mirage was designed for developing
markets and is assembled in Thailand. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MITSUBISHI MOTOR)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


