                             1290 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria's Army Holding Up Hunt for Taken Girls

BYLINE: By ADAM NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1121 words


ABUJA, Nigeria -- Intelligence agents from all over the globe have poured into
this city, Nigeria's capital, to help find the nearly 300 Nigerian schoolgirls
abducted by the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram more than a month ago -- but
there has been little or no progress in bringing the young women home.

The problem, many involved in the rescue effort say, is the failings of the
Nigerian military.

There is a view among diplomats here and with their governments at home that the
military is so poorly trained and armed, and so riddled with corruption, that
not only is it incapable of finding the girls, it is also losing the broader
fight against Boko Haram. The group has effective control of much of the
northeast of the country, as troops withdraw from vulnerable targets to avoid a
fight and stay out of the group's way, even as the militants slaughter
civilians.

Boko Haram's fighters have continued to strike with impunity this week, killing
dozens of people in three villages in its regional stronghold, but also hitting
far outside its base in the central region. Car bombs have killed well over 100,
according to local press reports.

One recent night, Boko Haram fighters ambushed a patrol that had sought to leave
Chibok, the town where the girls were kidnapped, killing 12 soldiers. The next
day, when the bodies were brought to the Seventh Division -- the main army unit
taking on Boko Haram -- soldiers angry about the loss of their comrades opened
fire on the car carrying their commanding officer, Maj. Gen. Ahmadu Mohammed, as
he was heading to an armory. The commander was unharmed and the soldiers were
arrested.

''It's been our assessment for some time that they are not winning,'' said one
Western diplomat in Abuja, speaking anonymously in keeping with diplomatic
protocol.

For the moment, assistance from France, the United States, Israel and Britain is
focused on answering questions that ultimately might guide a rescue attempt.
Where exactly are the girls? Have they been split up into groups? How heavily
are they guarded?

Desperate for clues, the United States has dispatched drones to scan the 37,000
square miles of Sambisa Forest, a scrubby semidesert tangle of low trees and
bushes in the corner of northeastern Nigeria where the girls are believed to be
held.

''You have a lot of guys in town right now,'' said the diplomat, referring to
foreign intelligence and security personnel. But, he added, ''A lot of this is
assessment, and this is a pretty steep learning curve.'' And one senior diplomat
offered a sober picture of the prospect, for now: ''Realistically I don't think
we've seen anything to indicate that we are on the verge of a huge
breakthrough.''

That the hopes of many across the globe rests on such a weak reed as the
Nigerian military has left diplomats here in something of a quandary about the
way forward. The Nigerian armed forces must be helped, they say, but are those
forces so enfeebled that any assistance can only be of limited value? ''Now it's
a situation where the emperor has no clothes, and everybody is scratching their
heads,'' another diplomat here said.

Military officials in the northeast, Boko Haram's stronghold, insisted that
patrols are already underway in the Sambisa Forest, and that 10 days ago one
even came close to where some of the girls were being held. It was attacked by
Boko Haram, these officials said, and two officers were killed.

But the military presence on some of the region's most dangerous roads is light,
with only a handful of checkpoints in places where villages have been attacked
repeatedly and the burned-out shells of buildings are much in evidence.
Sometimes, the soldiers manning the checkpoints are not even wearing protective
gear.

Diplomats here in the capital expressed serious reservations about the
likelihood that any military operation would return the young women safely.
''We're concerned that a kinetic action'' -- meaning an armed intervention --
''would result in deaths,'' a senior diplomat here said. ''What are the good
potential outcomes? It's not going to be easy or quick.''

Instead, the government may have its best shot with a negotiated settlement with
the Islamists, possibly including a prisoner release, said a military officer in
the region. Nigerian officials have hinted of a deal as well, though President
Goodluck Jonathan has publicly ruled out a deal.

Some other diplomats here were more pessimistic, saying it was unlikely that all
of the victims would be saved. Already, in the region and in the capital of
Borno State, Maiduguri, 80 miles from Chibok, there are some credible accounts
suggesting that some of the girls may already have been killed. ''I think it's
going to be a slow burn,'' one diplomat said.

Adding to the diplomats' worry is a sense that officials in Mr. Jonathan's
administration are dangerously out of touch with the realities of a vicious
insurgency that for years had been minimized in the distant capital, until the
abductions made that impossible.

Last fall Boko Haram rampaged around the town of Benisheik for 10 hours before
the army even arrived. When it was over, about 150 people were dead. In
February, when Boko Haram struck a college in Yobe State, in the northeast, it
was unguarded by soldiers and a nearby military post was unstaffed, even though
it had been attacked in the past.

Still, Mr. Jonathan's aides were looking to the group to simply free the young
women.

''I have reason to believe Boko Haram will see reason and let these girls go,''
said Oronto Douglas, special adviser on strategy to Mr. Jonathan, in an
interview this week. ''I think they will have a conscience to let these girls
go.''

Mr. Douglas also suggested the recent Boko Haram video showing some of the
kidnapped girls may actually show another group of young women -- even though
parents have identified many of their own daughters on the video.

Other officials here, stung by Washington's criticism of the military, have
looked to place blame elsewhere. They defensively point to the United States'
withdrawal from Afghanistan, saying that Nigeria is not the only country that
has had difficulty with an Islamist insurgency. Terrorism is a global scourge,
and ''No one person, agency, or country can stamp out terror,'' said Sarkin-Yaki
Bello, a retired major general and one of the country's leading counterterrorism
officials.

Yet few outside the president's close circle accept such explanations. Daily
antigovernment demonstrations and increasingly critical news media coverage
point to widespread anger at the government.

''Now we know the army doesn't function,'' said Jibrin Ibrahim, one of the
country's leading political scientists. ''Many people are getting alarmed and
frightened.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/24/world/africa/nigerias-army-holding-up-hunt-for
-taken-girls.html

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP: A group of girls is believed to be held in northeast Nigeria. (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


