                             1251 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Voters Signaling a Turn

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND and AZAM AHMED; Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1366 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Abdullah Abdullah, a longtime opponent of President Hamid
Karzai and an ardent supporter of the United States, emerged Saturday as the
clear front-runner in Afghanistan's presidential election.

In preliminary results released Saturday, Mr. Abdullah had won 45 percent of the
vote, not enough to avoid a runoff with Ashraf Ghani, a former World Bank
economist and Karzai adviser, who had won 32 percent. But Afghan government
officials say Mr. Abdullah is on the verge of forging alliances with at least
two of the runners-up to gain their support, and possibly the presidency, in the
next round.

Either of the top two candidates would represent a significant break with the
years of deteriorating relations the United States has had with Afghanistan
under Mr. Karzai, and a shift toward greater bilateral cooperation. Each
candidate has said, for instance, that he will sign a security agreement
allowing American forces to remain in the country past 2014, which Mr. Karzai
negotiated but refused to sign.

But the United States and its NATO allies were likely to see the apparent
advantage for Mr. Abdullah, with his long record of advocating closer relations
with the United States and a more militant stance against the Taliban, as
encouraging, although they have been careful not to express support for any
candidate in the race.

Mr. Abdullah, a northerner of mixed Tajik and Pashtun ethnicity, would also
become one of the few northerners to lead a country long dominated by Pashtuns
from the south.

The election, the third for president since the NATO-led invasion of 2001,
appears to have been the country's most democratic yet. The turnout was roughly
50 percent higher than that of the last election, the deeply tainted race that
Mr. Abdullah lost to Mr. Karzai in 2009. Early indications suggested that it was
also far cleaner than the last one, although final rulings on fraud complaints
may not come for several weeks.

Mr. Ghani was the leading Pashtun candidate, but the other top two Pashtuns --
Zalmay Rassoul, believed to have been Mr. Karzai's favorite, and Gul Agha
Sherzai, a former warlord favored by the C.I.A. and popular in the Taliban's
southern heartland -- were expected to throw their support to Mr. Abdullah,
according to two senior Afghan government officials.

Their support could give Mr. Abdullah a powerful mandate if he wins the runoff,
which will be held no sooner than May 28. In a recent interview, he said he
would set a different tone with the United States, ending the often acrimonious
criticism from the Afghan president over prisoner releases, civilian casualties
and night raids. ''This rhetoric has not helped Afghanistan,'' he said.

Mr. Karzai, who is stepping down after 12 years in power, has been studiously
neutral throughout the campaign and has maintained silence on the issue since
the April 5 election. Officials in the presidential palace have said he is
deeply worried about Mr. Abdullah's apparent success.

Ethnic divisions are important here, not least because of the Taliban's largely
Pashtun base. The largest ethnic group in Afghanistan, Pashtuns are believed to
represent 42 percent of the population and have taken leading Afghanistan as a
birthright ever since Ahmad Shah Durrani created an Afghan-based empire in 1747
that ruled much of present-day Iran, India and Pakistan.

Many moderate Pashtuns worry that a government led by Mr. Abdullah, whose power
base has been among Tajiks in northern Afghanistan, would drive more Pashtuns
into supporting the insurgents. That made his expected alliances with the
Pashtun candidates, Mr. Rassoul and Mr. Sherzai, critical in a second round.

Mr. Ghani could still cut enough deals with some of the other six losing
candidates to regain the ground lost to Mr. Abdullah.

Or, as has happened many times in the past, Afghans might vote their
ethnicities, with the more numerous Pashtuns all rallying to Mr. Ghani's side.
Mr. Abdullah dismissed that possibility, saying Afghans had ''risen beyond''
ethnic politics.

Mr. Ghani is closely associated with Mr. Karzai's government, serving in the
past three years as his adviser in charge of transition, the process in which
responsibility for security was being gradually transferred from the Americans
and NATO to Afghan security forces.

In an interview Saturday, Mr. Ghani cited that work as an indication of the less
contentious relationship with the United States he espouses. ''Neither you nor
any journalist can cite a single incident where any aspect of transition became
a public debate or an issue of contention,'' he said.

But some voters assign him a measure of guilt by association for Mr. Karzai's
refusal to sign the bilateral security agreement with the United States, a move
that has thrown the future of a Western military presence here into doubt and
turmoil. The deal had widespread support among Afghans and was endorsed by the
grand council of elders, or loya jirga, that Mr. Karzai called to ratify it.

American officials have expressed alarm that the lack of an agreement would
force a total American military withdrawal by the end of the year and the
potential loss of air bases used for drone strikes in Pakistan. Some American
policy makers fear it could also ease the way to a Taliban resurgence and even a
regrouping of Al Qaeda, whose presence here the 12-year NATO-led war was
intended to eliminate.

While Mr. Ghani has also promised to sign the security agreement if he takes
office, he has refrained from criticizing Mr. Karzai on the issue. Mr. Abdullah,
on the other hand, has assailed Mr. Karzai for it, saying his refusal to sign
had imperiled Afghanistan's security in the midst of a war.

Mr. Ghani also was deeply involved in the bitter disputes between Mr. Karzai's
government and the Americans over the transfer of Taliban prisoners to Afghan
control and their subsequent quick release, which Mr. Abdullah criticized as
sending them directly back to the battlefield.

Mr. Abdullah, whose father was a Pashtun from Kandahar, has been more closely
identified with the Tajiks in the north, who were central in the fight against
the Pashtun-led Taliban, which swept to power in most of Afghanistan in the
1990s, except for small parts of the north under Northern Alliance control.

During the Taliban government, from 1994 to 2001, Mr. Abdullah, an
ophthalmologist by training, served as the spokesman for Ahmed Shah Massoud, the
northern leader assassinated by Al Qaeda days before the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks. Mr. Abdullah was one of Mr. Massoud's few confidantes who could speak
English, and had a close relationship with the alliance's C.I.A. handlers at the
time.

In the first Karzai government after the American-led invasion toppled the
Taliban, Mr. Abdullah served as foreign minister, while Mr. Ghani was the
minister of finance. Mr. Abdullah acquired a reputation for suavity, and a
penchant for expensive suits and Louis Vuitton slippers. Mr. Ghani was widely
admired for his intellectual wattage, but often infuriated other officials who
complained he was condescending and prickly.

During the 2014 campaign, they met several times in televised debates. Mr.
Abdullah said his whole strategy was to nettle Mr. Ghani into losing his temper;
he is famous for tantrums which have alienated many Afghan officials, and which
have worried American military leaders who have dealt with him regularly during
the transition process.

There was little evidence of that during the campaign, however.

''He was the one who was angry during campaign debates,'' Mr. Ghani said.
''Isn't that ironic? If the campaign has shown anything it's that my alleged
reputation is manufactured.''

Mr. Abdullah often boasted during the campaign that he had never left
Afghanistan, remaining to fight with the Northern Alliance while the Taliban
were in power. Mr. Ghani, on the other hand, was a longtime exile and lived in
the United States; his wife is an American citizen of Lebanese descent.

Many Afghans have been resentful of exiles who escaped the hard years of civil
war and the Taliban government, only to return to fame and fortune in 2001 with
connections in Western countries that gave them advantages in business and
government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/27/world/asia/afghanistan-elections.html

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A runoff is expected between Abdullah Abdullah, top, a longtime
opponent of President Hamid Karzai shown at his residence in Kabul on Thursday,
and Ashraf Ghani, above, a Karzai adviser. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MASSOUD
HOSSAINI/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 DIEGO IBARRA SANCHEZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


