                             1238 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghanistan Says NATO Airstrike in East Killed Civilians

BYLINE: By AZAM AHMED; Farooq Jan Mangal contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 517 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Afghan officials said that a NATO airstrike in eastern
Afghanistan killed a woman and two children on Tuesday, again raising the issue
of civilian casualties at a time when both the presidential election and the
future of the Western troop presence are unresolved.

Local officials said that a NATO aircraft had fired a rocket into a village in
the Nadir Shah Kot district of Khost Province, striking an area where a family
was gathered. In addition to killing the woman and children, the attack wounded
a man, officials said. They said the victims may have been camping in tents in a
mountainous part of the district.

A spokesman for the governor of Khost Province, Mubrez Zadran, said a delegation
had been sent to the area to investigate.

In the past, instances of NATO's causing civilian casualties have led to harsh
condemnations from President Hamid Karzai, and the issue helped derail the
signing of a security pact between the Afghans and Americans after he demanded
an end to all such attacks.

On Tuesday, Mr. Karzai condemned the attack as a ''violation of agreements
between the two countries'' and ordered an investigation.

The American-led military coalition issued a statement saying that it was aware
of the reports of civilian casualties, and that ''we are looking into these
allegations and will provide more information as available.''

The number of civilian deaths at the hands of coalition forces has been in rapid
decline, in large part because conventional American troops rarely leave their
bases anymore. Special Operations forces continue to conduct missions, typically
alongside their Afghan counterparts, as advisers. On occasion, when overwhelmed
by insurgent fire, they call in air support.

But even those airstrikes have grown rare, as coalition officials contend with
an increasingly tough political landscape. Drone strikes have also contributed
to civilian deaths, though the coalition says it scaled those back.

With Mr. Karzai set to leave office this year, and with the Americans preparing
to withdraw most of their forces this year as well, the acrimony over Western
military operations has only grown.

That tension reached a high point in January when a coalition airstrike in the
Ghorband district of Parwan Province struck a village.

Neither side could agree on the death toll: The Afghans said at least 14
civilians died, while coalition officials put the number as low as two. The
government of Mr. Karzai even issued a dossier of pictures and what it said was
evidence of the strike, though some of that material was from an episode that
occurred years earlier, and the authenticity of the rest remains under question.

It was unclear what might have led to the airstrike on Tuesday, and neither the
coalition nor the Afghan government offered a description of the events
preceding the attack. The area that was struck sits along a crucial highway
connecting Khost and Paktia Provinces, though on a remote stretch of it.
Government officials say that while the Taliban are active there, villagers also
sometimes head up into the mountains to gather wood.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/16/world/asia/nato-airstrike-in-afghanistan-is-sa
id-to-kill-civilians.html

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


