                             1257 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Artificial, With a Human Touch

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1088 words


ASHEVILLE, N.C. -- Geekiness reigned, proudly and openly, at Moogfest 2014, the
largest iteration yet of a festival created by Moog Music, which makes all of
its synthesizers and other equipment by hand at a small factory here in downtown
Asheville.

It was a five-day festival devoted to the interaction of the human and the
synthetic, the electronic and the organic. How geeky was it? Some festivalgoers
wandered the streets of Asheville, wearing headset brainwave sensors that were
paired with iPhones. Through their earbuds, the phones played music guided by
those brainwaves from an app, Conductar, that also used location data to display
a virtual-reality rendering of the streetscape.

The festival connected current music to the legacy of strange sounds and
engineering breakthroughs like those made by Robert Moog, the inventor of the
Moog synthesizer, who settled in Asheville in 1978 and died in 2005. Half a
century after Moog hooked up the voltage-controlled oscillators that drive
analog synthesizers, Moogfest mixed the retro and the futuristic, reveling in
artificial sounds that could still be tweaked further.

Moogfest, which ran from last Wednesday through Sunday, was an outlier among the
music festivals this spring and summer, booking many musicians who aren't
working the circuit from Coachella to Bonnaroo to Governors Ball. It offered a
broad sonic spectrum, from neat pop hits to noise experiments, in an outpouring
of what music technology can do best: drones, repetitions, dense layerings and
happily unnatural tones and timbres.

There were more than 100 club and concert performances by musicians and D.J.s
featuring electronic sounds, made with or without Moog equipment. The lineup
included arena shows by Kraftwerk (who performed three sets with 3-D video for
audiences wearing polarized glasses), M.I.A. and the Pet Shop Boys. It also
offered free outdoor dance parties with disc jockeys including Giorgio Moroder,
who brought electronics to dance music with his productions for Donna Summer.
There were about 7,000 ticketholders and an estimated 25,000 people attending
the free events.

Moogfest also included lectures and panels with futurologists, musicians,
artists involved with technology and electronic-instrument pioneers. Claire L.
Evans, a science journalist and the singer of the band Yacht, invited listeners
to consider the kind of music that might be made by true artificial
intelligence: a ''symphony of pure data'' that might be inaudible or destructive
to the human brain.

Instrument makers noted a technological paradox; although electronic music can
now be made by software -- even with a smartphone app -- many musicians have
found themselves missing the physicality of hardware instruments, with knobs and
sliders and keyboards. Roger Linn, whose LinnDrum put the beat in many 1980s
hits, demonstrated new controllers that are sensitive to more parameters than
keyboards, aiming to restore virtuosity and a human touch to electronic music.

On three afternoons, the festival presented four-hour ''durational
performances'': leisurely, improvisational explorations -- sometimes meditative,
sometimes propulsive and bristling -- by Dan Deacon (whose gear included an
upright piano that mysteriously played itself); Gavin Russom from LCD
Soundsystem; and the duo of Bradford Cox from Deerhunter and Nick Zinner from
the Yeah Yeah Yeahs.

While part of the festival looked forward, another part looked back. Moog Music
is riding a resurgence of interest in analog synthesizer sounds, which are more
complex and unpredictable -- and often rawer -- than the smoother digital tones
that became fashionable in the 1980s.

The progressive-rock keyboardist Keith Emerson, who headlined the first Moogfest
in 2004 when it was held at a club in New York City, returned for a theater-size
show featuring the vintage customized Moog he has been playing since 1969: an
assembly of modules that is the size of a refrigerator. At some acme of
geekiness, Moog Music announced that it has now painstakingly copied the whole
thing, down to its circuits, for sale in a limited edition. Moog engineers had
to use 3-D printing technology to replicate some small parts, like switches,
that are no longer commercially manufactured.

There was a disco streak at Moogfest: not just with Mr. Moroder but with Chic,
whose arena show defied the prevalence of machine-made music. Its leader, the
guitarist, songwriter and producer Nile Rodgers, had done an onstage interview
earlier in the day, demonstrating the abstruse jazz chords that are tucked into
Chic songs like ''I Want Your Love'' and ''Le Freak.'' Onstage, as he led the
band through Chic's disco-era hits and the songs he went on to write for Diana
Ross, Madonna and David Bowie, his endlessly inventive rhythm-guitar
syncopations were the all-natural mainspring of the music.

But some of Moogfest's best music was a world away from pop, exploiting the
flexibility and tirelessness of electronics and often bolstered by eye-popping
video. Flying Lotus repeatedly whipsawed between lush chords and brutal beats
with deep basslines. Holly Herndon layered her voice into airy vocal harmonies
that sailed above jagged, tricky percussion.

Blondes, a duo, started with quiet, almost subliminal dance beats and added
layer upon layer of riffs and rhythms until a seated theater audience was up and
dancing. Teengirl Fantasy encoded mixed emotions into its electronic music, a
calibrated mesh of brooding minor chords and perky, quickly mutating beats. The
D.J. Green Velvet served up techno as a stark, effective slam that was usually
nothing but a beat. And the English band Factory Floor mixed the human and the
electronic, with fast, relentless beats matched and elaborated by a very
hardworking drummer, in a set that built toward an ominous frenzy.

One of the most forward-looking things I heard at Moogfest was 50 years old.
Herbert Deutsch, a composer who collaborated in the invention of the first Moog
synthesizers, played a tape recording that Moog had sent him in 1964. It was a
demonstration, using familiar melodies, of the swooping, unruly, proudly
artificial sounds that Mr. Moog had just created with the synthesizer prototype
that he was calling ''the Abominatron.'' In comments between the tunes, he asked
Mr. Deutsch ''what you think the potential of a contraption like this is.''

He added, ''It doesn't sound like much when I play it. Maybe someone with more
musicianship and imagination can get some good things out of it.''

He was right about that.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/29/arts/music/moogfest-2014-unfolds-in-asheville-
nc.html

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Top, Dan Deacon, right, was among the performers at Moogfest
2014. Above, some of the electronic music-making equipment celebrated at the
event. (C1)
Festivalgoers at the Moog store, which is attached to the company's factory, in
Asheville, N.C. The festival was first held at a club in New York City in 2004.
 Nile Rodgers of Chic added a  streak of disco to the festival. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
MIKE BELLEME FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


