                             1214 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Employer's Creed

BYLINE: By DAVID BROOKS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 810 words


Dear Employers,

You may not realize it, but you have a powerful impact on the culture and the
moral ecology of our era. If your human resources bosses decide they want to
hire a certain sort of person, then young people begin turning themselves into
that sort of person.

Therefore, I'm asking you to think about the following principles, this
Employer's Creed. If you follow these principles in your hiring practices,
you'll be sending a signal about what sort of person gets ahead. You may correct
some of the perversities at the upper reaches of our meritocracy. You may even
help cultivate deeper, fuller human beings.

Bias hiring decisions against perfectionists. If you work in a white-collar
sector that attracts highly educated job applicants, you've probably been
flooded with résumés from people who are not so much human beings as perfect
avatars of success. They got 3.8 grade-point averages in high school and
college. They served in the cliché leadership positions on campus. They got all
the perfect consultant/investment bank internships. During off-hours they
distributed bed nets in Zambia and dug wells in Peru.

When you read these résumés, you have two thoughts. First, this applicant is
awesome. Second, there's something completely flavorless here. This person has
followed the cookie-cutter formula for what it means to be successful and you
actually have no clue what the person is really like except for a high talent
for social conformity. Either they have no desire to chart out an original life
course or lack the courage to do so. Shy away from such people.

Bias hiring decisions toward dualists. The people you want to hire should have
achieved some measure of conventional success, but they should have also engaged
in some desperate lark that made no sense from a career or social status
perspective. Maybe a person left a successful banking job to rescue the family
dry-cleaning business in Akron. Maybe another had great grades at a fancy East
Coast prep school but went off to a Christian college because she wanted a place
to explore her values. These peoples have done at least one Deeply Unfashionable
Thing. Such people have intrinsic motivation, native curiosity and social
courage.

Bias toward truth-tellers. I recently ran into a fellow who hires a lot of
people. He said he asks the following question during each interview. ''Could
you describe a time when you told the truth and it hurt you?'' If the
interviewee can't immediately come up with an episode, there may be a problem
here.

Don't mindlessly favor people with high G.P.A.s. Students who get straight As
have an ability to prudentially master their passions so they can achieve
proficiency across a range of subjects. But you probably want employees who are
relentlessly dedicated to one subject. In school, those people often got As in
subjects they were passionate about but got Bs in subjects that did not arouse
their imagination.

Reward the ripening virtues, not the blooming virtues. Some virtues bloom forth
with youth: being intelligent, energetic, curious and pleasant. Some virtues
only ripen over time: other-centeredness, having a sense for how events will
flow, being able to discern what's right in the absence of external affirmation.
These virtues usually come with experience, after a person has taken time off to
raise children, been fired or learned to cope with having a cruel boss. The
blooming virtues are great if you are hiring thousands of consultants to churn
out reports. For most other jobs, you want the ripening ones, too.

Reward those who have come by way of sorrow. Job seekers are told to present one
linear narrative to the world, one that can easily be read and digested as a
series of clean conquests. But if you are stuck in an airport bar with a
colleague after a horrible business trip, would you really want to have a drink
with a person like that? No, you'd want a real human being, someone who'd
experienced setback, suffering and recovery. You'd want someone with obvious
holes in his résumé, who has learned the lessons that only suffering teaches,
and who got back on track.

Reward cover letter rebels. Job seeking is the second greatest arena of social
pretense in modern life -- after dating. But some people choose not to spin and
exaggerate. They choose not to make each occasion seem more impressive than it
really was. You want people who are radically straight, even with superiors.

You could argue that you don't actually want rich, full personalities for your
company. You just want achievement drones who can perform specific tasks. I
doubt that's in your company's long-term interests. But if you fear leaping out
in this way, at least think of the effect you're having on the deeper
sensibilities of the next generation, the kind of souls you are incentivizing
and thus fashioning, the legacy you will leave behind.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/01/opinion/brooks-the-employers-creed.html

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


