                             1297 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 28, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghanistan: Review Ordered in Naming of C.I.A. Spy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 317 words


WASHINGTON -- The White House has ordered a review of how officials accidentally
revealed the name of the Central Intelligence Agency's top spy in Afghanistan
during President Obama's surprise trip to the country over the weekend.

Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, has asked W. Neil Eggleston,
the president's top lawyer, to ''look into what happened'' and to recommend
changes that would prevent similar mistakes, officials said.

The name of the C.I.A. station chief in Afghanistan was accidentally disclosed
on Sunday morning when military officials sent a White House press aide a list
of 16 people who were participating in a briefing with Mr. Obama. One of the
participants was identified as ''chief of station.'' That title refers to the
highest-ranking C.I.A. officer in a country.

The New York Times is not naming the C.I.A. chief at the request of the White
House and C.I.A. officials.

The White House press aide sent the list to a reporter traveling with the
president, who included it in a pool report that is distributed by the White
House to about 6,000 reporters around the world.

The name and title of the station chief were removed in a later pool report that
urged reporters to ''please use this list'' of attendees at the president's
briefing instead of the previous one.

Such disclosures are rarely made, and the names often become public only when
they are released by mistake, or in leaks from people opposed to the United
States policy or presence in a country. Last year, a political party opposed to
American drone strikes in Pakistan identified a man it described as the C.I.A.'s
top spy in that country.

American officials have not said what disciplinary actions, if any, have been
taken. C.I.A. officials have also not said whether the station chief would be
able to continue in his job.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/28/world/white-house-orders-review-after-spys-nam
e-is-revealed.html

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


