                             1264 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

President Obama and the World

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1806 words


Two years after winning an election in which foreign policy was barely
mentioned, President Obama is being pummeled at home and abroad for his
international leadership. The world sometimes seems as if it is flying apart,
with Mr. Obama unable to fix it. Through a combination of a few significant
missteps, circumstances beyond his control, unreasonable expectations and his
maddeningly bland demeanor, Mr. Obama has opened himself to criticism that he is
not articulating a strong, overarching blueprint for the exercise of American
power and has not been able to bend authoritarian leaders to his will.

It is paradoxical that, in key respects, Mr. Obama is precisely the kind of
foreign policy president most Americans and their allies overseas wanted. He
rejected the shoot-first tendencies of George W. Bush, who pretended to have all
the answers, bungled two wars and asserted an in-your-face American
exceptionalism that included bullying allies. We know where that got us.

But Mr. Obama has long been fully responsible for his own foreign policy. While
he has made mistakes, and can be frustratingly cautious, he has done a better
job than his detractors allow, starting with salvaging an economy that is at the
core of American power. He has produced the first possibility of a deal on
Iran's nuclear weapons. Even though shrinking budgets and a public that is tired
of war and unconvinced of the need for international engagement have undoubtedly
put a check on his ambitions, talk of America shrinking from the world is
overblown.

Still, too often, Mr. Obama's ambitions seem in question. It does not feel as if
he is exercising sufficient American leadership and power, even if he is in fact
working to solve a problem. Some analysts have suggested he lacks a passion for
foreign policy. Others say he has no inspiring ideological prism through which
the world can understand his choices. Others say he is too resigned to the
obstacles that prevent the United States from being able to control world events
as easily as it may once have done. These criticisms have some truth to them,
and Mr. Obama sometimes makes things worse when he deigns to explain himself.

By last week, when he was in the Philippines defensively talking about his
inability to affect outcomes in places like Syria, Egypt and Israel, he offered
a sadly pinched view of the powers of his office. ''You hit singles, you hit
doubles; every once in a while we may be able to hit a home run,'' Mr. Obama
said. You don't inspire a team to go out and bloop a single over an infielder.
American presidents who stood as strong global leaders did so by setting high
expectations in clear, if sometimes overly simplistic, ways. Mr. Obama's
comments last week fanned the anger of people on the left and the right who find
him unfocused, weak and passive.

What follows is an examination of some of the world's problems, the areas where
Mr. Obama has done well, and the areas where he has stumbled.

THE TRANSFORMATION TRAP Mr. Obama positioned himself as a transformational
leader, but in foreign affairs, as in domestic policy, he overestimated the
degree to which the mere fact of his election could achieve that transformation.
He has run up against the realities of a chaotic and increasingly multipolar
world. As a senator running for president in 2008, Mr. Obama spoke of a ''new
strategy for a new world'' that focused on nuclear disarmament and ending the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, but also promised the United States is ''ready to
lead again.'' When he won his premature Nobel Peace Prize in 2009, Mr. Obama
explained his belief in just wars, including those waged on humanitarian
grounds.

It is tempting to dismiss criticism from right-wing Republicans like Senator Ted
Cruz, who knows little about foreign policy; from Senator John McCain, who knows
quite a lot but advocates a military response to almost every crisis; and from
former Bush officials. They have an interest in seeing this president fail. It
was disquieting to hear some Republicans speak almost admiringly about Vladimir
Putin's macho boldness when the Russian president invaded Crimea. There was a
time when both political parties saw real value in cooperating to advance
America's security interests, and the country was better for it.

But there is also powerful criticism from Democrats, liberals and centrists, who
fault Mr. Obama's handling of Syria (some want airstrikes, some want more
weapons for rebels) and Ukraine (many want weapons for the government). His
critics are inconsistent in their philosophies and have failed to offer cogent
alternatives to Mr. Obama's policies. But the perception -- of weakness,
dithering, inaction, there are many names for it -- has indisputably had a
negative effect on Mr. Obama's global standing.

RED LINES Mr. Obama has been right to avoid direct military involvement in
Syria, even though the horrors there -- more than 150,000 killed, President
Bashar al-Assad of Syria denying aid to starving people, the rise of jihadi
groups -- have worsened. But he bungled the Assad government's chemical weapons
attack against civilians last year (vowing there was a ''red line'' and then
allowing it to be crossed), and that has left doubts about his willingness to
use force in other circumstances.

Mr. Obama made the right choice when he went for a diplomatic solution, under
which Syria's chemical arms stockpile is being dismantled. But did he learn that
no president should threaten military action and make a public case for it
unless he plans to follow through? America has provided the most humanitarian
aid to beleaguered Syrians and led the push for a diplomatic solution to the
war. That failed in large measure because Russia and Iran are enabling Mr.
Assad. Now, according to news reports, the administration has begun to provide
certain rebels with more lethal weapons; the shipments should be monitored and
halted if there is evidence of diversion.

USE OF FORCE Mr. Obama has delivered on his promise to end the American-led war
in Iraq and is withdrawing troops from Afghanistan, although too slowly. He has
committed to pursue diplomacy first and war as a last resort, but he is no
pacifist. Mr. Obama joined France and Britain in military strikes to aid rebels
in ousting Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya, authorized the killing of Osama bin
Laden and -- to a degree that is far too excessive -- shifted military actions
to the shadows by authorizing drone campaigns in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia.

He has asserted the right to order the killing even of Americans who plot
against this country abroad. In Asia on April 24, he gave assurances that
America's treaty commitments to Japan included defending islands disputed with
China. Accusations that he is soft on terrorism are simply without merit. In
fact, his policies are too similar to his predecessor's for our comfort.

RUSSIA AND UKRAINE When he came to office, Mr. Obama was right to pursue a
better relationship with Russia. He has not acted precipitously since Mr. Putin
displayed his true colors by invading Crimea and destabilizing eastern Ukraine.
Instead, he gave Mr. Putin a diplomatic option that would allow him to back down
and then, when Putin did not take it, imposed sanctions on Russians and
Ukrainians connected to the turmoil.

Suggestions from the right that Mr. Obama should somehow use the military, or at
least the threat of it, against Russia over Ukraine are irresponsible, to put it
politely. Mr. Obama's efforts to work with Europe on tougher sanctions have the
best chance of restraining Russia.

But that takes time, and the Europeans, entwined economically with Russia, are
balking at adding new sanctions, even as Mr. Putin gobbles up more of Ukraine. A
lot is riding on Mr. Obama's ability to lead the trans-Atlantic response, which
includes strengthening Ukraine politically and economically, reasserting
international law, and forcing Russia to reconsider its campaign to turn Ukraine
into a failed, partitioned state. Mr. Obama has rejected arming the Ukrainians
but has beefed up military assets in nearby NATO member countries. He should
consider unilaterally imposing more sanctions if the Europeans continue
temporizing.

IRAN'S NUCLEAR AMBITION One of Mr. Obama's most promising initiatives is working
with other major powers on a deal to ensure Iran does not build nuclear weapons.
An interim agreement, reached last November, has decreased Iran's ability to
produce a weapon quickly, and a final deal is expected by the end of July. While
that is anything but guaranteed, Mr. Obama deserves credit for taking the risk
of engaging with Iran, and for persuading Congress to hold off on actions that
could threaten the negotiations. Now he has to deal with members of Congress who
say they want to stop Iran from becoming a nuclear power but do everything they
can to stymie any agreement.

THE ASIAN PUZZLE With his recent trip to Asia , Mr. Obama breathed new life into
his commitment to focus more of America's attention on the world's most
economically dynamic region. The trip produced a military base agreement with
the Philippines, improved relations with Malaysia, and, officials say, progress
during talks in Japan on a 12-nation trade deal. That will be crucial to making
his Asia rebalance policy a success and demonstrating that it involves more than
a military hedge against China. One country to which he should pay far more
attention is India.

ISRAEL AND THE PALESTINIANS Mr. Obama showed leadership in empowering Secretary
of State John Kerry to undertake a nine-month negotiation on an
Israeli-Palestinian peace deal after fumbling badly with his first peacemaking
overture in 2009. The second effort, which seemed better prepared, is now in
tatters and seems unlikely to be revived soon. But it demonstrated a serious
American commitment and was still worth it, especially if it results in a set of
American principles that point the way to a peace deal if the two sides ever
muster the will to agree on one.

THE ARAB TURMOIL More than anything else, perhaps, the revolutions in this
region have demonstrated the limits of American influence when countries are in
turmoil. Egypt is the most important and difficult case. While it is an example
of the realpolitik that some of his critics say Mr. Obama lacks, Egypt is
Exhibit A in the case against his claim to be supporting democracy in the Middle
East. The Obama administration finds itself defending and continuing to finance
a repressive military government in Cairo that comes nowhere near to fulfilling
the promise of the Arab Spring and that recently ordered more than 1,000
political prisoners put to death.

Taken as a whole and stripped as much as possible of ideological blinkers, Mr.
Obama's record on foreign policy is not as bad as his critics say. It's just not
good enough.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/04/opinion/sunday/president-obama-and-the-world.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The body language between Putin, left, and Obama at the G-20
meeting in Los Cabos, Mexico, was telling. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


