                             1223 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Long Way From South Dakota

BYLINE: By STACEY ANDERSON

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; SNAPSHOT | EMA; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 636 words


On the cover of her new album, ''The Future's Void,'' the South Dakota-raised
noise-rocker EMA sports an Oculus Rift virtual reality headset, but the
photograph was shot before that company's recent $2 billion purchase by
Facebook. And she wrote the song ''Satellites,'' which rages against government
surveillance, months before the National Security Agency scandal broke.

''It's freaking me out,'' said EMA, whose real name is Erika M. Anderson. ''I
don't know how this happened. I was writing about what I felt like writing about
that year, but I felt out of touch. I was being kind of solitary and wasn't
really on the Internet. And now it's all, like, almost too topical.''

Her obsession with science and technology courses through ''The Future's Void,''
which is out on Tuesday on Matador Records. In its distorted guitars and
hypnotic swirls of feedback, the record nods to her past work with the drone
-rock band Gowns and her assertive debut solo album, ''Past Life Martyred
Saints,'' which was lauded in many year-end lists in 2011. However, this time
around, EMA, who plays multiple instruments and records alone in her home, also
dives ambitiously into other genres, growling like Courtney Love in a critique
of female objectification (''So Blonde'') and confessing her insecurities with
new frailty atop somber electronic balladry (''3Jane'').

Ahead of her national and European tours, including shows on April 25 at Mercury
Lounge and May 9 at Rough Trade in Brooklyn, the amusingly candid singer called
from her home in Portland to talk with Stacey Anderson (no relation) about
growing up a tomboy and meeting the metal star Glenn Danzig. These are excerpts
from the conversation.

Q. What was it like to be a girl in the South Dakota hardcore scene?

A. I was the only girl to front a band. Being around so many tough boys made me
have to be really tough. I get obsessed with the idea of the void because, in
some ways, that's what South Dakota felt like. I used to think growing up there
put me at a disadvantage because I didn't have access to a lot of art, but I
keep re-evaluating my relationship to it. Being totally free on those gravel
roads with my friends and good music was the most awesome thing.

South Dakota has a strong gun culture, doesn't it?

Yeah, I took a hunter safety class at 14 at the behest of my father. He's an
environmentalist Democrat hunter, which isn't as rare as it seems, and he had
this idea that maybe we could hunt together. I rolled up there with my shaved
head and weird combat boots, and there's a woman in there talking about the mark
of the beast, how they want people to get chips put in their arms. I'm like,
''Oh, you're about to get a gun license. That's amazing.''

''So Blonde'' is a blast against stereotypes that blonde women face.

''So Blonde'' is supposed to be kind of funny and meta-grunge. There's a slight
Kurt and Courtney reference. It's also about my ambivalence of having that woman
be the rock 'n' roll role model. What do you do when the world only gives you
one successful rocker-poet woman in your life, and that woman happens to be
Courtney Love? I spent too many years being a Courtney apologist, and that wears
you out.

Is the riot grrrl influence in that song ''So Blonde'' an effect of moving to
the Pacific Northwest?

Those boys I hung out with used to call me ''riot grrrl'' in a way that I don't
know was totally complimentary. It came back now because one thing I really
wanted to do on this record, something I'd been missing in music, is this idea
of feminine grotesque, a voice that is just gnarly.

There's a picture of Glenn Danzig and you as a teenager floating around the
Internet and he's actually smiling. What did you say to crack that serious
facade of his?

I don't remember. I don't know. I just must have been my charming, cornfed self.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/06/arts/music/a-long-way-from-south-dakota.html

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALESSANDRO SIMONETTI)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


