                             1281 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Within a Ship's Walls, Songs of War in High Voices

BYLINE: By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 485 words


Human fragility is a recurring theme in the music of David Lang, and ''battle
hymns,'' an almost hourlong collection of choral songs about war, is no
exception. On Thursday, this often moving but occasionally precious work
received its New York premiere, sung by the Collegiate Chorale and the Manhattan
Girls Chorus under the direction of James Bagwell in the 12,000-square-foot
Hangar 3 inside the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum. The performance also
included six singers from the Veteran Artist Program, a nationwide initiative to
engage former service members in the arts. Mr. Lang sets repurposed Civil War
texts by Stephen Foster, Abraham Lincoln and Maj. Sullivan Ballou in his
trademark spare vocal lines and crystalline textures. The result is a portrait
of the soldier as sleepwalker, caught in a no man's land between patriotism and
private longing.

As battle hymns go, Mr. Lang's are as far removed from the Red Army Choir kind
as is musically possible. For one thing, the work favors high voices.
Throughout, the music is carried by the clear, bell-like children's voices and
the choir's sopranos and altos; the few men's solos are given over to tenors.
Words are recited in swirling repetitions of monotone fragments. In the first
movement, ''I'll be a soldier,'' these accumulate in an emotionally and
musically powerful way that evokes the multitude of individual stories
converging in an army. But in ''a father's love,'' the unchanging plainness of
the vocal lines began to grate -- as did Mr. Lang's decision to reorganize the
words of Ballou's last letter to his wife in alphabetically arranged fragments
that reduced this eloquent and heart-wrenching document to a blizzard of paper
scraps.

Still, Mr. Lang's command of his material is always deft, and the deliberate use
of repetition and simple musical cells allows the occasional dramatic gesture to
stand out clearly. In ''tell me,'' he colored individual words in sharp
dissonances that punctured the litany of a boy's questions about his fallen
brother.

Mr. Bagwell drew an assured performance from the singers, who dealt admirably
with the work's challenges. The subtle choreography by the director Ted Sperling
made good use of the setting and allowed for stunning spatial effects, as when
the members of the girls chorus walked through the aisles, singing, or when the
percussionist Brendan Ko circled the audience with his snare drum in ''as i
would not be a slave.''

The last movement, ''beautiful dreamer,'' after Foster, was gorgeous and
mesmerizing, with the girls singing from a mezzanine behind the audience, while
the chorale provided a humming drone crosshatched with whispered reiterations of
the word ''beautiful.''

The Collegiate Chorale performs with the American Symphony Orchestra at Carnegie
Hall on May 30. From July 21 through 27, it will be in residence at the Verbier
Festival in Switzerland; collegiatechorale.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/17/arts/music/david-langs-battle-hymns-are-perfor
med-on-the-intrepid.html

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: battle hymns: James Bagwell leading singers in David Lang's work
at the Intrepid museum. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


