                             1233 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Adapting to a New Environment

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER JENSEN

SECTION: Section AU; Column 0; Automobiles; BEHIND THE WHEEL | 2014 NISSAN
ROGUE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1088 words


For those of the mammalian persuasion, evolution has tended to be a leisurely
process. This has not been the case among compact crossover utility vehicles,
which in the last half-dozen years have made leaps in sophistication while
adapting to a changing high-tech environment.

Now the redesigned 2014 Nissan Rogue, with attributes that stand out in its
class like a collision-warning system and LED headlights, is making new
contributions to the crossover gene pool.

''The segment is evolving and maturing at an incredibly fast pace,'' said
Michael Bunce, Nissan's product planning director.

Compact S.U.V.s were once seen as providing basic interim transportation, often
until owners could afford a larger vehicle. But Nissan sees that changing.
''This segment is becoming, really, the new all-purpose segment,'' said Scott
Pak, Nissan's senior manager for product planning.

In an email, Jeff Schuster, the senior vice president for forecasting at LMC
Automotive, noted the segment's ''tremendous'' growth since 2007, when fewer
than 1.5 million compact S.U.V.s were sold. LMC predicts 2014 sales of almost
two million.

The traffic jam of competitors includes the Chevrolet Equinox, Ford Escape,
Honda CR-V, Hyundai Tucson, Kia Sportage, Mazda CX-5 and Toyota RAV4.

When the Rogue was introduced as a 2008 model, it was aimed at buyers in their
early 30s. Now Nissan also hopes to attract young families and empty nesters.

Prices start at $23,350 for the front-wheel drive S; $25,090 for the SV and
$28,930 for the fancy SL. All-wheel drive adds $1,350.

The model I tested was an SL with all-wheel drive. Its $30,280 price included a
long list of standard equipment from heated ''leather appointed'' seats to a
navigation system and power liftgate. The $1,990 Premium Package included a huge
sunroof, LED headlights, blind-spot monitor, lane-departure warning,
forward-collision warning and moving-object detection. That brought the total to
$32,395, not a surprising amount for a heavily equipped compact crossover.

The Rogue has a new look, the most notable change being the substitution of a
bold U-shape grille -- a theme that will soon show up in other Nissans -- for a
toothy chrome version.

The overall length of 182.3 inches, an inch shorter than last year, but a
slightly longer wheelbase and clever packaging permitted significant interior
improvements. There is now 37.9 inches of second-row legroom, a gain of 2.6
inches. That means a pair of 6-foot adults will fit in the back while two more
are up front.

An optional third row is new, priced at $1,190 on the least expensive Rogue. But
it is hard to imagine how that seat could comfortably accommodate anyone but a
small child or a sedated teen. Because the extra row takes room that would have
gone to a compact spare tire, Rogues with that option get run-flat tires.

There is 32 cubic feet of cargo space behind the second row, a gain of 3.1 cubic
feet from last year. Shelves back there can be moved around, providing
flexibility and tidiness.

The interior has an upscale look, the controls are easy to use and there's
adequate storage.

The rear window is on the small side, making backing up a challenge. A solution
is the Around View Monitor that shows the vehicle's front, back and flanks and
is available with an object-detection system for bump-free parking. It is not
available on the basic Rogue S.

There's also some other optional safety technology that's unusual in this
segment, such as lane-departure and forward-collision warnings.

The 2014 Rogue received the highest crash rating, Top Safety Pick+, from the
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.

With the Rogue, Nissan's Common Module Family -- a set of shared underpinnings
for a range of vehicles -- is making its debut in North America. Major
components that were carried over, albeit with some improvements, include the
suspension, the 4-cylinder engine and the all-wheel-drive system. The
continuously variable transmission is a new unit shared with the 4-cylinder
Altima. And the Rogue is now assembled in Smyrna, Tenn., rather than in Japan.

The Rogue's original focus on driving entertainment has not diminished. Indeed,
there are improvements because of technology not often found in this segment.

Driven in a conservative manner on a two-lane, the Rogue feels competent and
slightly nose-heavy. But when the driver starts to push harder, Nissan's
''active trace control'' -- standard on all versions -- uses sensors and a
computer to apply the brakes on individual wheels to help the vehicle turn more
sharply.

The steering lacks the road feel of the competitive Mazda CX-5, but it is
wonderfully predictable and doesn't get lighter or heavier as the vehicle turns.
Aim the Rogue through a turn and it is the soul of undeterred compliance.

The body feels solid and ride motions are nicely controlled. But there is no
free dynamic lunch: On a rough surface there's moderate jostling, although the
Rogue manages to fend off the most hurtful impacts.

The only transmission is the C.V.T., a Nissan favorite because it works to
improve fuel economy by reducing engine speed when the car is not accelerating.
The 2.5-liter engine has been carried over, and although it has been tweaked a
bit it lacks the newest efficiency-improving feature, gasoline direct injection,
which is found in the Tucson and CX-5.

Consequently, the Rogue's 170-horsepower engine is challenged by the vehicle's
3,605-pound unloaded weight, providing only adequate acceleration despite
audible distress. There's also a tiresome drone and vibration felt through the
steering wheel whenever the engine hovers around 1,300 r.p.m.

Fuel economy is significantly better for 2014. The front-drive model is rated at
26 miles per gallon in the city and 33 on the highway. The all-wheel-drive
version is rated 25/32 m.p.g. In each case that's an improvement of 3 m.p.g. in
town and 5 on the highway. Nissan recommends regular-grade fuel.

Almost 648,000 last-generation Rogues were sold in the United States, making the
new version an incredibly important vehicle for Nissan. Thus the company's
decision not to use a new engine is puzzling. But like all automakers, Nissan
has to consider the cost-benefit ratio.

Nevertheless, there's a lot to appreciate about the new Rogue: more room, good
fuel economy, impressive crash protection and a zestful approach to a mountain
road. And all of that is available with the least expensive model, meaning
there's no need to spend $30,000. That combination makes a pretty compelling
argument in the Nissan's favor.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/automobiles/autoreviews/adapting-to-a-new-envi
ronment.html

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: 2014 Rogue grille is the new face of Nissan. (AU1)
 The Rogue interior is roomier, and there is now an optional third-row seat.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY NISSAN NORTH AMERICA) (AU4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


