                             1272 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Honoring the Missing Schoolgirls

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 797 words


When Boko Haram fanatics attacked a girls' boarding school in northeastern
Nigeria, kidnapping several hundred girls whose only offense was to dream of
becoming doctors, teachers or lawyers, the Nigerian authorities' initial
response was to lie.

The military promptly claimed that it had freed 107 of the girls. In fact, it
had done nothing, and, the girls' parents say, it continued to do little for the
three weeks since.

Meanwhile, we in the news media world were also largely indifferent, too busy
reporting nonnews like the latest on the missing MH370 airliner. The American
government, the United Nations and other players didn't seem interested either.

Yet if world leaders and the news media dropped the ball, leadership came
elsewhere. More than 50 of the kidnapped girls managed to escape the gunmen.
Dads armed with nothing more than bows and arrows pursued the kidnappers into
the terrifying Sambisa forest, where militants have hide-outs. Women's rights
advocates in Nigeria noisily demanded action, and social media mavens around the
world spread word on Twitter, Facebook and online petitions -- and a movement
grew.

The #BringBackOurGirls hashtag, started on Twitter by a Nigerian lawyer, has now
been shared more than one million times. A Nigerian started a petition on
Change.org, calling for more efforts to find the girls, and more than 450,000
people around the world have signed it.

Nigerian women embarrassed the government by announcing that they would strip
off their clothes and march naked into the Sambisa forest to confront the
militants and recover the girls.

All this grass-roots activism finally catapulted this news -- three weeks later
-- onto the global agenda. President Obama weighed in this week and sent a team
of security experts to help. Nigeria has offered a $300,000 reward for
information about the girls, and the government finally seems to have been
embarrassed into making them a priority.

It's reasonable to be skeptical, for Nigerian officials have been as feckless as
Nigerian activists have been brave. According to The Associated Press, a
military barracks an hour from the school was alerted to the attack, but troops
never showed up.

Then Nigeria's first lady, Patience Jonathan, accused activists of fabricating
the kidnappings. She reportedly had a female protest leader detained.

It's not clear if this global clamor will succeed, and two girls already have
reportedly died of snakebites. But the United States might be of help locating
the girls. For example, some reportedly have been taken to an island in Lake
Chad. There are few people on the islands (the area all used to be underwater)
and limited vegetation, so satellite imagery or reconnaissance aircraft might be
able to locate any girls there.

In the past, Nigeria's army, while reluctant to fight Boko Haram militants
directly, has gone after young men it thinks might sympathize with the group --
rounding up and sometimes killing them, thus driving more villagers toward Boko
Haram. It's entirely possible that some families that lost a daughter to Boko
Haram will now lose a son to the army, but outspoken United States monitoring
can help limit atrocities.

All of us can respond more directly. Boko Haram, whose name means roughly
''Western education is a sin,'' is keeping women and girls marginalized;
conversely, we can help educate and empower women. Ultimately, the greatest
threat to extremism isn't a drone overhead but a girl with a book.

So here's a challenge.

Mother's Day is this Sunday, and, by all means, let's use it to celebrate the
moms in our lives with flowers and brunches. But let's also use the occasion to
honor the girls still missing in Nigeria.

One way is a donation to support girls going to school around Africa through the
Campaign for Female Education, Camfed.org; a $40 gift pays for a girl's school
uniform.

Another way to empower women is to support Edna Adan, an extraordinary Somali
woman who has started her own maternity hospital, midwife training program and
private university, saving lives, providing family planning and fighting female
genital mutilation. At EdnaHospital.org, a $50 donation pays for a safe hospital
delivery.

Or there's the Mothers' Day Movement, mothersdaymovement.org, which is
supporting a clean water initiative in Uganda. With access to water, some girls
will no longer have to drop out of school to haul water.

We inevitably feel helpless when terrible things happen, but these are practical
steps to fight a blow against extremism while honoring some of those brave
Nigerian girls who are missing -- like Deborah, Naomi, Hauwa, Pindar, Mary,
Monica, Grace, Esther, Aisha, Ruth, Saraya, Blessing, Gloria, Christy, Tabitha,
Helen, Amina, Hasana and Rhoda. We may not be able to rescue them, but we can
back them up.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/08/opinion/kristof-honoring-the-missing-schoolgir
ls.html

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


