                             1267 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fairways From the Air

BYLINE: By KAREN CROUSE

SECTION: Section SP; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1076 words


ABOARD SNOOPY ONE, above Charlotte, N.C. -- Like scores of other golf spectators
at a PGA Tour event, Andrew Murray chooses where to position himself by
consulting a course map. By the end of the week, his legs are leaden from the
effort of tracking the leaders.

The weariness is worth it because Murray's vantage point is consistently the
best, enabling him to find the occasional wayward drive that has come to rest in
a stand of trees, hidden from everyone else's view, or the errant approach
nestled deep in the sand that nobody else has spotted.

Murray is an airship pilot, and this weekend he and Mark Finney are taking turns
manning MetLife's Snoopy One blimp during CBS's telecast of the Wells Fargo
Championship at Quail Hollow Club.

''Golf is probably the hardest thing I've ever done,'' said Murray, whose
assignments have included N.F.L. games and Nascar races. ''You have to worry
about sun angles and shadows on the course.''

Murray was in the blimp's gondola at midmorning Friday, speaking from his seat,
which has wheel controls on each side.

''It's like flying a wheelchair,'' Murray said, joking, to the two guests taking
the place of the camera operator and television equipment that are his usual
crew and cargo.

Flying under a thick canopy of clouds, Murray piloted his passengers on a
''float-by'' of the course before CBS's Friday telecast. The blimp and
tournament golf began as an arranged marriage brokered by the renowned CBS
Sports producer Frank Chirkinian.

In the beginning, the airship views were all for show, with the focus on
producing pretty panoramic pictures for the telecast. Over the years, the
relationship has deepened and become much richer, with Murray and the other
pilots now considered an integral part of the television crew.

The overhead images from a camera mounted to the front of the blimp give new
meaning to the term high definition.

''At first, the blimp was used basically just to show a wide shot of the area,''
said Lance Barrow, who learned at Chirkinian's elbow before succeeding him as
the network's sports producer in 1997. ''Now it has become a vital part of our
coverage. I couldn't imagine putting on a broadcast without it.''

Thursday's opening round had been a long one for Murray, who spent more than six
hours in the two-engine, propeller-driven airship with rudders that he controls
with his feet. Except for a GPS unit, which looked like the ones mounted in
cars, and a television monitor, the dashboard resembled the control panel of a
Piper Cub, the simple, light World War II-era aircraft.

The retro nature of the airship, which was traveling about 30 miles per hour,
led one passenger to ask Murray if anything should be read into a blimp program
underwritten by a life insurance provider. He laughed.

''Honestly, airships are the only aircraft that hasn't scared me yet,'' said
Murray, a blimp pilot for more than two years.

He added: ''An airship is pretty much the easiest thing to fly. I could be hands
off as long as the conditions are right.''

Murray would have a hard time convincing Phil Mickelson, a headliner at this
year's Quail Hollow tournament. Mickelson, whose father was a commercial airline
pilot, said he was motivated to earn his pilot's license because he never felt
comfortable flying and thought that confronting a fear was the best way to
conquer it.

On Thursday, Mickelson said he had never flown in a blimp. ''No desire to,'' he
said, adding, ''I just don't like the aerodynamics of it.'' (Nor is a blimp ride
on the bucket list of the former world No. 1 Rory McIlroy, who shuddered and
said, ''I was in a hot-air balloon once and I didn't like it.'')

Even from 1,500 feet, the blimp's altitude during golf telecasts, Mickelson, a
five-time major winner, was easy to spot Friday. His group, which included the
reigning United States Open champion Justin Rose and the former world No. 1 Lee
Westwood, had a large, amoeba-like gallery that moved from hole to hole.

Perhaps because of the early hour, few clusters of fans were visible elsewhere
on the course. Missing from the field was Tiger Woods, the world No. 1 and 2007
Quail Hollow champion, who is rehabilitating from back surgery.

''I love when Tiger's playing,'' Murray said, ''because then my job is just
follow Tiger.''

The hour's ride to the course from Chester Airport in South Carolina was
extraordinarily smooth, owing to the cloud cover, Murray said. During the
flight, Murray was in contact with the control tower at Charlotte Douglas
International Airport, north of the course. He referred to his airship by its
tail number instead of its name, as he usually does, he said, because in local
jargon, police helicopters are called Snoopy One, Snoopy Two and so forth.

There are back-seat drivers and then there are the voices in Murray's ear during
a telecast. He takes direction from air traffic controllers, the people in the
television truck on the ground and the camera operator seated behind him while
following the television coverage on the monitor.

''Normally, I carry a course map, so when they're talking about a hole, I know
which one to go to,'' Murray said, adding: ''We're not up there hovering around.
We're moving.''

As he maneuvers the blimp over tens of thousands of spectators, sometimes
standing like a ship's captain to get a better view, Murray can feel the tension
rising. ''I get nervous that I am being too loud for the golfers,'' he said.

Murray need not worry. The drone of the blimp overhead has become white noise
for the golfers.

''If anything, the blimp helps us,'' said Rickie Fowler, who won here in 2012.
''They always idle into the wind. So that's one way you can tell wind
direction.''

On windless days when the sun is beating on the players, the blimp is an even
more welcome sight.

''It's like a cloud,'' Fowler said.

Having eyes in the sky can save a player a stroke or two. Murray said he and his
camera operator often spot balls that people on the ground have lost. While at
the controls of Snoopy Two at the match-play event outside Tucson in February,
he said, he located a ball feared lost in the native area.

Barrow, the CBS producer, said that when the blimp is airborne, he does not
worry about the weather because he knows the pilot has done his homework.

''Every time I see the blimp flying, I know we're not going to have a
thunderstorm any time soon,'' he said.

Is the blimp ever a distraction?

With a sparkle in his eye, Stewart Cink said, ''Not unless you hit it really
high.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/04/sports/golf/metlife-blimp-becomes-an-integral-
part-of-pga-tour-telecasts.html

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The view from Snoopy One, the MetLife airship that is being
used by CBS about 1,500 feet above Quail Hollow Club in Charlotte, N.C., for the
Wells Fargo Championship this weekend. (SP1)
Clockwise from top, Andrew Murray piloting Snoopy One
the blimp preparing for takeoff
the dashboard
 and Mike Carr ascending the mast. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TRAVIS DOVE FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (SP11)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


