                             1213 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On Friday

BYLINE: By ADAM W. KEPLER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 736 words


4:20 P.M. (HBO2) RUSHMORE (1998) Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman, above right,
with Bill Murray), a high school student and playwright with a proclivity for
extracurricular activities, befriends a depressed steel tycoon (Mr. Murray)
until they become rivals for the affections of the same woman (Olivia Williams).
Directed by Wes Anderson, who wrote the script with Owen Wilson, and
complemented by an energetic British Invasion soundtrack, this comedy is ''a
particular treat for its skewed, hilarious memories of a cutthroat boyhood,''
Janet Maslin wrote in The Times. She added: ''It's too smart to be maudlin. Far
better to show off Max's Vietnam play, with real explosives (earplugs and safety
glasses available) or let him boast derangedly (in one especially funny dinner
scene) about having a hit to his credit.''

12:15 P.M. (HBO) PHIL SPECTOR (2013) A wigged-out Al Pacino (below, with Helen
Mirren) reunites with the writer and director David Mamet (''Glengarry Glen
Ross'') to portray the music producer and songwriter charged with the 2003
shooting death of Lana Clarkson inside his home in Alhambra, Calif. Ms. Mirren
plays the lawyer Linda Kenney Baden, who represented Mr. Spector alongside Bruce
Cutler (Jeffrey Tambor) at his first trial, in 2007, which resulted in a hung
jury. (He was convicted in 2009 and is serving 19 years to life.) Mr. Spector's
wife, Rachelle, criticized the film's depiction of her husband as ''a
foul-mouthed megalomaniac.'' And Edward Lozzi, a former publicist for Ms.
Clarkson, took exception to the film's focus on the defense's argument that she
had killed herself. The film is a work of fiction, Mr. Mamet said in an HBO
interview. ''The focus on the tender and respectful bond between lawyer and
client looks a lot like a revisionist re-enactment and maybe even absolution,''
Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times. ''Everyone has a right to the best
available defense, but not everyone deserves to be played by the best available
actor.''

4:15 P.M. (Showtime 2) THE IRON LADY (2011) Meryl Streep won an Oscar, her
third, for her portrayal of Margaret Thatcher, the grocer's daughter from
Grantham, England, who rose to become the British prime minister, in this biopic
directed by Phyllida Lloyd and written by Abi Morgan. Jim Broadbent plays her
husband, Denis, whose ghost an aged Mrs. Thatcher converses with while recalling
her glory years. ''Stiff legged and slow moving, behind a discreetly applied ton
of geriatric makeup, Ms. Streep provides, once again, a technically flawless
impersonation that also seems to reveal the inner essence of a well-known
person,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.

10 P.M. (NBC) HANNIBAL Dr. Abel Gideon (Eddie Izzard) visits Will (Hugh Dancy)
in the asylum and offers an unexpected solution to stopping the Chesapeake
Ripper once and for all.

10:15 P.M. (Cinemax) STOKER (2013) In his English-language debut, the South
Korean director Park Chan-wook (''Oldboy,'' ''Lady Vengeance'') tells the story
of India Stoker (Mia Wasikowska), a solitary Connecticut teenager embroiled in a
landscape of family secrets, sexual subtext and aristocratic entitlement after
her father (Dermot Mulroney) dies in a car accident on her 18th birthday. Then
her handsome Uncle Charlie (Matthew Goode), whom she never knew, comes to visit
her mother (Nicole Kidman), who seems to her daughter insufficiently
grief-stricken. ''A great deal of information has been withheld, perhaps from
India and certainly from us, and Mr. Park, with sadistic relish, takes his time
with revelations that are both ghastly and a bit disappointing,'' A. O. Scott
wrote in The Times. Learning the truth about Charlie ''does not so much explain
what had come before as turn everything upside down, scattering the puzzle
pieces in a colorful, brutal cascade.''

11 P.M. (HBO) VICE David Choe tracks the life cycle of scrap metal, which begins
in cities like Cleveland and Detroit, where abandoned buildings are being torn
apart. The materials, especially copper, are then sold to scrap yards for cash
and exported to China, where it is invested in their infrastructure. Suroosh
Alvi investigates the adverse effects of drone strikes in Pakistan.

1 A.M. (13) THEATER TALK Terry Teachout discusses his one-man play about the
final years of Louis Armstrong, ''Satchmo at the Waldorf,'' along with John
Douglas Thompson, the actor who plays Armstrong and others in the show. ADAM W.
KEPLER

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/28/arts/television/whats-on-friday.html

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


