                             1269 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 6, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Signs New Lease to Keep Strategic Military Installation in the Horn of
Africa

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Luanda,
Angola.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 973 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration said Monday that it had signed a 20-year
lease on its military base in Djibouti in the Horn of Africa, the only American
installation on the continent and a staging ground for counterterrorism
operations in Yemen and Somalia.

Djibouti, a country of fewer than one million people the size of New Jersey that
borders the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, has played an increasingly significant
role in seeking to stabilize regional crises. The deal reflects the small
country's outsize strategic importance in helping the United States and other
Western allies combat terrorists, pirates and smugglers in the region.

In a 40-minute meeting in the Oval Office, President Obama and Ismail Omar
Guelleh, the president of Djibouti, covered a range of security and development
issues, aides said. But the talks centered on the critical role played by Camp
Lemonnier, a sprawling base of 4,000 American service members and civilians that
serves as a hub for counterterrorism operations and training.

''Obviously, Camp Lemonnier is extraordinarily important not only to our work
throughout the Horn of Africa but throughout the region,'' said Mr. Obama, who
visited Djibouti in 2006 as a United States senator.

The renewal of the long-term lease illustrates the base's rise from an
expeditionary way stop for American troops in the aftermath of the terrorist
attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, to the focus of a Pentagon plan to invest nearly $1
billion to upgrade the camp and other facilities. Defense officials envision
Camp Lemonnier as a major regional base supporting operations throughout Africa,
as well as part of the Arabian peninsula and the Indian Ocean.

The agreement reinforces strategic ties between the two nations, which were
strained last year after the Pentagon was forced to relocate a large fleet of
drones from the base in Djibouti's congested capital to a desert location
several miles away after a string of crashes heightened local fears that the
remotely piloted aircraft might collide with passenger jets.

''Our relation is a relation of strategic partnership,'' Mr. Guelleh told
reporters. ''The fact that we welcome U.S. forces in our country shows our
support for international peace, and for peace in our region as well.''

The deal also appears to end speculation that Djibouti might lease a small
parcel of land to Russia and grant it military landing rights at a time when
relations between Washington and Moscow have badly deteriorated over the crisis
in Ukraine. Russia has been an active contributor to the international
antipiracy effort in the region since it first deployed warships in 2008.

Terms of the lease renewal were not disclosed, but officials from both countries
said the United States would pay a total of about $70 million a year -- $63
million in lease fees and the rest in development aid -- more than double the
current leasing fees of roughly $30 million a year. Djiboutian officials said
the increase reflected the base's expanded operations.

Camp Lemonnier is on the southwest side of Djibouti-Ambouli International
Airport, between the runway overflow areas and a French military munitions
storage facility.

The base has grown from the several hundred Marines and members of Special
Operations forces that landed in 2003 when the Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of
Africa relocated. It had been based on a warship when the mission was conceived
a year before, dedicated to hunting for remnants of Al Qaeda in the wake of the
Taliban's ouster from Afghanistan.

In January 2007, the United States and Djiboutian governments announced that a
lease agreement had been signed to expand Camp Lemonnier from 88 acres to nearly
500 acres.

In the past several years, the Pentagon has spent more than $500 million on an
array of construction projects that signal Washington's plans to stay in
Djibouti for the long haul. The facilities include aircraft hangars, two new
taxiways for aircraft, housing, a second recreation center, a water production
and distribution center and a wastewater treatment plant.

In recent months, the American base in Djibouti has taken on new missions. In
response to the fatal attack on the American diplomatic mission in Benghazi,
Libya, in 2012, the Pentagon created a 150-member rapid response force at Camp
Lemonnier.

Four days after arriving from Kansas, a team of 45 soldiers from the larger
force in Djibouti was sent to Juba, the South Sudanese capital, on Dec. 18 to
reinforce the seven Marines and State Department officers providing security at
the embassy.

Mr. Guelleh's visit underscores the strength of the strategic partnership
between the two allies, officials from both countries said. Mr. Guelleh, who has
led Djibouti since May 1999, met with President George W. Bush during a visit to
Washington in 2003.

Djibouti has dispatched security forces to Darfur, Ivory Coast, Western Sahara,
Somalia and, in coming weeks, the Central African Republic, Mr. Guelleh said. It
has also joined a regional diplomatic effort to end the fighting in South Sudan.

Its strategic importance has drawn interest from not only the United States, but
also France, Japan and Italy, all of which have security forces in Djibouti.

Russia wanted to establish a presence in Djibouti but was stymied by the
Djiboutians, an American official said.

''The Russians came to see us; they wanted facilities in our country,'' Mahmoud
Ali Youssef, Djibouti's foreign minister, said in a telephone interview.

With the American lease renewal pending final approval, Mr. Youssef said his
government wanted to avoid ''conflicting interests between those countries,''
and did not strike a deal with Russia. American officials including Susan E.
Rice, Mr. Obama's national security adviser, who visited Djibouti in March, had
not pressured his government about that decision, Mr. Youssef said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/06/world/africa/us-signs-new-lease-to-keep-strate
gic-military-installation-in-the-horn-of-africa.html

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAP: Camp Lemonnier is the only U.S. military base in Africa.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


