                             1246 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Transparency on Targeted Killings

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 540 words


For years now, the Obama administration has been playing a self-serving and
duplicitous game over its power to kill people away from any battlefield and
without judicial oversight or accountability. It has trotted out successive
officials and doled out tidbits of information attesting to the legality of
President Obama's claim to unilateral authority to carry out such killings,
while withholding information essential to evaluating that aggressive claim of
executive power.

In an important unanimous decision on Monday, a three-judge panel of the federal
appeals court in Manhattan refused to go along with that tactic. The ruling,
written by Judge Jon Newman of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, reversed a disturbing 2013 decision by a federal district judge,
Colleen McMahon, upholding the government's claim to secrecy largely on national
security grounds.

The new ruling ordered the release of portions of a classified Justice
Department memorandum that provided the legal justification for the targeted
killing of a United States citizen, Anwar al-Awlaki, who had joined Al Qaeda and
died in a 2011 drone strike in Yemen. It came in response to lawsuits filed
under the Freedom of Information Act by The New York Times and two of its
reporters, Charlie Savage and Scott Shane, and by the American Civil Liberties
Union.

Essentially, the appellate panel reviewed the government's overwrought claims of
national security and found them seriously wanting. It concluded that the
government had waived its right to keep the analysis secret, citing numerous
public statements by administration officials and the Justice Department's
release of a 16-page, single-spaced ''white paper'' containing a detailed
analysis of why targeted killings were legal.

''Whatever protection the legal analysis might once have had,'' Judge Newman
wrote for the panel, ''has been lost by virtue of public statements of public
officials at the highest levels and official disclosure of the D.O.J. White
Paper.'' Still, there seems to be a very good chance that the secret analysis
will reveal critical aspects of the government's justification for its actions,
well beyond what the public has been told. Otherwise, why would the
administration have refused to disclose the memo for years?

Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, stresses the
decision's value in rejecting ''the government's effort to use secrecy, and
selective disclosure, as a means of manipulating public opinion about the
targeted killing program.''

The administration's attempt to have it both ways in this instance --
cherry-picking information to share while keeping its underlying legal reasoning
secret -- recalls its response to the revelations of widespread phone-data
surveillance by the National Security Agency.

In both instances, the administration has shown itself to be more interested
with its public relations crusade than with being open and honest with the
American people about significant acts carried out in their name.

Instead of appealing Monday's ruling to the full Second Circuit or the Supreme
Court, President Obama should see the wisdom of allowing it to stand -- and
allowing the conversation the country needs to have.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/opinion/transparency-on-targeted-killings.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


