                             1204 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Weeks After a Plane Crash, Debris Would Be Only a Modest Clue, Experts Say

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 738 words


WASHINGTON -- Even if searchers are fortunate enough to spot floating debris in
the ocean west of Australia from the missing Malaysia Airlines jet, it would be
only a modest step in locating the rest of the Boeing 777, according to
oceanographers and recovery experts. And only then could they dig into the
question of why it crashed.

Almost two weeks after a crash, there is certain to be less of the debris on the
surface, and what remains is more dispersed and farther from the clues that
investigators really want, in the wreckage that has sunk beneath the waves,
experts say.

The delay in finding any wreckage on the surface will ''create a cone of
uncertainty, which is going to be bigger with time,'' said Luca Centurioni, a
researcher at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego and the
director of the Global Drifter Program there. ''The more time goes by, the more
difficult it will be to try to go back to the point of impact with the ocean.''

The amount of debris and degree of dispersion would depend in part on the
circumstances of a crash. ''A gentle landing on a smooth sea with mild currents
keeps the debris field more intact,'' David G. Gallo, director of special
projects at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, said in an email. ''A
high-velocity impact or midair breakup on a stormy sea will scatter objects much
more.''

In the case of Air France Flight 447 -- which came down in the equatorial
Atlantic in June 2009 while traveling from Rio de Janeiro to Paris -- searchers
found debris after five days, and experts estimated that the impact site was 15
miles away. It turned out to be 30 miles away, and in a different direction,
said Michael J. Purcell, the principal engineer at Woods Hole, who spent months
on that search. If the Air France case is any guide, Malaysia Airlines debris
could have drifted hundreds of miles.

Median ocean current speed is about a foot per second, said Mr. Centurioni,
which comes to about 16 miles a day. The tropics are a bit slower; the Air
France wreckage was moving at about 10 miles per day, Mr. Purcell said. Average
speed at the site of any Malaysia Airlines crash would depend on where that
airliner went down. Some debris would be pushed more by wind than current, and
the wind could be moving in the same direction as the current, or against it.

Some parts of airplanes, like seat back cushions, are designed to float.
Aluminum parts with air trapped inside will tend to sink in rough seas. Planes
like the Boeing 777, the type in the Malaysia flight, or the Airbus A330, in the
case of the Air France crash, make major use of composite materials, and some of
those are in the form of a honeycomb using light materials with air trapped
inside. Those parts will float for some time, as the tail of Air France Flight
447 did, and the tail of the American Airlines A300 jet that crashed shortly
after takeoff from Kennedy International Airport in November 2001.

The searchers, flying in various aircraft but notably in airplanes designed to
hunt enemy submarines, are using infrared scanners, which detect minute
temperature differences between the water and debris, as well as radar. They
make low passes at hundreds of miles per hour.

If the airplane searches locate floating debris, and oceanographers calculate
where it originated, the next step would be to use robot submarines to
scrutinize the ocean floor. Mr. Purcell said the Woods Hole drone submarines,
like the Remus 6000, travel about four miles per hour, covering a little less
than a mile in width if the sea floor is smooth. They were not built with this
purpose in mind. (In fact, this week the Remus 6000 was gathering clam larvae,
Mr. Purcell said.)

In search work, the submarines follow a pattern like a lawn mower, laboriously
tracing back and forth. The search area is now over two million square nautical
miles, but would have to be narrowed to about 5,000 square miles before it would
be sensible to use the submarines, he said.

The cockpit voice recorder, important in any investigation and crucial when a
hijacking or other crime is suspected, would probably not be useful, one
investigator said, because it is a two-hour loop, and the plane flew for hours
after leaving its planned route. The boxes originally captured 30 minutes, on a
loop of audiotape, but in 1999 the Federal Aviation Administration endorsed the
idea of going to two hours. The recording is now on microchips.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/world/asia/plane-debris-would-be-modest-clue-t
wo-weeks-after-a-crash-experts-say.html

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


