                             1222 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Automation Alone Isn't Killing Jobs

BYLINE: By TYLER COWEN.

TYLER COWEN is professor of economics at George Mason University.

SECTION: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; ECONOMIC VIEW;
Pg. 6

LENGTH: 941 words


Although the labor market report on Friday showed modest job growth, employment
opportunities remain stubbornly low in the United States, giving new prominence
to the old notion that automation throws people out of work.

Back in the 19th century, steam power and machinery took away many traditional
jobs, though they also created new ones. This time around, computers, smart
software and robots are seen as the culprits. They seem to be replacing many of
the remaining manufacturing jobs and encroaching on service-sector jobs, too.

Driverless vehicles and drone aircraft are no longer science fiction, and over
time, they may eliminate millions of transportation jobs. Many other examples of
automatable jobs are discussed in ''The Second Machine Age,'' a book by Erik
Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, and in my own book, ''Average Is Over.'' The
upshot is that machines are often filling in for our smarts, not just for our
brawn -- and this trend is likely to grow.

How afraid should workers be of these new technologies? There is reason to be
skeptical of the assumption that machines will leave humanity without jobs.
After all, history has seen many waves of innovation and automation, and yet as
recently as 2000, the rate of unemployment was a mere 4 percent. There are
unlimited human wants, so there is always more work to be done. The economic
theory of comparative advantage suggests that even unskilled workers can gain
from selling their services, thereby liberating the more skilled workers for
more productive tasks.

Nonetheless, technologically related unemployment -- or, even worse, the
phenomenon of people falling out of the labor force altogether because of
technology -- may prove a tougher problem this time around.

Labor markets just aren't as flexible these days for workers, especially for men
at the bottom end of the skills distribution. Through much of the 20th century,
workers moved out of agriculture and into manufacturing jobs. A high school
diploma and a basic willingness to work were often enough, at least for white
men, because the technologies of those times often relied on accompanying manual
labor.

Many of the new jobs today are in health care and education, where specialized
training and study are required. Across the economy, a college degree is often
demanded where a high school degree used to suffice. It's now common for a fire
chief to be expected to have a master's degree, and to perform a broader variety
of business-related tasks that were virtually unheard-of in earlier generations.
All of these developments mean a disadvantage for people who don't like formal
education, even if they are otherwise very talented. It's no surprise that
current unemployment has been concentrated among those with lower education
levels.

There is also a special problem for some young men, namely those with especially
restless temperaments. They aren't always well-suited to the new class of
service jobs, like greeting customers or taking care of the aged, which require
much discipline or sometimes even a subordination of will. The law is yet
another source of labor market inflexibility: The number of jobs covered by
occupational licensing continues to rise and is almost one-third of the work
force. We don't need such laws for, say, barbers or interior designers, although
they are commonly on the books.

Many expanding economic sectors are not very labor-intensive, be they tech
fields like online retailing or even new mining and extraction industries. That
means it's harder for the rate of job creation to keep up with the rate of job
destruction, because a given amount of economic growth isn't bringing as many
jobs.

A new paper by Alan B. Krueger, Judd Cramer and David Cho of Princeton has
documented that the nation now appears to have a permanent class of long-term
unemployed, who probably can't be helped much by monetary and fiscal policy.
It's not right to describe these people as ''thrown out of work by machines,''
because the causes involve complex interactions of technology, education and
market demand. Still, many people are finding this new world of work harder to
navigate.

Sometimes, the problem in labor markets takes the form of underemployment rather
than outright joblessness. Many people, especially the young, end up with
part-time and temporary service jobs -- or perhaps a combination of them. A
part-time retail worker, for example, might also write for a friend's website
and walk dogs for wealthier neighbors. These workers often aren't climbing
career ladders that build a brighter or more secure future.

Many of these labor market problems were brought on by the financial crisis and
the collapse of market demand. But it would be a mistake to place all the blame
on the business cycle. Before the crisis, for example, business executives and
owners didn't always know who their worst workers were, or didn't want to engage
in the disruptive act of rooting out and firing them. So long as sales were
brisk, it was easier to let matters lie. But when money ran out, many businesses
had to make the tough decisions -- and the axes fell. The financial crisis thus
accelerated what would have been a much slower process.

Subsequently, some would-be employers seem to have discriminated against workers
who were laid off in the crash. These judgments weren't always fair, but that
stigma isn't easily overcome, because a lot of employers in fact had reason to
identify and fire their less productive workers.

In a nutshell, what we're facing isn't your grandfather's unemployment problem.
It does have something to do with modern technology, and it will be with us for
some time.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/06/business/automation-alone-isnt-killing-jobs.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JOHN HERSEY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


