                             1282 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Small Plane Connects the Dots of a Big Country

BYLINE: By DEBORAH FALLOWS.

Deborah Fallows, author of ''Dreaming in Chinese,'' is traveling with her
husband, Jim, on a reporting series for The Atlantic.

SECTION: Section TR; Column 0; Travel Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1505 words


We are rolling down the runway, increasing speed. At 70 knots, my husband lifts
the nose of our small plane and we are suddenly airborne. Looking down, I can
see the treetops, then the diagram of the town, and soon a panorama of hills and
highways. We are heading south and west, toward Mississippi.

I grew up seeing America by taking classic journeys, along interstates riding in
the back seat of the family station wagon and later on Route 66 in the front
seat of a VW Beetle. I rode the train, watching the scenery of the upper Midwest
from the glassy Vista-Dome cars. Now, many of my travels are in the air, in a
small propeller plane that offers an intimate experience that bears little
resemblance to that of flying in a big commercial airliner.

My pilot-husband and I have been meandering around the country for many months
now in our single-engine four-seater propeller plane. We land at small town
airports, where the airlines never land, and where even occasional private jets
are easily outnumbered by crop dusters. There are more than 150,000 small piston
planes flying in the United States, offering a view of America and life that is
otherwise rare to find.

We like to fly just a few thousand feet above ground level, higher than the
flight path of many birds, but low enough to watch the currents that beat
against barges maneuvering down the Mississippi or the heavy semis jockeying for
position on long stretches of Interstate 80. We spot yellow school buses easing
to a stop in front of the white picket fences of corn-belt farmhouses. We track
horse-and-buggies inching along the back roads of Pennsylvania's Amish country.
In the course of an hour or two, we'll see the marked geometry of neat, green
farms that are ''East River'' in South Dakota fade slowly into stark brown
expanses of ''West River,'' on the other side of the Missouri, too hostile for
anyone to try to tend. We have stopped counting the number of quarries and
prisons we fly over, which are everywhere and often, oddly, near each other. And
we marvel at the rows and rows of massive, white windmills, steely and elegant,
churning slowly with languor yet still making power.

I might have seen it coming, that we would get to this way of travel. Over the
years, our family has lived in a lot of places around the world (My husband,
Jim, is a journalist). We took to exploring the edges and corners of Ghana and
England, of Japan, China, Australia and Southeast Asia. Also, Jim is a
passionate pilot. I think pilots are born, like musicians or artists. There is
no place they would rather be than in the air.

It seemed a natural step, then, that we should set out to explore our own
country in our little plane. Our mission, or excuse, was to spend more time in
some of the many towns where we had put down over the years, searching for small
airstrips with cheap fuel. There are almost 5,000 small airports to choose from,
each maybe a mile or five from a town we had never heard of and had never
planned to be. In fact, I'm sure that William Least Heat-Moon's blue highways
wouldn't even get you to many of these towns.

As our list of towns grew, so did a humble sense that America is full of places
with stories to tell, where generations had spent their lives building, losing
and rebuilding, or where newcomers migrate, like pioneers, to strive toward
their dreams. Their stories are compelling, especially now with steep economic
challenges. Just one flight over rusted-out abandoned factories and new
groundbreakings up the road tells you that.

But first, getting there, as they say, should be half the adventure. In this
plane, we can go anywhere -- anywhere -- with no permission, no ticket, no
plans. The skies are free, with a few reasonable caveats: even-numbered
thousands-of-feet altitudes when flying west and odd-numbered when flying east
to keep planes away from each other; avoiding military flight-training zones, if
they are ''hot''; staying outside the perimeter of wherever Air Force One might
be; and post-2001, securing permission to land within the ''Special Flight
Rules'' zone around Washington. In good, clear weather where we can fly under
''visual flight rules,'' we don't even have to talk to air traffic controllers,
although we usually do, to request ''flight following'' for a layer of safety,
so they can track us and we can hear them.

We set just one hard-and-fast rule for ourselves: safe, benign flying conditions
trump everything. There is nowhere we ever have to be, no wedding or appointment
or holiday gathering, ever -- and if there is, we can get there another way. Jim
is a cautious pilot; he never took passengers until he earned his instrument
rating. And our plane, a Cirrus, has a parachute built into the body of the
plane. In extreme emergency, you can yank down a lever that is nestled just
above the two front seats, and a parachute with rip cords will rocket out of the
top of the plane, settling the plane safely to the ground.

Of course nothing is foolproof. I am often surprised at how quickly conditions
change, despite predictions. Out of nowhere come clouds, haze, fronts, isolated
storms, downdrafts, updrafts and smoke, not to mention birds, other planes, sky
divers, balloons and gliders. The skies are rarely dull. No trip ever goes
exactly as foreseen.

Once, long ago, when we were flying east over upstate New York, a front
materialized between us and Boston, where we were heading. We were suddenly
surrounded, our lightning scope lit up with countless little yellow X's,
indicating the location of the strikes. The controller (God bless them all)
suggested that the best way to thread through this was to head north over
Canada. He asked us for the number of ''souls on board'' before he wished us
good luck (the one and only time I've heard that), and handed us off to a
military controller, through whose space we secured permission to fly.

A few weeks ago, we set out again. Our destination was Columbus, Miss., a small
town along the border with Alabama. We had heard tales of how it is recovering
from the loss of its low-wage, low-tech textile, plastics and food-processing
factories and how new industries like tire-making, steel, drones and engines, to
name a few, are bringing new life to the area.

It was Easter Sunday, a gorgeous day along the East Coast. The skies were busy
after months of endless winter that marooned all of us. Jumpers were out over
South Carolina. When the controller in the Atlanta center slipped a ''y'all''
into just about every strictly, formulaic transmission, we knew we had crossed
some invisible Southern border.

Jim located a small airport, a fixed-base operator (F.B.O.) where we could stop
for gas. For humans, the effects of three or four hours in a small plane
accumulate: too hot, too cold, noisy, cramped, hungry, where's the bathroom. As
we approached for landing, I wished for good luck with the F.B.O. The worst ones
will have a small shack, a bathroom, a few phone numbers to call for emergency,
a vending machine with cheese crackers, yet always a working self-serve gas
pump. One F.B.O. in Maine was so remote that we had to circle around twice for
landing when a local farmer was using the runway as a shortcut for his tractor.
On the other hand, you might find an F.B.O. with a nice comfy lounge, homemade
cookies, popcorn and a restroom full of amenities.

On that Sunday, we stopped for gas at Toccoa, Ga., near the South Carolina
border, as I was working up a little bit of self-pity over our Easter lunch of
beef jerky. When I pulled open the door to the F.B.O., the most delicious aromas
wafted out, followed by a warm invitation from the manager to take a plate and
join his extended family for a potluck buffet: ham, salads, biscuits, casseroles
and enough Southern hospitality to fill the state. You never know.

Well-fortified, we flew on a few more hours west to Mississippi. The approach to
the tiny county airport goes right over the skeletons of textile factories of
Columbus. We spent several days in and around the town. Jim visited the new
Russian-owned steel mill, Severstal, as well as the PACCAR truck-engine plant
and an Airbus facility that makes helicopters for the military. I visited the
Mississippi School for Mathematics and Science, which is a public residential
high school that sends its graduates to colleges as close as Mississippi State
University or as far as M.I.T. or Harvey Mudd in California. I prowled the
archives of the town library, with its stacks of war journals of Confederate and
Union soldiers, and the segregated cemeteries and antebellum homes.

Heading out, we decided to fly west a few miles, over the heart of nearly $5
billion of new factories and industry. We spotted the new small regional airport
right across the road from the new steel mill. This was our evocative view from
the skies: as we traveled from one small airport to the next, separated by just
a few moments in flying time, we moved across a space of decades in economic
evolution, a journey symbolic of a changing America.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/18/travel/an-intimate-view-of-america-from-above.
html

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above left, Deborah and Jim  Fallows unload and tie down  their
Cirrus SR22 plane upon  landing in Columbus, Miss.  Above, an aerial view of
Columbus  shows the patchwork mix  of farmland and factories. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
RAYMOND MCCREA JONES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


