                             1221 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Viewing Video Games From Another Level

BYLINE: By MARTHA SCHWENDENER

SECTION: Section WE; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; ARTS REVIEW | WESTCHESTER; Pg.
10

LENGTH: 1020 words


A benchmark for video games as cultural artifacts came in 2012 when the Museum
of Modern Art in New York announced it had acquired 14 games for its collection.
Depending on your perspective, the museum might be a little late in
acknowledging the significance of video games -- or early, compared with other
art institutions. (The games were acquired by the museum's department of
architecture and design, putting them in the ''design'' category rather than
alongside painting and sculpture.) Now, an ambitious survey of video games
organized by the Smithsonian American Art Museum, and previously on view there,
is at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.

''The Art of Video Games'' covers 40 years of games and takes an evolutionary
approach. Technological developments and the narrative capacity of video games
are emphasized over interaction or play. Eighty games are displayed in kiosks
arranged into six historical eras, starting in the '70s and ending in the
near-present. Five games, including classics like Pac-Man (1981) and Myst
(1995), can be played for three-minute sessions. (The years listed for the games
in the exhibition are the dates of their corporate release for home sales, which
are normally later than the arcade release.)

The earliest eras are the most interesting. ''These are what old-fashioned video
games looked like,'' a woman was telling a group of children during my visit.
And like the recent film ''Computer Chess'' (2013), which recreated with
reverent, fetishizing precision the look of the early personal computer era, the
games here benefit from that same nostalgic revival. Here you'll find Combat
(1977), Pac-Man, Space Invaders (a 1980 version) and Pitfall (1982), as well as
an Atari VCS joystick and console in a display case.

The early games demonstrate the ingenuity of designers working with limited
colors and pixels: for Donkey Kong (1982), Shigeru Miyamoto put a cap on his
famous Mario character because hair was difficult to render; TRON: Maze-Atron
(1982) reveled in recreating the internal circuits of the computer, which were
still somewhat novel.

The video game as a narrative medium, like film or television, is traced through
games like The Bard's Tale III: Thief of Fate (1987), The Legend of Zelda series
and Tomb Raider (1996), which was important for introducing a female protagonist
-- notable given charges of sexism in the gaming world (which, as many gamers
have pointed out, reflects the larger culture). Video games are also tied to art
and literature: Dune II: Battle for Arrakis (1993), took its inspiration from
Frank Herbert's 1965 novel ''Dune;'' BioShock (2007) drew from Ayn Rand; Marble
Madness (1992) was inspired by the work of artist M. C. Escher; while Rez (2001)
looked to the abstract paintings of Vasily Kandinsky.

Two of the most consciously arty -- or art-like -- games were designed or
directed by Jenova Chen. FlOw (2006) takes its name from the mental state in
which a person feels fully immersed in and focused on an activity (like playing
a video game) and Flower (2009) uses the rolling hills of California as its
leitmotif. In their spare, visually ambient design, these games come closest to
achieving what one of the quotes on the gallery walls claims: ''Programming is
like poetry.''

In general, however, the exhibition focuses too much on mainstream commercial
video games and stresses too often the evolution toward realism -- a paradox,
since art has generally and systematically rejected all claims to the ''real''
in recent centuries. Video-games-as-art aside, the works here are being given
the ''art'' treatment by their inclusion in a provisional canon of ''great''
works. It's important to note these were chosen from a pool of 240 games
suggested by Smithsonian curators and a board of advisers. More than 119,000
people in 175 countries voted to choose the 80 games that appear in the
exhibition, according to a news release from the museum.

And yet, it might have been better if curators had taken a firmer hand. Because,
when you reach the fifth iteration of Super Mario Brothers, the 13th installment
of The Legend of Zelda, or a game developed by Steven Spielberg, you wonder:
What lies beyond the products of Microsoft, Nintendo and PlayStation? Who are
the new video game pioneers? (Another recent movie, ''Indie Game'' from 2012,
offers some insight. Other areas left untouched are the world of mobile games --
from the early eight-bit Game Boy to the massively popular games played on
smartphones -- and recent online games funded by individual donations.)

Instead, the show suffers from a kind of boosterism that ranges, particularly in
accompanying video testimonies, from the predatory (''If you don't play video
games yet, we're going to get you'') to the absurd (''I've always said that if
Beethoven were alive today, he'd be a video game composer'').

More to the point, since ''The Art of Video Games'' uses, as the curator Chris
Melissinos puts it, the ''cultural lens of an art museum'' to consider video
games, it would be nice to see that platform fully utilized. Given the
mainstream thrust of the show, why are controversial yet widely popular games
like Grand Theft Auto not included? And what about the links between video games
and violence -- or war games, since the United States military developed its own
video game America's Army as a recruitment device and some scholars have called
the use of drones in Afghanistan and Pakistan a ''PlayStation War''?

Video games are a cultural juggernaut; time will tell if they are also ''art.''
In the meantime, the apparatus of the art museum offers a laboratory for putting
the medium through its paces and challenging the myths around gaming, rather
than merely repeating them -- which makes this a good early, rather than
definitive, exhibition for exploring this relatively new form.

''The Art of Video Games'' is on view through May 18 at the Hudson River Museum,
511 Warburton Avenue, Yonkers; (914) 963-4550 or hrm.org.

''The Art of Video Games'' is on view through May 18 at the Hudson River Museum,
511 Warburton Avenue, Yonkers; (914) 963-4550 or hrm.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/06/nyregion/a-review-of-the-art-of-video-games-at
-the-hudson-river-museum-in-yonkers.html

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Among the games included in ''The Art of Video Games'' at
Hudson River Museum are, clockwise from top right: the Legend of Zelda (2006)
Diablo II (2000)
Marble Madness (1992)
Bioshock (2007), Minecraft (2009), and Earthworm Jim (1994). (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
NINTENDO OF AMERICA INC.
BLIZZARD ENTERTAINMENT INC.
SEGA MASTER SYSTEM
2K GAMES INC. AND TAKE-TWO INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE
NOTCH DEVELOPMENT AB
 AND INTERPLAY ENTERTAINMENT CORP.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


