                             1295 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Makes Surprise Trip to Afghanistan

BYLINE: By MATTHEW ROSENBERG and MICHAEL D. SHEAR; Matthew Rosenberg reported
from Kabul, and Michael D. Shear from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1062 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- The last time President Obama visited Afghanistan, he came
to sign a strategic partnership agreement with President Hamid Karzai.

But that was two years ago. When Mr. Obama returned to Afghanistan on Sunday,
conspicuously absent from the agenda was a meeting with Mr. Karzai, who has
staunchly opposed an enduring American presence here.

The trip to Afghanistan was unannounced, and Mr. Obama slipped out of the White
House secretly on Saturday evening. He arrived a day ahead of Memorial Day under
the cover of darkness at Bagram Air Base, the sprawling American encampment
north of Kabul, accompanied by the country music singer Brad Paisley, who
performed for about an hour before the president spoke to troops.

Though Mr. Obama did not meet with Mr. Karzai, who is to leave office in the
coming months, he vowed to work with whoever wins the presidential runoff
scheduled for June 14: either Abdullah Abdullah or Ashraf Ghani.

White House officials said that the trip, Mr. Obama's fourth to Afghanistan
since taking office, was intended strictly as a visit with troops, and that they
wanted to avoid any appearance of trying to sway the Afghan political process.

They said American officials offered Mr. Karzai the opportunity to join Mr.
Obama at Bagram, but were not surprised when the Afghan leader turned them down.
A statement from Mr. Karzai's office was terse about the invitation: ''The
president of Afghanistan said that he was ready to warmly welcome the president
of the United States in accordance with Afghan traditions,'' it said, ''but had
no intention of meeting him at Bagram.''

But officials said Mr. Obama did talk by phone to Mr. Karzai for 15 to 20
minutes before leaving Afghanistan. They said he praised Mr. Karzai for progress
being made by the Afghan security forces and for the recent presidential voting
in the country.

Mr. Obama, in his remarks to troops on Sunday, made it clear that he still
wanted the deal signed, allowing the United States to keep a small military
force in Afghanistan beyond 2014. His comments indicated that he may have ruled
out the idea of a complete withdrawal of American forces at the end of this
year, a move that administration officials had repeatedly threatened was
possible at difficult points in the negotiations over the security deal.

''Once Afghanistan has sworn in its new president, I'm hopeful we will sign a
bilateral security agreement that lets us move forward,'' Mr. Obama said. And he
vowed, ''We are going to make sure that Afghanistan can never again -- ever --
be used to launch a terrorist attack against our country.''

Mr. Obama's trip was shrouded in the usual secrecy. But after he arrived in
Afghanistan, White House officials broke with longstanding national security
protocol by revealing to reporters the name of the top Central Intelligence
Agency officer in Afghanistan.

The name was passed on to thousands of reporters in a written pool report sent
by a reporter traveling with the president. The pool report listed 16 people who
participated in a military and diplomatic briefing with Mr. Obama, including one
name that was identified as ''chief of station.'' The New York Times is not
disclosing the name at the request of C.I.A. officials.

The name appeared to have been released by accident, and it was removed in a
later pool report that urged reporters to ''please use this list'' of attendees
in the briefing with Mr. Obama.

Such disclosures are rarely made, and often become public knowledge only when
they are released by mistake, or by leaks from people opposed to United States
policy or presence in a country. Last year, a political party opposed to
American drone strikes in Pakistan identified a man it described as the C.I.A.'s
top spy there.

Mr. Obama got his biggest applause from the troops when he praised them for
making sure that ''America's war in Afghanistan will come to a responsible
end.'' The crowd also roared with approval when the president said he frequently
tells corporate leaders, ''If you want somebody who can get the job done, hire a
vet.''

Troops used smartphones to record the visit. Afterward, Mr. Obama walked through
the crowd to shake hands, saying he would pose for pictures with anyone who
wanted one.

White House officials said there was no connection between Mr. Obama's trip,
which they said was planned months ago, and the furor over misconduct at
veterans' hospitals in the United States. But the visit will provide the
president a symbolic military backdrop as his administration tries to fight
accusations of mismanagement back home.

Mr. Obama did not make any major policy announcements in his remarks to the
troops. He is expected to wait to offer his latest foreign policy and national
security vision during a speech at the West Point graduation on Wednesday. In
2009, he used a similar setting at West Point to announce a decision to add more
troops to the effort in Afghanistan, pushing the total United States presence
there past 100,000.

The total number of American troops here is now down to around 32,000, and
American officials hope to leave a far smaller contingent after 2014 to continue
training Afghan forces and targeting the remnants of Al Qaeda. Officials say the
administration is still deciding how large the force will be. Though Mr. Karzai
has refused to sign the agreement for such a force to remain, both of the
remaining presidential candidates have indicated that they would sign the
agreement upon taking office.

After Mr. Karzai dug in on the troop deal in February, administration officials
began pointedly looking past him. That came as almost a relief to some, who
expressed anger and frustration at the Afghan leader's increasingly harsh
criticism. Mr. Karzai has repeatedly berated the United States for deaths of
Afghan civilians and for raids on Afghan homes and the detentions of thousands
of Afghans suspected of fighting with or aiding the Taliban.

The Afghan government's latest salvo against the United States came hours before
Mr. Obama arrived at Bagram, when the presidential palace issued a statement
denouncing the reported mass recording of phone calls in Afghanistan by the
National Security Agency.

The statement called the spying a ''violation of national sovereignty and a
violation of human and citizenship rights of Afghans,'' and said the government
would seek to shut it down.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/26/world/asia/obama-in-afghanistan.html

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: After speaking at Bagram Air Base on Sunday, President Obama
told the troops that he would pose for pictures with anyone who wanted one.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


