                             1237 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Investigative Reporter Leaves NBC News

BYLINE: By SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; MEDIA DECODER; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 301 words


Michael Isikoff, an investigative reporter who has broken numerous national news
stories, has left NBC News. His last day was Friday.

Perhaps best known for his coverage of the liaison between former President Bill
Clinton and Monica Lewinsky, Mr. Isikoff has also reported extensively on the
war on terror, the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse scandal, the Penn State sex abuse
case and other national issues. Mr. Isikoff joined NBC News in July 2010 as the
national investigative correspondent, a position similar to the one he had held
at Newsweek since 1994. He was named an MSNBC contributor in January 2009.
During his nearly four years at NBC News, Mr. Isikoff appeared frequently on
''NBC Nightly News'' and ''Today,'' and on MSNBC.

Less than three months ago, Lisa Myers, the senior investigative correspondent
for NBC News, also left. NBC News recently added Cynthia McFadden, hiring her
from ABC News, to be NBC's senior legal and investigative correspondent.

''Michael has done terrific work for NBC News on stories ranging from revealing
which government official leaked the U.S. Stuxnet virus attack on Iran's nuclear
program to a groundbreaking examination of the Obama administration drone strike
program,'' Richard Esposito, the senior executive producer of the investigative
unit at NBC News, said in a statement. ''We're grateful for all he's done and
wish him the very best.''

NBC News and Mr. Isikoff said the decision to part ways was mutual. ''It's a
totally amicable departure,'' he said. ''I had a good ride at NBC, and I'm proud
of a lot of what I was able to do there. But it was increasingly clear they were
moving in directions in which there were going to be fewer opportunities for my
work.''

Mr. Isikoff, 61, said he intended to stay in Washington but declined to
elaborate on his plans.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/14/business/media/investigative-reporter-leaves-n
bc-news.html

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


