                             1239 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Italian Touch, With a Taste of Cognac

BYLINE: By BRIAN SEIBERT

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; DANCE REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 438 words


The choreographer Simone Forti and the composer Charlemagne Palestine are old
friends. They met in 1970 at the California Institute of the Arts and soon began
improvising together in performances called ''Illuminations.'' But when they
gathered together in a fourth-floor gallery at the Museum of Modern Art on
Sunday evening, it had been nearly 40 years since they had last staged one of
these ''Illuminations'' in New York. So it was a signal event, with a new title:
''Illlummminnnatttionnnsssss!!!!!!!''

They are old friends, but an odd couple. Though Mr. Palestine works with
minimalist simplicity and repetition, he calls himself a ''maximalist.'' This
may allude to his eccentric sense of ritual. On Sunday, he sat behind a piano
and a bank of keyboards draped in leopard-print fabric. Around him sat many
stuffed animals, arranged as if in a shrine.

He wore scarves and two Panama hats, one on top of the other. He drank cognac
from a snifter, and he began the performance by rubbing his finger around the
glass's rim. Taking his time, he rose and brought the sound and scent close to
each member of the audience, which was arrayed around him and Ms. Forti in
chairs and on the floor. ''Welcome,'' he said, and hummed over the drone of the
glass, making unpleasant noises out of the side of his mouth.

Meanwhile, Ms. Forti, in black pants and a white sweater, eyes closed, slowly
rolled across the floor. The beauty of her approach, if also its limitations and
risks, lies in how she doesn't put on a show; she just is. At one point, she
directed attention to the moon outside by saying ''moon.'' There was some
dissonance between her gentle radiance and Mr. Palestine's theatrics.

And yet, as she walked in circles and tilted into figure eights, playing with
momentum, there was a clear connection between the nature of that activity and
what Mr. Palestine was doing at the piano: gradually accumulating harmonics. And
later, as she seemed, maybe, to be miming some moment of distress, the ambiguous
sounds he contributed from his laptop -- an Italian train station? Children
screaming? -- added mysterious intensity, pointing perhaps to Ms. Forti's early
childhood in Italy.

She is now nearly 80, and her advanced age is inevitably part of her
performances: the shaking, the wobbling. It colored the song of farewell that
she sang in Italian, and it might have given the whole 40-minute performance a
somber, valedictory tone, except that Mr. Palestine chimed in, wailing like an
electric guitar. Then he gave the last word to two tiny blue bears, who sang
electronically in a Chipmunks register before chirping, ''Bye-bye.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/16/arts/dance/simone-forti-and-charlemagne-palest
ine-reunite-at-moma.html

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Simone Forti and Charlemagne Palestine in
''Illlummminnnatttionnnsssss!!!!!!!'' on Sunday at the Museum of  Modern Art.
The two first met in 1970 at the California Institute of the Arts and began
improvising together. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JULIETA CERVANTES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


