                             1284 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Commissioner Details Policing Options and Use of Resources at Council Budget
Hearing

BYLINE: By J. DAVID GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 569 words


To address pockets of rising violent crime, some New York City police officers
formerly assigned to counterterrorism patrols are being redeployed to affected
housing projects around the city, the police commissioner, William J. Bratton,
said at a City Council budget hearing on Tuesday.

The reassignment was among several policy announcements and policing opinions
offered by Mr. Bratton and his top commanders during a wide-ranging,
two-and-a-half-hour hearing on the mayor's proposed budget for the Police
Department.

The discussion swung from the rise of heroin trafficking in the city to the
state of dilapidated precinct station houses to the possible use -- sometime in
the future -- of unmanned drones.

It touched on marijuana decriminalization -- a ''major mistake'' in Mr.
Bratton's view -- and a pilot program to test technology that detects gunshots.

But with a debate raging between the City Council and Mayor Bill de Blasio over
increasing the police force by 1,000 officers, council members returned to
versions of the same question: Do you support an increase?

Over and over again, Mr. Bratton and his top chiefs provided versions of the
same answer.

''If you cut the ranks by 2,000, I'm going to do the best I possibly can,'' said
Chief Philip Banks III, the highest-ranking uniformed officer. ''If you were to
give me 200,000 officers, I'm going to do the best I possibly can. That's the
best answer I can give you.''

Rather than increase the ranks of the force beyond its roughly 35,000 uniformed
officers, Mr. Bratton said the Police Department could make use of overtime to
address crime hot spots. Currently, he said, the department has the ''overtime
equivalent of 320 additional police officers'' walking patrols in public
housing, where shootings are on the rise.

''I know that you are sympathetic and that privately you support this
initiative,'' said Letitia James, the public advocate. ''This really is an
appeal to the mayor.''

Mr. Bratton devoted most of his opening remarks to outlining new ideas and
initiatives, including the creation of a program in Brooklyn aimed at those
responsible for the bulk of the borough's violence, some of whom have already
been in jail.

''We will meet with them and warn them about the consequences they'll face if
they re-offend,'' he said. ''We will also provide them with assistance in
finding a job or obtaining social services.''

Mr. Bratton said the department was also using nearly $5 million in the budget
to create a compliance unit and a risk assessment unit that will, among other
things, study trends in lawsuits against police officers and reduce their
number.

He said the new use of counterterrorism patrol cars -- known as critical
response vehicles, and often seen in teams rushing around Manhattan in clusters
of flashing lights -- would extend beyond the crime issue in public housing.
''It's a mobile reserve, and we are broadening its use,'' Mr. Bratton said.

The teams, made up of officers on day assignments from their local precincts,
were the most visible part of the street-level counterterrorism operations of
the previous commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly.

Speaking to reporters later, Mr. Bratton said the issue of how many police
officers should be on the force was between the Council and the mayor. ''Would I
like a thousand more cops? Certainly,'' he said. ''But I'm also very mindful of
the mayor's issues around the budget and his needs.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/21/nyregion/commissioner-details-policing-options
-and-use-of-resources-at-council-budget-hearing.html

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


