                             1244 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Its Return, Band Goes Right Back to the Basics

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 457 words


Loop's concert on Thursday night at Le Poisson Rouge started, of course, with a
drone: a guitar note looped for continuous sustain, almost meditative. But not
for long. Soon the clobbering began: The repeating two-chord riff of
''Soundhead,'' basic and primal, blasted in unison on guitar, bass and drums.
''I hear that sound! I hear that sound!,'' Robert Hampson sang.

It was a familiar sound, one that has been around since the first garage-rock
psychedelia of the mid-1960s, when a few chords, a relentless beat, cranked-up
distortion and a wah-wah pedal were the makings of countless songs. But this
version of that sound had long been absent. Loop broke up in 1991, five years
after Mr. Hampson started the band in south London, and it reunited only last
year with what had been its final lineup: Mr. Hampson and Scott Dowson on
guitars, Neil MacKay on bass (playing with his back turned to the audience) and
John Wills on drums. The drummer Wayne Maskell has now replaced Mr. Wills for
Loop's first United States tour since 1990.

Loop's style was a very deliberate choice in 1986, well aware of Minimalism,
punk, post-punk, German kraut-rock and other psychedelic revivals and
extensions. It was also a complete rejection of highly synthesized 1980s pop.

Mr. Hampson made a rigorous return to the basics. His songs for Loop are all
riff; they stick to two or three chords and they don't bother with bridges or
choruses or transitions, just the primordial effects of repetition and volume as
the reverberations build up. Vocals tend to get swallowed in the echo and roar;
after singing the verses, Mr. Hampson moves on to lead guitar, still keeping
things rudimentary, worrying a handful a notes. The music builds patiently and
relentlessly until, by sheer accretion, it grows overwhelming.

That's how Thursday's set worked. The first few songs were blunt and
declarative, varying the spearhead of their attack from guitar (''Soundhead'')
to bass (''The Nail Will Burn'') to drums (''Straight to Your Heart'') to all at
once (the implacable power dirge of ''Fade Out''). Yet the band came across as
slightly tentative; between songs, Mr. Hampson kept telling the sound man to
readjust the mix.

Then something meshed, and the music grew unstoppable; maybe the room had become
fully saturated with overtones. The riffs arrived, adamant and incantatory,
while subtleties loomed amid the blare, like a particular salvo of tom-toms or
shifts in the tone of the guitars. The music summoned the power of clinging to a
simple idea, against all temptations, distractions or frills.

At the end of the set, after paying homage to a predecessor with ''Mother Sky''
by the German band Can, Mr. Hampson made an unexpected vow: ''We'll be back
soon,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/19/arts/music/reunited-loop-performs-at-le-poisso
n-rouge.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Loop: Robert Hampson at Le Poisson Rouge on Thursday evening.
The band is making its first United States tour since 1990. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


