                             1280 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On Saturday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 761 words


8 P.M. (Lifetime) RETURN TO ZERO (2014) Maggie (Minnie Driver) and Aaron (Paul
Adelstein, above with Ms. Driver) try to resume their picture-perfect existence
after their son is stillborn, but can't escape their grief in this drama based
on the personal experiences of the writer and director, Sean Hanish. They cope
through denial, escape and alcohol, but when Maggie discovers that Aaron is
having an affair with a colleague (Sarah Jones), she decides to end the
marriage. But just as she believes that she is ready to move on, she discovers
that she's pregnant. Alfred Molina portrays Aaron's brusque father and boss;
Kathy Baker is Maggie's mother. And Connie Nielsen plays the doctor who, having
experienced a similar loss, helps Maggie and Aaron begin their lives anew.

10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Judy Valente reports on the Night
Ministry, a volunteer group on the South Side of Chicago that is waging war on
H.I.V. in the streets. Fred de Sam Lazaro looks at efforts of churches and
Christian agencies to help survivors of genocide in Rwanda learn to live in
peace with neighbors who were their enemies.

1 P.M. (ABC) WORLD OF X GAMES A preview of the games' 20th-anniversary event in
Austin, Tex., presents highlights from RallyCross and BMX from the 2013 season
and introduces the newest sport, Stadium Super Trucks.

4:30 P.M. (NBC) PREAKNESS STAKES This year's Kentucky Derby winner, California
Chrome, left, leads the field at this 139th running of the middle jewel in the
Triple Crown, broadcast from Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore. Prerace coverage,
at 1, includes a visit to the homes of California Chrome's owners, Steve Coburn
and Perry Martin, and an interview with his jockey, Victor Espinoza.

6:55 P.M. (Comedy Central) GET HIM TO THE GREEK (2010) Russell Brand reprises
Aldous Snow, his snake-hipped British rocker from ''Forgetting Sarah Marshall,''
in Nicholas Stoller's comedy about a record label drone (Jonah Hill, below left,
with Mr. Brand) dispatched to transport Snow -- a wreck after the failure of his
latest album -- from London to the Greek, a concert hall in Los Angeles. As
played by ''the brilliantly unpredictable'' Mr. Brand, Snow ''is more than a pop
culture museum piece or a MacGruber-like bit of sketch comedy nonsense,'' A. O.
Scott wrote in The New York Times of this comedy, with Judd Apatow among its
producers. Mr. Hill ''makes a fine visual and temperamental foil,'' he added.
''The two of them are like the Trylon and Perisphere of comedy.'' In
''Superbad'' (2007), at 9:25, Mr. Hill and Michael Cera play high school virgins
searching for lessons of love to take with them to college in this cuddly
comedy, also produced by Mr. Apatow, directed by Greg Mottola and written by
Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg. Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called the
film, ''a tickly, funny tale.''

9 P.M. (CUNY) BARTLEBY (1972) ''Classics of British Cinema'' concludes with
Anthony Friedman's adaptation of the Herman Melville short story ''Bartleby the
Scrivener,'' updated from 1850s Manhattan to 1970s London, about an accounting
clerk (John McEnery), who rebels against his employer (Paul Scofield) by
refusing to work. Instead, he responds, ''I would prefer not to'' to each
request. ''It is a stunning job of acting, all the lovelier for its quietness,
and the best aspect of a generally impressive film,'' Roger Greenspun wrote in
The Times about Mr. McEnery's performance.

9 P.M. (13) THE TRAIN (1965) In this drama from John Frankenheimer, set in
August 1944 during World War II, Paul Scofield plays Col. Franz von Waldheim, a
Nazi art lover plotting to smuggle treasures to Germany from a French museum via
locomotive. Burt Lancaster is Paul Labiche, the railway inspector who helps the
French Resistance sabotage the endeavor without damaging the cargo, or losing
his life in the process. ''Do you know what's in that train?'' he says to
someone standing in his way. ''The national heritage! The pride of France!'' --
before adding wryly, ''Crazy, isn't it?'' Writing in The Times, Bosley Crowther
called the film ''a beautiful, hissing tangle.''

10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS In August 2005 Bernadette and Greg Ohlemacher were shot
dead in their Albuquerque home while their daughter, Renee, then 20, hid in a
closet and phoned the police. But Renee was immediately considered a suspect,
despite no evidence connecting her to the crimes. Then a mortgage loan processor
turned himself in to the Secret Service for forging checks for more than
$240,000, leading investigators to an unsolved murder. KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/17/arts/television/whats-on-saturday.html

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY LIFETIME)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


