                             1266 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Bring Back Our Girls'

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS KRISTOF

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 809 words


DOZENS of heavily armed terrorists rolled into the sleepy little town one night
in a convoy of trucks, buses and vans. They made their way to the girls'
boarding school.

The high school girls, asleep in their dormitory, awoke to gunfire. The
attackers stormed the school, set it on fire, and, residents said, then herded
several hundred terrified girls into the vehicles -- and drove off and vanished.

That was April 15 in northern Nigeria. The girls were kidnapped by an extremist
Muslim group called Boko Haram, whose name in the Hausa language means ''Western
education is a sin.''

These girls, ages 15 to 18 and Christians and Muslims alike, knew the risks of
seeking an education, and schools in the area had closed in March for fear of
terror attacks. But this school had reopened so that the girls -- the stars of
their families and villages -- could take their final exams. They were expected
to move on to become teachers, doctors, lawyers.

Instead, they reportedly are being auctioned off for $12 each to become
''wives'' of militants. About 50 girls escaped, but the police say that 276 are
still missing -- and the Nigerian government has done next to nothing to recover
the girls.

''We are now asking for world power countries to intervene,'' the desperate
father of a missing 18-year-old girl, Ayesha, told me by phone. He said that the
parents had given up on Nigerian government officials -- ''they are just saying
lies'' -- and pleaded for international pressure on Nigeria to rescue the girls.

The parents pursued the kidnappers, carrying bows and arrows to confront
militants armed with AK-47s, but finally had to turn back. The father, who asked
not to be named for fear of retribution, said that the parents are now praying
to God for the United States and United Nations to help get their daughters
back.

While there has been a major international search for the missing people on
Malaysian flight MH370, and nonstop news coverage, there has been no meaningful
search for the even greater number of missing schoolgirls.

I spoke by telephone with Secretary of State John Kerry, who is visiting Africa,
and asked him whether the United States can nudge Nigerian authorities to do
more to find the girls.

''We're really pushing them ... about the situation with the girls,'' Kerry
said. ''Oh, God! Yes, absolutely.'' He described it as ''not just an act of
terrorism. It's a massive human trafficking moment and grotesque.''

I asked whether the United States could use satellites or intelligence assets to
try to locate the girls. ''We're engaged and cooperating,'' he said, declining
to discuss details. Kerry also emphasized the broader effort to disrupt Boko
Haram and its financial flows, while supporting the training of Nigerian
authorities to respond to terror attacks without violating human rights. ''We're
upping the game with them,'' he said.

In hopes of viral pressure on Nigerian authorities to try to recover the girls,
campaigns have started on the White House website, on Change.org and on Facebook
to demand: ''Bring Back Our Girls.'' All this may or may not help, but it's
worth trying.

The attack in Nigeria is part of a global backlash against girls' education by
extremists. The Pakistani Taliban shot Malala Yousafzai in the head at age 15
because she advocated for girls' education. Extremists threw acid in the faces
of girls walking to school in Afghanistan. And in Nigeria, militants destroyed
50 schools last year alone.

If the girls aren't rescued, ''no parent will allow their female child to go to
school,'' Hadiza Bala Usman, who has led protests in Nigeria on behalf of the
missing girls, warned in a telephone interview.

Northern Nigeria is a deeply conservative area, and if the schoolgirls are
recovered, it may be difficult for them to marry because of suspicions that they
are no longer virgins.

While the Nigerian military has shown little interest in rescuing the girls, it
has, in the last few years, presided over a brutal counterinsurgency in response
to Boko Haram bombings. There is viciousness on both sides.

The best tool to fight extremism is education, especially of girls -- and that
means ensuring that it is safe to study. The greatest threat to militancy in the
long run comes not from drones but from girls with schoolbooks.

''These abducted schoolgirls are my sisters,'' Malala told me in an email from
Britain, where she is recovering from the Taliban attack, ''and I call on the
international community and the government of Nigeria to take action and save my
sisters.'' She added: ''It should be our duty to speak up for our brothers and
sisters in Nigeria who are in a very difficult situation.''

Malala's right. More than 200 teenage girls have just been enslaved because they
had the brains and guts to seek to become teachers or doctors. They deserve a
serious international effort to rescue them.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/04/opinion/sunday/kristof-bring-back-our-girls.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mothers and relatives of kidnapped schoolgirls in northern
Nigeria gathered late last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AFOLABI SOTUNDE/REUTERS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


