                             1224 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

This Time, Jarmusch Is Kissing Vampires

BYLINE: By MELENA RYZIK

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1737 words


The filmmaker Jim Jarmusch is old school. He writes all his scripts out by hand
and then dictates them to a typist. Ideas are jotted down in small,
color-coordinated notebooks and, despite the presence of an iPad and iPhone in
his life, he doesn't have email. ''I don't have enough time as it is to read a
book or make music, or see my friends,'' he said. ''People don't believe me,
too. They think I'm just saying that because I don't want to give it to them.
But no, I do not have email.''

So his interest in vampires, the subject of his latest movie, ''Only Lovers Left
Alive,'' is hardly modish: He hasn't seen ''Twilight'' or ''True Blood'' or read
Anne Rice, but can recount the origin of one of the first English vampire
stories, which dates to around 1816. His film, opening April 11, stars Tom
Hiddleston and Tilda Swinton as Adam and Eve, an ur-cool bloodsucking couple
whose love spans centuries and continents -- he lives in crumbling Detroit; she
in seedy, tangled Tangier. They're united as much by their creative and literary
appetites -- he's a musician, she's a reader -- as by their darker urges. In
some ways, Mr. Jarmusch said, it's quite a personal film.

Mr. Jarmusch could be called vampiric, too, and not just for his predominantly
black wardrobe and movie-villain-like nimbus of silver hair, which he has styled
and cut himself since he was a boy. At 61, he still has an unquenched cultural
thirst: old school but with a tremendous jones for new (or new-to-him) projects.
His catholic tastes reflect the cross-pollinating downtown artistic life that
flourished in tandem with his early career.

Through Thursday, the Film Society of Lincoln Center is offering a
retrospective, ''Permanent Vacation,'' on his 11 feature films, several shorts
and music videos, including some for repeat collaborators like Jack White and
Tom Waits. More than three decades into filmmaking, Mr. Jarmusch remains the
rare indie director who achieved critical success (and four prizes at Cannes)
and enough prestige to cast bankable movie stars like Cate Blanchett and Johnny
Depp, and yet never made a move toward Hollywood, never even leapt at directing
a commercial. Instead he has maintained, in movies and music, his own wry, rad
vision.

''For my generation of European film nerds, he was pretty much the first who
showed us America through the eyes of an American alien,'' said Ms. Swinton, who
has made three films with him. As a student, she saw ''Stranger Than Paradise,''
his 1984 breakthrough, and ever since, ''he has been a consistent North Star for
me,'' she wrote in an email, ''a reliable idiosyncratic bass note under the
anthem of generica sounding around him.''

The film is part of a productive swoop for Mr. Jarmusch. It's the first in which
his five-year-old band, Sqürl, provides much of the soundtrack, in collaboration
with the composer and lutist Jozef van Wissem; alongside musicians like Zola
Jesus and Yasmine Hamdan, they have played shows in Berlin, Paris and New York
to promote the accompanying album, from ATP Recordings. Coming projects include
a quasi-documentary about the Stooges (''a little poetic essay,'' Mr. Jarmusch
said); an opera about Nikola Tesla, in collaboration with his friend the
composer Phil Kline and the international director Robert Wilson; and another
feature, about a bus driver and poet in Paterson, N.J., that Mr. Jarmusch wrote
in the years he waited for ''Only Lovers'' to come together.

''I take on a lot more now,'' he said, partly out of age, experience and desire,
and partly out of professional gumption.

Hemmed in by financing, ''Only Lovers Left Alive'' is the first movie he's shot
digitally, a concession (he prefers film) but one he eventually liked. ''The
things I hate about digital are daylight depths of field and skin tones,'' he
said, neither of which were a problem in a movie about extra-pale creatures who
wither in sun. After a long hiatus, he also started playing guitar again,
because music making is more immediate than film, and also because he started to
wonder, ''Why don't I use my left hand for anything?''

''I had this period where I would try shaving or brushing my teeth with my left
hand,'' he said. ''It's like, what the hell, it's got to have something in your
brain that helps it. So then I thought: O.K., I'll pick up the guitar again. You
use both hands.''

Mr. Jarmusch is nocturnal, which is why his films so often take place at night;
sitting recently at B Bar, the '80s-era haunt in the East Village, he seemed to
waken as the midafternoon light faded. He has long had a loft on the Lower East
Side, and a place in the Catskills, too -- ''that saves my sanity,'' he said --
with his longtime partner Sara Driver, also a filmmaker. He came to New York
from Akron, Ohio, for college in the 1970s and never left, baking himself into a
scene that produced DIY rock stars and idiosyncratic auteurs.

''What I loved when I came here from Ohio is that I realized, you could be the
weirdest person in the world and then walk around, and in three blocks, you're
going to see someone way weirder than you,'' he said.

Though he misses the wildness of those days (in the SoHo of the late '70s, ''I
looked out my window at about 3:30 a.m., and I saw a man walking a llama down
Prince Street''), ''I'm not nostalgic,'' he said. ''Because New York's only
about change and conning everybody out of whatever they have. That's just what
New York is.''

If his work has eccentric tonal similarities -- long, slow takes; a penchant for
black-and-white; evocative, obscure music; tinder-dry humor -- Mr. Jarmusch has
applied them to familiar genres, like westerns (''Dead Man,'' with Mr. Depp),
martial arts-gangster flicks (''Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai'' with Forest
Whitaker) and dark rom-coms (''Broken Flowers,'' with Bill Murray, his
highest-grossing film to date).

He conceived ''Only Lovers Left Alive'' as a tender romance. Vampires were, to
him, a way to sneak in an overview of cultural history. John Hurt plays an
undead Christopher Marlowe, now writing in Tangier; in Detroit, Adam and Eve
point out Jack White's childhood home. A wall of fame includes portraits of
their illustrious friends like Mark Twain, Franz Schubert and Rodney Dangerfield
-- all Mr. Jarmusch's suggestions. In under two minutes of conversation at B
Bar, he moved seamlessly from Godard to a 1955 Droopy Dog cartoon to Beethoven's
productivity. Mr. Jarmusch quit smoking a few years ago, and we drank tea, not
coffee. But otherwise, it could've been a scene in one of his movies.

In the new film, Adam is a reluctant virtuoso who shares Mr. Jarmusch's affinity
for avant drone rock (with lute). ''He has a weakness that he wants to hear his
own music echo back,'' Mr. Jarmusch said. ''That's not a smart thing to do, if
you're trying to live undercover. Unlike Eve -- she has no need for that, she's
full of wonder at things, and that's enough for her.''

He thought a bit. As a filmmaker who has always played coy with popularity, ''I
have his weakness,'' Mr. Jarmusch said. ''I think she's more enlightened
somehow.''

Tom Waits had a different, more charitable take. ''While Jim toils alone,'' he
said, ''as all great men must, his films freely roam the world, like weather
balloons that astound and awe those here on the ground.''

He also couldn't resist pinging his friend. ''I think Leavenworth was good for
Jim,'' he wrote, lying and deadpan even in an email. ''It disciplined him and
gave him a sense of containment and appreciation for the austere. In metal shop,
he made a camera out of a Coke bottle and piece of pipe.'' His color palette,
gray tones and shadows, was ''informed by the bits of rat hair and cobwebs that
decorated his cinder-block cell.''

Mr. Jarmusch, who started in bands before movies, has always enjoyed communion
with songwriters. He's studying Arabic pop via Ms. Hamdan, a Lebanese singer who
appears in the film, and he can as readily name-drop the rapper and producer
El-P as the conductor Claudio Abbado.

''He's definitely not just a director who does some music, he's definitely a
musician,'' said Deborah Kee Higgins, the co-director with her husband, Barry
Hogan, of ATP Recordings and the roving festival All Tomorrow's Parties. Mr.
Jarmusch was its curator in 2010. As part of the noise trio Sqürl, ''he's got
his own sound,'' Mr. Hogan said. ''It's not for the faint of heart, but it's
really great.''

With film, Mr. Jarmusch likes to improvise, writing new pages, adding scenes
when locations strike him and shooting as much as he can. He works ''as the
musician he is,'' Ms. Swinton said, ''assembling and tickling up a rhythm and a
relaxedness in the scene by extended 'jamming' before eventually laying down
tracks. I happen to love this free-fall way of working.''

He rehearses his actors, but only in scenes that will never be in the movie, a
technique to keep their reactions fresh. In ''Ghost Dog,'' Mr. Whitaker plays a
loner urban samurai. To prepare, they roamed the East Village, Mr. Whitaker in
character. ''He carried a practice wooden sword in his backpack, and he was
dressed like Ghost Dog, right, and he hardly speaks -- it's super intense,'' Mr.
Jarmusch said, especially when he whipped out the weapon to practice martial
arts in East River Park, to the delight of nearby schoolchildren. Ghost Dog even
went to get a slice. (Mr. Jarmusch said he hopes to translate the film into a TV
series, with Mr. Whitaker and the rapper RZA involved, and have someone else
direct.)

Mr. Jarmusch's real-life stories easily equal, or maybe surpass, the narrative
leaps of his movies. ''A lot of strange things happen, yeah, for sure,'' he
said. ''It's sort of been my way. I have a lot of weird experiences by not
having a plan. I have that, too, while filmmaking. I have this motto of: It's
hard to get lost when you don't know where you're going.''

Which is not to say that Mr. Jarmusch wants to live forever, extending his
self-proclaimed dilettanteness into the centuries, like his loving vampires. ''I
like that there's an end,'' he said, putting on his metal voice. '' 'Because
that's the way I like it baby. I don't want to live forever.' That's from a
Motörhead song.''

But as an aficionado of decay, he has, of course, imagined his own demise. The
Zoroastrians, an ancient Iranian religious group, ''get eaten by vultures,'' he
said. ''They put their dead bodies on a mountaintop, and they get eaten. I would
love that.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/06/movies/this-time-jim-jarmusch-is-kissing-vampi
res.html

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Jim Jarmusch, whose new film, ''Only Lovers Left Alive,'' opens
on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR1)
Jim Jarmusch, above, at the B Bar in the East Village and left, in 1984. Below,
Tilda Swinton in his new film ''Only Lovers Left Alive.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHAD
BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
EVERETT COLLECTION/REX USA
SONY PICTURES CLASSICS)
From left, Richard Edson, Eszter Balint and John Lurie in ''Stranger Than
Paradise'' (1984). (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAMUEL GOLDWYN FILMS/EVERETT COLLECTION)
Tom Waits as a prisoner in a scene from the movie ''Down by Law'' (1986).
(PHOTOGRAPH BY CINESTHESIA PRODUCTIONS INC.)
Johnny Depp in ''Dead Man'' (1995), written and directed by Mr. Jarmusch.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTINE PARRY/MIRAMAX)
Forest Whitaker in ''Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai'' (1999). (PHOTOGRAPH BY
ABBOT GENSER/ARTISAN ENTERTAINMENT)
From left, the musicians GZA and RZA with Bill Murray in ''Coffee and
Cigarettes'' (2003). (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM JARMUSCH/UNITED ARTISTS)
 Mr. Murray and Sharon Stone in a scene from  ''Broken Flowers'' (2005).
(PHOTOGRAPH BY FOCUS FEATURES) (AR12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


