                             1242 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Found Everything, Tried Everything, All His Own Way

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; ART REVIEW;
Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1434 words


Get confused is the first and last message of ''Alibis: Sigmar Polke 1963-2010''
at the Museum of Modern Art. And if you think, as I do, that some degree of
continuing bafflement is a healthy reaction to art, this disorienting contact
high of a show is for you.

Polke, who died in 2010 at 69, is usually mentioned in the same breath with two
German near-contemporaries, Anselm Kiefer and Gerhard Richter, as one of the
great European male artists of the postwar years. Of the three, though, he was
the most resistant to branding, and is still the hardest to get a handle on.

In media, he was all over the map: painting (abstract and figurative), drawing,
photography, collage, sculpture, film, installation, performance, sound art; he
did them all, often messy, counterintuitive combinations. Stylistically, he
brushed up against Abstract Expressionism, Pop, Minimalism and Conceptualism,
only to lift their moves and mock them.

He had a thing about making art from weird materials: tawdry fabrics,
radioactive pigments, liquid detergent, soot. He put the discipline in
interdisciplinary under stress. His work can be daintily detailed and virtuosic,
but it can also look polish-aversive and incomplete. Sometimes he seems to start
a painting or a drawing, then stop, as if to say: You get the idea.

For a long time, museums and galleries didn't know how to deal with him; that
is, with all of him. The standard procedure was to isolate a slice of work that
had some visual and thematic coherence: pictures sharing a color, say, or ones
with lots of the hand-applied, Benday-style dots that the market pushed as a
Polke signature. The prospect of a survey that brought the full range of his
multifarious output together under one roof must have seemed daunting even to
Polke himself. But that's what MoMA has done in a show that fills all of its
second-floor contemporary galleries, including the atrium, and then some.

The arrangement is mostly by date, though because Polke was an accumulator, a
recycler and a mix-master of styles, that doesn't give viewers a visual
narrative line to follow. Nor have the curators -- Kathy Halbreich and Lanka
Tattersall of MoMA, and Mark Godfrey of the Tate Modern -- provided object
labels. Instead, and this an excellent idea, they've designed a free,
gallery-by-gallery, work-by-work checklist, a kind of Baedeker for the perplexed
that incorporates some useful commentary. (Ms. Halbreich's catalog essay, by the
way, is superb.)

Even with that, the show throws you right in at the deep end. The opening
installation, in the atrium and first gallery, spans 40 years of Polke's career,
looks like a multiartist group show, and just says: Deal with it. And so,
without a compass, you do, taking in at one sweep 1960s drawings of flying
saucers and swastikas; jumpy films shot in Zurich and Papua New Guinea; a big,
fluffy 2003 fabric collage titled ''Season's Hottest Trend''; a giant digital
print tracing the routes of United States Predator drones after Sept. 11.

From this array, you learn that Polke's art was sometimes antagonistically
political, though its politics could be hard to decipher outside a very specific
cultural context. A Pop-ish-looking 1960s painting of neatly folded dress shirts
refers to the ''economic miracle'' that was restoring a defeated Germany to
bourgeois prosperity. A companion picture in the same style -- ''Capitalist
Realism,'' Polke called it -- of a minute figure sucking in sausages nails the
new consumerism as a form of binge-eating-till-you-black-out, designed to induce
amnesia about the wartime past.

That past was Polke's past. He was born in 1941 into a German bourgeois family
that was forced to move from German Silesia (now part of Poland) to
Soviet-occupied East Germany before escaping to West Germany in 1953. As a
teenager, he apprenticed in a stained-glass factory, then from 1961 to 1967
studied at the Arts Academy in Düsseldorf. There he befriended Mr. Richter, who,
like many other students, was under the spell of Joseph Beuys. At once attracted
by, and skeptical of, Beuys's charisma, Polke pulled back and went his own way,
which became the pattern of his life.

''Fathers are depressing,'' Gertrude Stein said. Polke seemed to agree. So did
the antiauthoritarian era during which he came into his own as an artist, and in
which he immersed himself, living and working communally, engaging in love fests
and drug fests, traveling, cameras always in hand, through the Middle East,
Asia, Oceania and the Americas. He remained, in certain ways, an unreconstructed
1960s person to the end of his life, fascinated with esoteric philosophies,
paranormal phenomena, alchemy and psychochemical exploration. These elements
contributed to his outsider identity within the international art world and
shaped his art.

A couple of galleries into the show, you come upon a kind of cosmopolitan hippie
encampment. Films Polke shot in Pakistan and Brazil are playing. Hazy pictures
he took of men on the Bowery line a wall. And there are some fantastic paintings
and drawings that layer 19th-century engravings; fabrics printed with Gauguin's
South Seas beauties; references to ''higher beings'' (Blake, Goya, Dürer); and
images of mushrooms and skulls.

In a show that has the variety and novelty of a souk, hierarchies of ''value''
evaporate. High versus low, modern versus traditional, art versus craft, genuine
versus inauthentic: None of these, Polke suggests, are really opposites. And
even art he derides he takes seriously. He lampoons the pretensions of painterly
abstraction -- its egocentricity, its political escapism -- but he also sticks
up for it. How could you not defend an art that the Third Reich condemned as
''degenerate''?

Abstraction also gave Polke a pretext to go wild with the alchemic outré:
Arsenic, meteorite dust, coffee and soap were precious work materials. And even
in his abstraction, politics was never far away. A series of auralike
photographs made by placing radioactive uranium on photographic plates had to
have a loaded meaning for someone raised in the shadow of the Cold War.
Semiabstract depictions of wooden watchtowers, traditional German hunting
perches, take on inescapable associations with death camp architecture.

Yet even in these ominous pictures, he fools around, delights in deviance,
frustrates interpretive closure. One watchtower is painted on garishly cheery
floral fabric; another is done on Bubble Wrap. A third has been washed with a
light-sensitive silver oxide solution that will darken to black over time,
obliterating the image.

Accident, serendipitous or engineered, became the foundation for much of Polke's
late work: paintings based on commercial printing errors or on images the artist
dragged across screens of copying machines. And in 2006, he went back to his
beginnings with a commission for stained-glass window design from the
Grossmünster cathedral in Zurich, home church to Huldrych Zwingli, an
iconoclastic force in the Protestant Reformation.

Seven of Polke's windows are devoted to the theme of the Creation, and he turned
them into the equivalent of a 1960s light show: abstract compositions made from
clusters of thin-sliced, odd-shaped, color-dyed agates that suggest cellular
forms. You see them in a video at the end of the show, images of primal slime
with a sunlit, mescaline glow.

Unlike Mr. Richter and Mr. Kiefer, Polke remains something of a puzzle when
taken piece by piece. There are powerful things at MoMA, but also scraps,
doodles, studies, toss-offs that can make you think, ''Why am I looking at
this?'' It's easy to envision a more tightly edited take on this artist, one
that would make him look more ordinarily Great. But it turns out that his career
is more interesting and unusual when seen episodically, mixed up, en masse. He
has this, and other things, in common with Mike Kelley (1954-2012), whose survey
at MoMA PS 1 last fall feels, in retrospect, like a bookend to the Polke show.

Both artists are perplexing in similar ways. Their art is both protean and of a
piece, riddled with weaknesses -- fussbudgety viewers can have a field day with
Polke; they did with Kelley -- that add up to a strength. Museums want
masterpieces, but Polke, though he produced some, was into process, not
perfection. Art history wants wrap-ups, final accounts. The Polke retrospective
is such an account, written with commas, colons, semicolons, dashes, ellipses,
parentheses, but no periods, no full stops.

''Alibis: Sigmar Polke 1963-2010'' opens on Saturday and remains on view through
Aug. 3 at the Museum of Modern Art; 212-708-9400, moma.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/18/arts/design/a-sigmar-polke-retrospective-opens
-at-moma.html

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Alibis: Sigmar Polke 1963-2010: ''Dr. Berlin,'' 1969-74, a
painting in this Polke retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
PRIVATE COLLECTION, 2014 ESTATE OF SIGMAR POLKE/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS),
NEW YORK -- VG BILD-KUNST, BONN) (C25)
Above, ''Watchtower,'' 1984, one of a series of such depictions, this one
painted on a patterned fabric
and top left, ''The Illusionist,'' 2007. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MUSEUM OF MODERN ART,
2014 ESTATE OF SIGMAR POLKE/ ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK -- VG
BILD-KUNST, BONN
JENNIFER AND JOHN EAGLE AND THE RACHOFSKY COLLECTION, 2014 ESTATE OF SIGMAR
POLKE/ARTISTS RIGHTS SOCIETY (ARS), NEW YORK -- VG BILD-KUNST, BONN)
From top, ''Uranium (Pink),'' 1992, chromogenic color prints
gelatin silver print images of destitute men from ''Bowery, New York,'' 1973
 and a scene from one of Sigmar Polke's films. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NICOLE
BENGIVENO/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C28)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


