                             1255 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

After a Drowning, Musical Bones Wash Ashore

BYLINE: By VIVIEN SCHWEITZER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 512 words


Tragic love stories, whether real or fictional, have provided fodder for poets,
playwrights and composers for millenniums. An installment of the composer David
Lang's ''collected stories'' series at Zankel Hall on Thursday evening
highlighted a particularly gruesome story of love gone awry, with a Celtic folk
song about sibling rivalry.

In the ballade ''Two Sisters,'' the jealous older sibling, in love with the same
man as her sister, drowns the girl in the ocean. When the skeleton washes up on
shore, the bones are made into a musical instrument.

Several works in the program were inspired by the story, but it was the
performance of a piece without text that best relayed the drama of the
narrative. In Julia Wolfe's ''Cruel Sister,'' a tone poem played with sizzling
energy by Ensemble Signal and conducted by Brad Lubman, the grim fable is
conveyed with a range of effects, beginning with ominous repeated patterns in
the lower strings, which establish a foreboding mood that grows quickly more
sinister. Cacophonous outbursts, eerie violin lines that unfold over a double
bass drone, frantic pizzicati and an underlying urgency hint at an unpleasant
outcome. The various strumming and plucking effects toward the end of the piece
evoked the harp (the musical incarnation of the dead sister) that figures
prominently at the conclusion.

In comparison, the monochromatic rendition of the ballade ''Cruel Sister'' by
the Irish Sean-nos vocalist Iarla O Lionaird, programmed before Signal's
performance, seemed bland, despite the tartness of the words. The program,
curated by Mr. Lang -- the holder this season of the Richard and Barbara Debs
Composer's Chair at Carnegie Hall -- also featured Nico Muhly's ''The Only
Tune,'' inspired by the same subject albeit with slight tweaks. (The sister
drowns in a mill pond and is resurrected as a fiddle instead of a harp.)

Mr. Muhly, on keyboard, performed his version with the folk singer and
instrumentalist Sam Amidon and the violist Nadia Sirota. Mr. Amidon's unemotive
voice crooned the deconstructed lyrics -- featuring ''oh the dreadful wind and
rain'' as a recurring motif -- over simple banjo melodies, electronics and Mr.
Muhly's chords, with Ms. Sirota providing additional support. There were
strikingly cacophonic moments, but the work often sounded facile.

To open the event, Mr. Lang recruited Uncluded, a duo featuring the
singer-songwriter Kimya Dawson and Aesop Rock, a hip-hop artist. In the program
book, Mr. Lang wrote that Ms. Dawson's songs, even the ones not specifically
about love or sadness, fit the theme of the evening because they made him ''feel
open to the possibility that something painful might happen and that I might
have to feel it. And that is painful enough.''

With James Lynch on electric guitar, the duo offered a range of heartfelt,
vulnerable songs -- including the quirky ''Delicate Cycle'' -- that meshed Aesop
Rock's (not always intelligible) rapping and Ms. Dawson's feathery voice.

The ''collected stories'' series runs through Tuesday at Zankel Hall;
212-247-7800; carnegiehall.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/28/arts/music/collected-stories-at-zankel-hall-ex
plores-a-tragic-tale.html

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: collected stories:  Ensemble Signal, conducted by Brad Lubman,
center, with the composer Julia Wolfe, performed ''Cruel Sister'' at Zankel
Hall. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


