                             1232 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 11, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hoping for Asylum, Migrants Strain U.S. Border

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1846 words


HIDALGO, Tex. -- Border Patrol agents in olive uniforms stood in broad daylight
on the banks of the Rio Grande, while on the Mexican side smugglers pulled up in
vans and unloaded illegal migrants.

The agents were clearly visible on that recent afternoon, but the migrants were
undeterred. Mainly women and children, 45 in all, they crossed the narrow river
on the smugglers' rafts, scrambled up the bluff and turned themselves in,
signaling a growing challenge for the immigration authorities.

After six years of steep declines across the Southwest, illegal crossings have
soared in South Texas while remaining low elsewhere. The Border Patrol made more
than 90,700 apprehensions in the Rio Grande Valley in the past six months, a 69
percent increase over last year.

The migrants are no longer primarily Mexican laborers. Instead they are Central
Americans, including many families with small children and youngsters without
their parents, who risk a danger-filled journey across Mexico. Driven out by
deepening poverty but also by rampant gang violence, increasing numbers of
migrants caught here seek asylum, setting off lengthy legal procedures to
determine whether they qualify.

The new migrant flow, largely from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, is
straining resources and confounding Obama administration security strategies
that work effectively in other regions. It is further complicating President
Obama's uphill push on immigration, fueling Republican arguments for more border
security before any overhaul.

With detention facilities, asylum offices and immigration courts overwhelmed,
enough migrants have been released temporarily in the United States that back
home in Central America people have heard that those who make it to American
soil have a good chance of staying.

''Word has gotten out that we're giving people permission and walking them out
the door,'' said Chris Cabrera, a Border Patrol agent who is vice president of
the local of the National Border Patrol Council, the agents' union. ''So they're
coming across in droves.''

In Mexican border cities like Reynosa, just across the river, migrants have
become easy prey for Mexican drug cartels that have seized control of the human
smuggling business, heightening perils for illegal crossers and security risks
for the United States.

At the Rio Grande that afternoon, the smugglers calculatedly sent the migrants
across at a point where the water is too shallow for Border Patrol boats that
might have turned them back safely at the midriver boundary between the United
States and Mexico.

A Border Patrol chief, Raul Ortiz, watched in frustration from a helicopter
overhead. ''Somebody probably told them they're going to get released,'' he
said. As agents booked them, the migrants waited quietly: a Guatemalan mother
carrying a toddler with a baby bottle, another with an infant wrapped in
blankets.

A 9-year-old girl said she was traveling by herself, hoping to rejoin her mother
and two brothers in Louisiana. But she did not know where in Louisiana they
were. After a two-week journey from Honduras, her only connection to them was
one telephone number on a scrap of paper.

A Honduran woman said the group had followed the instructions of the Mexican
smugglers. ''They just told us to cross and start walking,'' she said.

Other migrants were trying to elude the Border Patrol, and within the hour Chief
Ortiz saw his interdiction efforts working according to plan. A short way
upriver in deeper water, agents radioed that they had turned back a raft with
eight ''bodies.''

Moments later a surveillance blimp cruising nearby detected people lying under
dense brush. As the helicopter swooped low, the pilot spotted sneakers at the
base of the trees. Agents on the ground flushed out nine migrants, all men.

''Technology, air operations, ground units, that's the complete package,'' Chief
Ortiz said.

The new migrants head for South Texas because it is the shortest distance from
Central America. Many young people ride across Mexico on top of freight trains,
jumping off in Reynosa.

The Rio Grande twists and winds, and those who make it across can quickly hide
in sugar cane fields and orchards. In many places it is a short sprint to
shopping malls and suburban streets where smugglers pick up migrants to continue
north.

Border Patrol officials said apprehensions were higher partly because they were
catching many more of the illegal crossers. About 3,000 agents in the Rio Grande
Valley -- 495 new this year -- patrol in helicopters and boats, on all-terrain
vehicles and horseback. Drones and aerostat blimps are watching from the sky.
Under a new strategy, border agencies are working with federal drug agents, the
F.B.I. and Texas police to break up Mexican smuggling organizations by
prosecuting operatives on this side of the border.

But whereas Mexicans can be swiftly returned by the Border Patrol, migrants from
noncontiguous countries must be formally deported and flown home by other
agencies. Even though federal flights are leaving South Texas every day, Central
Americans are often detained longer.

Women with children are detained separately. But because the nearest facility
for ''family units'' is in Pennsylvania, families apprehended in the Rio Grande
Valley are likely to be released while their cases proceed, a senior
deportations official said.

Minors without parents are turned over to the Department of Health and Human
Services, which holds them in shelters that provide medical care and schooling
and tries to send them to relatives in the United States. The authorities here
are expecting 35,000 unaccompanied minors this year, triple the number two years
ago.

Under asylum law, border agents are required to ask migrants if they are afraid
of returning to their countries. If the answer is yes, migrants must be detained
until an immigration officer interviews them to determine if the fear is
credible. If the officer concludes it is, the migrant can petition for asylum.
An immigration judge will decide whether there is a ''well-founded fear of
persecution'' based on race, religion, nationality, political opinion or
''membership in a particular social group.''

Immigration officials said they had set the bar intentionally low for the
initial ''credible fear'' test, to avoid turning away a foreigner in danger. In
2013, 85 percent of fear claims were found to be credible, according to federal
figures.

As more Central Americans have come, fear claims have spiked, more than doubling
in 2013 to 36,026 from 13,931 in 2012.

The chances have not improved much to win asylum in the end, however. In 2012,
immigration courts approved 34 percent of asylum petitions from migrants facing
deportation -- 2,888 cases nationwide. Many Central Americans say they are
fleeing extortion or forced recruitment by criminal gangs. But immigration
courts have rarely recognized those threats as grounds for asylum.

Yet because of immense backlogs in the courts -- with the average wait for a
hearing currently at about 19 months -- claiming fear of return has allowed some
Central Americans to prolong their time in the United States.

At the big immigration detention center at Port Isabel, which serves much of the
Rio Grande Valley, half of about 1,100 detainees at any given time are asylum
seekers, officials said. With the asylum system already stretched, the nearest
officers are in Houston, doing interviews by video conference. In 2013, the
closest immigration court, in Harlingen, was swamped with new cases, becoming
even more backlogged.

Detention beds fill up, and migrants deemed to present no security risk are
released under supervision, officials said, with their next court hearing often
more than a year away.

At their now teeming front-line stations along the river, Border Patrol
officials readily admit they are not set up to hold migrants for long. Agents
and migrants alike refer to the cells there as ''hieleras'' -- freezers.

In cinder-block rooms with concrete benches and a toilet in the corner, there
are no chairs, beds, showers or hot food. On a recent day, migrants caked in
river mud were packed shoulder to shoulder, many on the floor, trying to warm up
in space blankets the Border Patrol provides. Some held their fingers to their
lips to signal hunger.

But agents said they have accelerated their work so more migrants are deported
directly from Border Patrol stations in as little as two days. Officials said
few migrants -- only 4 percent -- claim fear of returning when they are with the
Border Patrol.

Rather, migrants are claiming fear after they are sent to longer-term detention
centers like Port Isabel, leading officials to suspect they have been coached by
other detainees.

But lawyers for asylum seekers said migrants frequently report that Border
Patrol agents never asked them about their concerns, or that they were too
exhausted or intimidated to express them in the hours after being caught.

''A lot of times these people had very real, legitimate fears,'' said Kimi
Jackson, director of the South Texas Pro Bono Asylum Representation Project,
known as ProBAR. ''But it seems to them they were not asked the questions by the
Border Patrol in the type of situation where they could talk freely.''

Lawyers said officials had started to make it far harder for migrants to win
release by requiring many more to post bond, with rates rising to as high as
$10,000.

That news had not reached migrants at a shelter run by nuns in Reynosa. Several
said they were heading to the United States to seek ''asilo.'' They could say
truthfully they were afraid to go home.

Luis Fernando Herrera Perdomo, 19, said he fled Honduras after gang members shot
and killed a brother who was sleeping in the bed next to his.

A 29-year-old former soldier from El Salvador, who asked to be identified only
as Jesús, said he left his wife and three children to escape a gang that came
gunning for him because he arrested some of its members while in the army.

In Reynosa, the dangers had only multiplied. José Rubén Hernández, 32, said he
had been kidnapped for two weeks while Mexican smugglers extorted $10,000 in
ransom from his frantic family in Honduras.

''We are a gold mine for the cartels,'' he said.

Other migrants had been imprisoned in a smugglers' stash house until Mexican
military troops stormed it to free them. Two Hondurans who had just arrived at
the shelter displayed new bruises, saying they had been beaten that morning in a
rail yard by smugglers associated with the Zetas, a brutal Mexican cartel.

But the migrants still intended to hire new smugglers and try to cross. ''I'm
still alive and I have faith in God, so I will try to make it over to the other
side,'' Mr. Herrera said.

Chief Ortiz said agents were speeding deportations to change the message
reaching Central America.

''It cost the migrant an awful lot of money and time and effort to get here,''
he said. ''If I send somebody back to Guatemala or Honduras, chances are they're
going to sit there and say, 'You know what, I don't think I'm going to try this
again.' ''

''The word may get out,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/11/us/poverty-and-violence-push-new-wave-of-migra
nts-toward-us.html

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Border Patrol agents were waiting on the banks of the Rio
Grande recently when about 45 migrants, mainly women and children, were placed
in rafts by smugglers and crossed the river. (A1)
A group of migrants recently crossed the Rio Grande, above, into South Texas,
where they were met and detained by Border Patrol agents, left. Below at left,
two brothers from El Salvador were among the new arrivals taken to an
immigration processing center in Brownsville, Tex. More photographs at
nytimes.com/national. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)
MAP: Migrants choose the shortest route from Central America.
 CHART: Illegal Crossings  In Rio Grande Valley: Migrants crossing the South
Texas border  illegally in recent years are no longer  primarily from Mexico,
but from other  countries, mainly in Central America. (Source: U.S. Border
Patrol) (A16)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


