                             1230 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Would Johnson Do?

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; WHITE HOUSE MEMO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1306 words


WASHINGTON -- Two days before joining other presidents in Texas to commemorate
the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act, President Obama tackled enduring
inequality himself on Tuesday, in this case economic disparity based on gender.

His action? Signing an executive order barring federal contractors from
retaliating against employees who discuss their pay and a memo seeking
statistics on contractor salaries.

If the photo-friendly ceremony in the East Room was not exactly the stuff of
Mount Rushmore, it did reflect a broader question about the state of the
presidency a half-century after Lyndon B. Johnson enacted monumental change in
American society: Is it even possible for a president to do big things anymore?

For better or worse, Johnson represented the high-water mark for American
presidents pushing through sweeping legislation -- not just the Civil Rights
Act, but the Voting Rights Act, Medicare, Medicaid, the Fair Housing Act and
major measures on immigration, education, gun control and clean air and water.
No president since has approached that level of legislative success, although
there are people who argue that is a good thing because government should not be
so intrusive.

But Mr. Obama and many Democrats are not among them. At this stage of his
presidency, Mr. Obama has become a symbol of liberal frustration over his
inability to use government to bring about change. Republicans publicly, and
some Democrats privately, blame Mr. Obama for not doing more to work across the
aisle. The White House and many Democrats scoff at that, laying stalemate at the
feet of what they call an obstructionist Republican Party.

Certainly, Mr. Obama can point to landmark actions from his first term, most
notably his health care program, the most significant expansion of the social
safety net since the Johnson era. He also pushed through an economic stimulus
intended to pull the country back from the abyss and Wall Street regulations
devised to avert another crisis. But those actions were accomplished in his
first two years, back when he had a Democratic Congress and before sky-high
deficits brought on an age of austerity.

Mr. Obama now confronts the likelihood that he may not come close to anything
like those first 24 months in his final six years in office. Day in and day out,
the president with the grand aspirations finds himself signing orders and memos
that barely move the needle toward the goals he outlined for himself.

''I'm going to do my small part,'' he said on Tuesday as he signed the executive
measures.

Jeffrey A. Engel, director of the Center for Presidential History at Southern
Methodist University, said Mr. Obama's health program might ultimately be seen
as similar to the lasting legacies of the Great Society or the New Deal.

But the reality of the modern presidency, he said, is that big things are best
done right away before second terms devolve into an exercise in aggravation.
''It's more difficult to achieve massive change after that initial mandate
because money and media and constant pinpricks can very effectively take the
wind out of any president's sails very quickly,'' Mr. Engel said.

When domestic prospects recede, presidents often turn to foreign policy, where
they have fewer constraints and Congress is a bit player. Mr. Obama inherited an
empowered national security presidency from George W. Bush and has used it to
wage a vigorous drone war and preside over an expansive surveillance program in
the pursuit of terrorists.

But he has also had a difficult time dealing with Russia, Syria and the Middle
East peace process, and has projected a more restrained American role in the
world. If anything, Mr. Obama seems intent on being the anti-Johnson by
withdrawing troops from Iraq and Afghanistan rather than letting an overseas
quagmire like Vietnam come to dominate his presidency and overshadow any
domestic accomplishments.

Washington has changed in many ways since the Great Society. Johnson enjoyed
such large Democratic majorities that even when his party lost 47 House seats in
the 1966 midterm elections, Democrats still held 61 more than Republicans. The
country faced crises both parties felt compelled to address. And political deal
making then was different with pork projects called earmarks that are now banned
-- seedier, perhaps, but also effective.

Since the Johnson era, the country has grown more skeptical about government.
Even Mr. Obama's biggest legislative project, the health care program, was based
on helping uninsured Americans buy coverage in the private market, rather than
setting up a government-run system like Medicare. But it still stirred
widespread opposition.

And the political parties, both ideologically diverse in the 1960s, have grown
more homogeneous.

''The nature of politics has changed,'' said Jennifer Palmieri, the White House
communications director. ''The electorate is more polarized. I think often
members of Congress are more concerned with how the voter on the more
enthusiastic side of their party is going to react than they would have 50 years
ago. That's a real change.''

Still, few things irritate Mr. Obama and his team more than the comparison to
Johnson, which they consider facile and unfair. The notion that Mr. Obama should
exert more energy in cajoling, bargaining and even pressuring lawmakers is a
common assessment on both sides of the aisle, but it remains unpersuasive in the
Oval Office, despite Johnson's successes.

''When he lost that historic majority, and the glow of that landslide victory
faded, he had the same problems with Congress that most presidents at one point
or another have,'' Mr. Obama told The New Yorker's David Remnick last year. ''I
say that not to suggest that I'm a master wheeler-dealer, but rather to suggest
that there are some structural institutional realities to our political system
that don't have much to do with schmoozing.''

Not everyone accepts that. Marvin Watson, who was Johnson's chief of staff, said
he made no judgment about Mr. Obama or any other president but rejected the
notion that Johnson lost sway over time.

''There's not much difference,'' he said. ''They talk about that because they're
trying to find an excuse why it was done at one time and why it's not been done
since.''

Mr. Watson agreed that Johnson had a powerful majority but noted that he made a
point of negotiating with Republicans anyway. ''We just had a feeling that all
positions should be represented,'' he said.

Mark K. Updegrove, director of the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library and
Museum and the organizer of this week's conference celebrating the Civil Rights
Act, said comparisons were hard to make.

''Washington was fundamentally different when L.B.J. was king of the jungle,''
he said. ''There are many factors there, but one is that I don't think lawmakers
know each other as well as they did in L.B.J.'s day. One of the ways he was able
to get things done is he read the motivations of his colleagues so well. And
that was because he knew them so well.''

After Mr. Obama experienced a year of scant legislative progress -- he failed to
push through even a modest gun control bill in 2013 after the schoolhouse
massacre in Newtown, Conn. -- the president has turned to a strategy of enacting
smaller executive actions and using his bully pulpit to persuade states and
companies to pick up the cause of, say, raising the minimum wage. And he still
has the power to make major changes unilaterally, as he plans to do through
environmental regulations of greenhouse gas emissions.

''He would prefer that Congress pick up this legislation and pass it,'' Ms.
Palmieri said after Tuesday's event on pay equity. ''It irks him sometimes. But
he's also a pragmatic guy.''

She added: ''Washington's not the end-all, be-all. It's the United States of
America, and he's the leader of it.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/09/us/politics/for-obama-presidency-lyndon-b-john
son-looms-large.html

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Lyndon B. Johnson delivering a speech in 1964 during
the signing of the Civil Rights  Act. He enjoyed a level of legislative success
that presidents since have found hard to match. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEYSTONE/GETTY
IMAGES) (A13)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


