                             1275 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Snowden's Story, Behind the Scenes

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1607 words


NO PLACE TO HIDEEdward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State

By Glenn Greenwald Illustrated. 259 pages. Metropolitan Books. $27.

The title of the journalist Glenn Greenwald's impassioned new book, ''No Place
to Hide,'' comes from a chilling observation made in 1975 by Senator Frank
Church, then chairman of a select committee on intelligence. The United States
government, he said, had perfected ''a technological capability that enables us
to monitor the messages that go through the air.'' That capability, he added,
could at any time ''be turned around on the American people, and no American
would have any privacy left, such is the capability to monitor everything:
telephone conversations, telegrams, it doesn't matter. There would be no place
to hide.''

That was nearly 40 years ago, and as the documents leaked last year by the
former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden revealed, the N.S.A.'s
ability to spy on our daily lives has grown exponentially to Orwellian
proportions. The documents provided by Mr. Snowden revealed that the agency has
an ability to monitor or collect information from hundreds of millions of people
around the globe, that it has broken into the communications links of major data
centers across the world, that it has circumvented or cracked much of the
encryption that protects sensitive data on the Internet, and that, according to
its own records, it has broken privacy laws or exceeded its authority thousands
of times a year. The first journalist Mr. Snowden approached by email was Glenn
Greenwald, a columnist for The Guardian and former constitutional lawyer who had
frequently written about civil liberties, the dangers of enhanced executive
power, and surveillance abuses in post-Sept. 11 America. (Mr. Greenwald has
since left The Guardian to work with Pierre Omidyar, the founder of eBay, on
building a new media venture, which includes the news site The Intercept, of
which Mr. Greenwald, Laura Poitras and Jeremy Scahill are founding editors.)

In ''No Place to Hide,'' Mr. Greenwald recounts the story of how he and Ms.
Poitras, a documentary filmmaker, traveled to Hong Kong to meet with Mr. Snowden
and the race to publish articles based on the documents he provided, all the
while fearful of authorities' closing in. The outlines of this story will be
familiar to readers who followed it in real time last year, and to readers of
the recent book ''The Snowden Files'' (by the Guardian reporter Luke Harding),
just as much of the material here about the N.S.A. will be familiar to readers
of articles that have appeared in The Guardian (many with Mr. Greenwald's
byline), The Washington Post and The New York Times.

''No Place to Hide'' is enlivened by reproductions of dozens of fascinating
documents from the Snowden archive that help illustrate the N.S.A.'s methodology
and that showcase its strange corporatelike boosterism (complete with sometimes
corny graphics). And Mr. Greenwald fleshes out his portrait of Mr. Snowden with
fresh observations from their exchanges. He amplifies our understanding of the
N.S.A.'s sweeping ambitions, methods and global reach, and provides detailed
insights into what he calls the agency's ''corporate partnerships,'' which
''extend beyond intelligence and defense contractors to include the world's
largest and most important Internet corporations and telecoms.''

For instance, the agency's Stormbrew program, Mr. Greenwald writes, ''gives the
N.S.A. access to Internet and telephone traffic that enters the United States at
various 'choke points' on U.S. soil. It exploits the fact that the vast majority
of the world's Internet traffic at some point flows through the U.S.
communications infrastructure -- a residual by-product of the central role that
the United States had played in developing the network.'' According to the
N.S.A., he says, Stormbrew ''is currently comprised of very sensitive
relationships with two U.S. telecom providers (cover terms ARTIFICE and
WOLFPOINT)''; the identity of such corporate partners, he adds, ''is one of the
most closely guarded secrets in the N.S.A.''

Mr. Greenwald portrays Mr. Snowden -- regarded by some as a heroic
whistle-blower, by others as a traitor -- as a courageous idealist who felt he
needed to act on his beliefs. That outlook, Mr. Greenwald suggests, was partly
shaped by books Mr. Snowden read growing up -- Greek mythology and ''The Hero
With a Thousand Faces'' by Joseph Campbell, which convinced Mr. Snowden that, in
his own words, ''it is we who infuse life with meaning through our actions and
the stories we create with them.''

Mr. Snowden also confided ''with a hint of embarrassment,'' Mr. Greenwald
writes, that video games had taught him certain lessons. As Mr. Snowden put it:
''The protagonist is often an ordinary person, who finds himself faced with
grave injustices from powerful forces and has the choice to flee in fear or to
fight for his beliefs. And history also shows that seemingly ordinary people who
are sufficiently resolute about justice can triumph over the most formidable
adversaries.''

In the course of this book, Mr. Greenwald describes how he received his first
communication from Mr. Snowden on Dec. 1, 2012, though he had no idea who it was
from. The email came from someone calling himself Cincinnatus and urged Mr.
Greenwald to begin using PGP encryption so that Cincinnatus could communicate
with him securely. Busy with other projects, Mr. Greenwald procrastinated about
installing the encryption program, and Mr. Snowden was only able to make contact
with him months later, through Ms. Poitras.

According to Mr. Greenwald, Mr. Snowden would later describe his frustration:
''Here am I ready to risk my liberty, perhaps even my life, to hand this guy
thousands of Top Secret documents from the nation's most secretive agency -- a
leak that will produce dozens if not hundreds of huge journalistic scoops. And
he can't even be bothered to install an encryption program.''

The most gripping sections of ''No Place to Hide'' recount Mr. Greenwald and Ms.
Poitras's 10-day trip to Hong Kong, where they and The Guardian's veteran
correspondent Ewen MacAskill met with Mr. Snowden in his hotel room. Mr.
Greenwald describes the tradecraft they employed (removing batteries from their
cellphones, or placing the phones in the minibar refrigerator) to avoid
detection; his initial five-hour, litigatorlike grilling of Mr. Snowden; and the
''giddy gallows humor'' that later crept into their conversations (''I call the
bottom bunk at Gitmo,'' Mr. Snowden reportedly joked).

Mr. Greenwald writes that Mr. Snowden said one turning point in his decision to
become a leaker came in 2010, when he was working as an N.S.A. contractor in
Japan. ''The stuff I saw really began to disturb me,'' Mr. Snowden recalled. ''I
could watch drones in real time as they surveilled the people they might kill.''
He added: ''I watched N.S.A. tracking people's Internet activities as they
typed. I became aware of just how invasive U.S. surveillance capabilities had
become. I realized the true breadth of this system. And almost nobody knew it
was happening''

Substantial sections of this book deal not with Mr. Greenwald's relationship
with Mr. Snowden and the N.S.A., but with his combative view of ''the
establishment media,'' which he has denounced for ''glaring subservience to
political power'' and to which he condescends as inferior to his more activist
kind of journalism.

In ''No Place to Hide,'' Mr. Greenwald is critical of the process by which
publications like The Washington Post, The New York Times and The Guardian speak
with government officials before publishing sensitive articles dealing with
national security issues; he contends that this process allows the ''government
to control disclosures and minimize, even neuter, their impact.'' He also makes
self-dramatizing boasts about his own mission: ''Only audacious journalism could
give the story the power it needed to overcome the climate of fear the
government had imposed on journalists and their sources.''

In one passage, Mr. Greenwald makes the demonstrably false assertion that one
''unwritten rule designed to protect the government is that media outlets
publish only a few such secret documents, and then stop,'' that ''they would
report on an archive like Snowden's so as to limit its impact -- publish a
handful of stories, revel in the accolades of a 'big scoop,' collect prizes, and
then walk away, ensuring that nothing had really changed.'' Many establishment
media outlets obviously continue to pursue the Snowden story. Further, many of
Mr. Greenwald's gross generalizations about the establishment media do a
terrible disservice to the many tenacious investigative reporters who have
broken important stories on some of the very subjects like the war on terror and
executive power that Mr. Greenwald feels so strongly about.

When Mr. Greenwald turns his fervor to the issue of surveillance and its
implications for ordinary citizens' civil liberties, he is far more credible.
Sometimes eloquent. He places the N.S.A.'s current activities in historical
perspective with the F.B.I.'s Cointelpro program to target political groups and
individuals, begun in 1956 and ended in 1971. And he delivers a fierce argument
in defense of the right of privacy, quoting the Supreme Court Justice Louis
Brandeis's famous dissent in the 1928 case Olmstead v. United States, of the
founding fathers' efforts ''to protect Americans in their beliefs, their
thoughts, their emotions and their sensations.''

The makers of our Constitution, Brandeis argued, conferred ''the right to be let
alone.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/13/books/no-place-to-hide-by-glenn-greenwald.html

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTO (C1)
 The journalist Glenn Greenwald  in New York last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDUARDO
MUÑOZ/REUTERS) (C4)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


