                             1286 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Senate Foolishly Rushes In

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 491 words


The Senate is unnecessarily rushing to vote on President Obama's nomination of
David Barron for a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the First
Circuit in Boston, even though the public has yet to see documents written by
Mr. Barron that have raised legitimate concern among civil liberties advocates
on both the left and the right.

Mr. Barron, a Harvard law professor, was a top official in the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Counsel when he wrote two classified memos
justifying the drone strike in Yemen in 2011 that killed Anwar al-Awlaki, an
American citizen accused of being a terrorist.

Following lawsuits brought by the American Civil Liberties Union and The New
York Times, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit last month
ordered the government to release one of those memos to the public, and, on
Tuesday, the White House relented, agreeing to release a redacted version at
some point. Earlier this month it shared the memo with senators behind closed
doors.

This was not enough for Senator Rand Paul, a Republican of Kentucky, who
filibustered Mr. Barron's nomination on Wednesday because, as he said, ''there
is no legal precedent for killing American citizens not directly involved in
combat,'' and ''any nominee who rubber stamps and grants such power to a
president is not worthy of being placed one step away from the Supreme Court.''

The Senate rightly voted 52 to 43 to end the filibuster and advance the
nomination to the floor. Every judicial nominee should receive an up-or-down
vote. But the decision by Senate Democrats to charge ahead to a vote on Mr.
Barron's nomination, scheduled for Thursday, would shut the public out of the
debate because it has not had a chance to consider the memo.

Much of Mr. Paul's speech was an impassioned and articulate defense of the
centrality of due process even for the most reviled. ''This isn't a debate about
transparency,'' he said. ''This is a debate about whether or not American
citizens not involved in combat are guaranteed due process.''

This debate should be about both of these things. The substance of the memos is
a necessary part of any consideration of Mr. Barron's nomination, and only their
public release (assuming the government doesn't black out all the important
parts) will allow the nation to consider and weigh such critical moral and legal
issues. The public has the right to know precisely how Mr. Barron, and the White
House, made the case for killing an American citizen without due process in a
court of law.

In other respects, Mr. Barron appears clearly qualified for the job. Some
senators will vote for him in spite of (or because of) what is in the memos;
some, like Mr. Paul, will vote against him. But what's the rush in pushing
through this vote? A federal judgeship is a lifetime appointment. The American
people should be able to decide for themselves whether their elected
representatives are making the right decision.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/22/opinion/the-senate-foolishly-rushes-in.html

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


