                             1252 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Harmonic Drone Subsides in Britain

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WHITE

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1094 words


LONDON -- Next door to the Royal Albert Hall here is an impressive building that
is still sometimes referred to as the Royal College of Organists -- as indeed it
was in the days when organists had weight to throw around and needed premises
that told you so. Founded in 1864, the college was grand, its membership as
powerful as that of any London club, and its examinations recognized throughout
the world.

The college, struggling for income, moved out long ago to cheaper digs. And now
the body is what its president, Catherine Ennis, euphemistically calls
''virtual'': another word for homeless, and a sad condition to be in on its
150th anniversary.

But Ms. Ennis contends there are things to celebrate. ''We're arguably still the
most significant organization of our kind in existence,'' she said in an
interview, ''and to have been around for a century and half, with a record of
achievement that speaks for itself, is no small thing. So yes, we're
celebrating.''

On the agenda is a year-round program of anniversary concerts, services and an
invitation to organists -- amateur, professional, celebrated or unknown -- to
take part in 150 recitals around the nation. They began in March and are
designed to boost morale.

But the very need to boost morale signals the fact that being an organist today,
at least in Britain, isn't what it was when various luminaries of the instrument
resolved that it deserved a college of its own. ''There's never been a Royal
College of Violinists,'' Ms. Ennis said. ''Or of flutists.''

In the mid-19th century, organists knew where they stood -- and it was at the
top of the musical pecking order, thanks to their association with the church,
which mostly supplied their instruments. According to Ms. Ennis, their average
earnings compared favorably with bank managers and other middle-class
professionals. And the chief among them, with cathedral posts, could hope for
more.

Now, all this has gone. With the decline in organized religion, parish organists
earn token incomes -- if the parish has an organist at all -- and cathedral
organists have suffered declines in influence and pay. Which explains why so
many of the best relocate to America. John Scott -- the former organist of St.
Paul's Cathedral in London, now at St. Thomas Episcopal on Fifth Avenue in New
York -- is a case in point.

Looking beyond Britain, the patterns of decline are mixed. In Germany a
long-established system of church taxes may not provide the revenue it used to,
as secularists increasingly opt out, but still raise enough to ensure that most
parishes can employ musicians and give them a fair wage.

Historically, those taxes have also kept the organs themselves in good repair
and kept in business 180 organ builders in Germany compared with a few in
Britain, said Philipp Klais, who runs Orgelbau Klais, the celebrated Bonn-based
organ builders. ''But this too is changing,'' he said, adding that private
donors now pay for 90 percent of his work, largely because the church now
prefers to spend money on social projects.

''Thankfully, the donors are there,'' Mr. Klais said. ''We are after all the
nation of Bach, and people want to support the great organ tradition associated
with him.''

In France they can't claim Bach as their own, but they do have a comparable
playing tradition that, unlike the British, exists independently of running
choirs, and is exemplified in the enormous 19th-century Romantic instruments
that fill the wall space of Parisian basilicas. The titulaires of these great
monsters always ranked among the leading virtuosi of the day, and still do. And
although their income isn't what it was, they still draw crowds to hear their
grand improvisations on a Sunday morning, with admirers that afford them
something like heroic status.

With no church taxes and no ongoing recognition of organs or organists as
national treasures, Britain seems to be the poor relation. ''Our problems are
obvious,'' said James O'Donnell, organist of Westminster Abbey and past
president of the Royal College of Organists, ''and we're aware that we have to
do something positive about them rather than just raise our hands and say 'Oh
no.' ''

This ''something'' means a shift in the college's objectives. In the past, its
rationale was largely focused on the administering of exams. But now the college
is more of an advocate, with a far broader range of educational activities, like
the RCO Academy, which runs outreach programs to pull in curious youngsters
(sometimes oldsters too) and bring new talent to the organ loft.

There is in fact no shortage of new talent coming forward. A recital at the
Mansion House in London to open the anniversary year showcased notable examples,
including the 16-year-old Henry Websdale from Winchester, and the 23-year-old
Jemima Stephenson, a student at the Royal Academy of Music in London. And
although there were gloomy predictions a few years ago, the number of quality
applicants for organ scholarships at Oxford and Cambridge -- the traditional
route to a career in Britain -- is holding up.

''I'm not aware of any crisis in finding the next generation of organists,'' Mr.
O'Donnell said. ''The problem is that there are so few jobs to enable them to do
it professionally.''

Arguing the case for organs to outsiders, though, is difficult. ''We have an
image problem,'' Ms. Ennis said. Organists have been described as so geekishly
obsessed with pistons, pedals, 32-foot pipes and mechanics that far from being
top dogs of the music business, they sometimes seem barely part of it. One sign
of the difficulties is the dwindling number of concert halls that have organs.

More positively, the organ at the Royal Festival Hall -- which has been out of
action for years -- has just undergone a major restoration. There are dynamic,
glamorous young players on the circuit now, like Cameron Carpenter. And the
ascent of women to the front ranks has supplied a fresh edge. Ms. Ennis is the
second female president in the college's history: The first was Dame Gillian
Weir in the mid-1990s. And there are three British cathedrals now with female
organists, although it's taken a while for them to move up, largely because
organists usually started as choristers and girls were accepted into cathedral
choirs only later.

The obsession with mechanics needs to change too, Mr. O'Donnell said. ''The
important thing for us is to have a sense of ourselves not as organists -- a
breed apart -- but as musicians who happen to the play the organ,'' he said.
''That's the task, after 150 years. We need to reinvent ourselves.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/27/arts/music/once-top-musicians-organists-see-lo
ss-of-relevance.html

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Clockwise from left, the organ at Westminster Abbey
James O'Donnell, the Abbey's organist and past president of the Royal College of
Organists
the restored organ at the Royal Festival Hall
Rosemary Field teaching Tiffany Vong during the Royal College's summer school.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEAN AND CHAPTER OF WESTMINSTER
AMY T. ZIELINSKI/GETTY IMAGES
 SIMON JACOBS / THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF ORGANISTS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


