                             1209 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Imposes 16-Year Term for Manhattan Man in Pipe Bomb Case

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 614 words


A Manhattan man who conspired with a police informer to plant pipe bombs as part
of a jihad against the United States was sentenced to 16 years in a New York
State prison on Tuesday at a hearing with little of the theatrics that had
accompanied his arrest.

Shortly after the defendant, Jose Pimentel, was arrested in November 2011, Mayor
Michael R. Bloomberg held a news conference at City Hall, describing the young
man as a ''total lone wolf'' terrorist, inspired by Al Qaeda's leaders but not
taking orders from them.

By contrast, drama was absent at Mr. Pimentel's sentencing in State Supreme
Court. Justice Thomas Farber said nothing about the seriousness of the crime, as
he quickly imposed a sentence agreed to by prosecutors and Mr. Pimentel's
lawyers.

Mr. Pimentel, wearing a skullcap and an orange prison jumpsuit, declined to
speak, offering neither an apology nor any justification. Besides handcuffs, he
was wearing protective mitts on his hands.

The Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., released a statement saying
Mr. Pimentel's case showed that ''the threat of terrorism is increasingly coming
from radicalized actors living in our communities.''

Mr. Pimentel's lawyers, Lori Cohen and Susan J. Walsh, declined to comment.

Mr. Pimentel, 29, who was reared in a Dominican household in Hamilton Heights,
converted to Islam and began using the name Mohammad Yusuf. Though he never came
close to realizing his plans to become a terrorist, he did start a website
encouraging a terror campaign. He was inspired to take action, prosecutors said,
after Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical cleric, was killed by a drone in Yemen.

After a two-year sting operation involving an undercover officer and two
informers, Mr. Pimentel was arrested in the process of building three pipe bombs
at an apartment belonging to one of the informers, having found instructions on
a pro-Qaeda website, prosecutors said.

Mr. Pimentel's lawyers portrayed him as a gullible young man, down on his luck,
who had been enticed to build bombs by the informer after being plied for months
with free food and marijuana. The evidence against him included hundreds of
hours of recorded conversations during which he talked about bombing cars and
police stations.

But rather than go to trial and argue entrapment, Mr. Pimentel decided last
month to plead guilty to a single count in the indictment -- attempted criminal
possession of a weapon in the first degree -- in return for the 16-year prison
sentence, his lawyers said.

As part of the plea agreement, Mr. Pimentel admitted he had built a pipe bomb
with an informer named Abdul in November 2011, using instructions from Inspire
magazine, an online jihadist publication. He had intended to set off that bomb
and at least two others ''to undermine the support for the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan.''

The bomb had been built cheaply, using an ordinary pipe, sulfur scraped from
matches as an explosive, Christmas tree lights for an ignition device, nails as
shrapnel, and a converted clock, prosecutors said. Two others were under
construction. The police had a videotape of Mr. Pimentel drilling holes in the
pipes, court papers said.

The case drew attention because federal authorities usually handle terrorism
prosecutions. The Federal Bureau of Investigation had monitored Mr. Pimentel but
decided not to pursue an indictment.

But Mr. Vance saw a serious threat in Mr. Pimentel's actions and charged him
under a state antiterrorism law, which was enacted after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Defending the investigation, he said the police and his office had averted a
lethal attack. ''The most important aspect of this case is not what happened but
what didn't,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/26/nyregion/judge-imposes-16-year-term-for-manhat
tan-man-in-pipe-bomb-case.html

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jose Pimentel appearing last month in a Manhattan court to plead
guilty to a count of attempted criminal possession of a weapon. (POOL PHOTO BY
JEFFERSON SIEGEL)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


