                             1200 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Start-Ups Aim to Conquer Space Market

BYLINE: By QUENTIN HARDY and NICK BILTON

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1226 words


SAN FRANCISCO -- It was party time at the Planet Labs satellite factory, in an
unkempt office in the trendy South of Market neighborhood here.

A man in a blue tuxedo shared pancakes with about two dozen young engineers at
the space start-up. The air was filled with the smell of bacon and the voices of
Russian and Japanese astronauts. The astronauts communicated over a video hookup
to the International Space Station, 230 miles above the kitchen, one morning
last month.

''Now we're going to push the boundaries,'' said Chester Gillmore, the company's
director of manufacturing. He was referring to his cooking skills, but he could
just as well have been talking about his 40-employee company, which has already
put dozens of small satellites in space. Once they are connected, they will be
able to provide near-constant images of what is going on back on Earth.

And that, Mr. Gillmore believes, could be the basis of a very good business.

Silicon Valley, not content with changing how retailers, taxi companies and
hotels do business, is taking its disruptive ways into outer space. Several
young companies with roots in Silicon Valley are trying to elbow their way into
a business long dominated by national governments and aeronautics giants like
Boeing.

Space Exploration Technologies, or SpaceX, started by the Tesla founder Elon
Musk, is already a contractor for NASA, running supply missions to the
International Space Station. Another start-up, Masten Space Systems, with
headquarters in Mojave, Calif., is developing rockets designed for unmanned
research flights. Skybox Imaging, based in Mountain View, Calif., makes
satellites similar to those of Planet Labs, though they are significantly
larger.

These start-ups have one thing in common: They think they can undercut the old
guard with lower prices and smarter thinking.

While the Planet Labs staff ate pancakes that morning in February, two
shoebox-size nine-pound pods made in the company's unconventional factory
floated from the International Space Station toward a polar orbit of Earth. Ten
hours later, two more were released.

The plan was to launch two to four a day, for a configuration of 28 satellites.
The small, basic devices with solar panels and simple maneuvering equipment and
radios are expected to last two to four years and are capable of taking weekly
photos with details as small as a car.

But that is just the start. Last week, Planet Labs announced that it would put
about 100 satellites into space from the United States and Russia, bringing the
total number of ''Doves,'' as the company calls them, to 131. That larger
network, which Planet Labs hopes to complete within a year, is expected to
create a daily photo mosaic of most of Earth.

That mosaic could be valuable to private customers, like agricultural companies
monitoring farmlands, or even to governments trying to figure out how to aid
natural disaster victims. The company has so far booked contracts worth more
than the $65 million in private equity it has raised, according to Will
Marshall, the company's co-founder and chief executive.

Working from what he calls a ''clean-ish room,'' separated from the kitchen by
some loose plastic sheets, Mr. Gillmore and a small team are working on newer
versions of the lightweight satellites, adjusting and improving them with the
frequency you would normally see at a software company. The satellites now in
space are the seventh version; versions eight through 10, which are expected to
cost less and do more, are being assembled.

These satellites are powered by batteries normally found in a laptop, with
semiconductors similar to those in a smartphone. ''Nothing here was prequalified
to be in space,'' Mr. Marshall said. ''We bought most of our parts online.''

Planet Labs will not disclose its manufacturing costs, but potential customers
who have seen the products think the satellites are approximately 95 percent
cheaper than most satellites, a figure Mr. Marshall would neither confirm nor
dispute. ''We leverage the billions of dollars spent on the consumer mobile
phone business'' for most of the company's parts, he said.

Launch costs, which are mostly based on weight and distance above the planet,
are also lower. All 28 satellites together weigh about 126 pounds and can easily
hitch a ride on rockets carrying other space cargo. In comparison, a single
Landsat, a popular Earth-imaging satellite, weighs 4,566 pounds and flies twice
as high.

With these small, inexpensive satellites, ''we'll eventually be able to see
anything on the planet. Anything,'' said Chris Boshuizen, co-founder and chief
technology officer at Planet Labs. ''We'll be able to tell you what something
looked like the day before, the day of and the day after an event.''

Planet Labs was founded in 2010 by three scientists who worked at NASA. Mr.
Boshuizen is Australian, while Mr. Marshall is British. The third, Robbie
Schingler, is an American who is the company's chief operating officer. Like
many tech entrepreneurs, all three grew tired of the conventional way things
were built -- in this case, space products.

For example, the cost of designing, building, launching and monitoring the
government's Landsat satellite, which takes pictures of Earth from 480 miles up,
is over $1 billion, according to the United States Geological Survey, which
administers data from the satellite.

Breaking into a field dominated by big companies with long government contracts
is tough to do. And doing it cheaply is even harder.

In designing their satellites, Planet Labs threw out things like propulsion
systems, because of the high cost and weight. Instead, the satellites use
commercial light sensors, accelerometers and motors to orient their cameras.
Laptop batteries were chosen because a more expensive version cost too much.
Plus, they fit inside the satellite's frame.

By making little machines that are often updated, Mr. Gillmore said, ''we're
building satellites with computers that are six months old. Lots of satellites
have 10-year-old computers.'' Version nine, which is almost complete, cost about
35 percent less than the current version in space, and was made four times
faster, he estimated.

Should Boeing be worried? Not yet, said James P. Lloyd, associate professor of
astronomy and mechanical and aerospace engineering at Cornell University.
Professor Lloyd said he believed the space market was big enough for expensive
Boeing systems and cheaper alternatives from start-ups.

''Essentially anybody can do it, because a combination of miniaturization,
simplification and availability of technology for building small satellites has
made it accessible in a way that has never been before,'' he said.

Also, while Planet Labs can beat older competitors on price, those expensive
features do matter, said David Friedberg, chief executive of Climate, an
agricultural data analysis firm owned by Monsanto. Monsanto buys data from
several older imaging satellites, he said, but is not a Planet Labs customer
because it does not yet offer the infrared imagery needed to judge the health of
plants. ''Their real competition may be drones,'' he said.

Still, Mr. Marshall is confident that his fast and cheap method will hold its
own.

''This is the rapid prototyping, like you see with software, taken into space,''
he said. ''We can see rivers changing course. We can count individual trees.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/17/technology/start-ups-aim-to-conquer-space-mark
et.html

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Planet Labs, a San Francisco start-up, is producing and
launching dozens of relatively cheap shoebox-size satellites. (B1)
Engineers and technicians at Planet Labs, which has contracts for its imaging
with both private companies and governments. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)
 A Planet Labs satellite is released into orbit. The company aims to create a
daily photo mosaic of most of Earth. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NASA) (B3)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


