                             1296 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria: Military Says It Knows Whereabouts of Abducted Girls

BYLINE: By RICK GLADSTONE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 484 words


Nigeria's military knows the location of nearly 300 girls abducted from school
seven weeks ago by Boko Haram extremists, the top commander of the country's
armed forces said Monday. The assertion by the commander, Air Chief Marshal Alex
Badeh, was the first time the Nigerian government had publicly claimed to know
the whereabouts of the missing girls, whose abduction has provoked global
outrage and criticism of the Nigeria military for having failed to find and
rescue them.

In remarks carried by the National News Agency of Nigeria, Air Chief Marshal
Badeh, the chief of the defense staff, also said the military would not
undertake any rescue attempt that would endanger the lives of the girls. Their
captors have publicly threatened to sell them into slavery or forced marriage.

Air Chief Marshal Badeh spoke to what news agencies described as a supportive
crowd of Nigerians in Abuja, the Nigerian capital, as part of what appeared to
be an orchestrated campaign by the military to rebut the criticism over its
handling of the mass kidnapping of the girls, who were all seized from the
remote northeast village of Chibok on April 14 as they were taking school exams.

''We want our girls back,'' Air Chief Marshal Badeh was quoted as saying. ''I
can tell you that our military can and will do it, but where they are held, can
we go there with force? Nobody should say the Nigerian military does not know
what it is doing. We can't kill our girls in the name of trying to get them
back.''

He was further quoted as saying: ''The good news for the parents of the girls is
that we know where they are, but we cannot tell you. We cannot come and tell you
the military secret. Just leave us alone, we are working to get the girls
back.''

In a further retort to critics, Air Chief Marshal Badeh said, ''Anybody
castigating the military, definitely there is something wrong with him.''

He did not go into any detail in his quoted remarks about whether the girls
remained in one group or had been split up.

At least four countries, including the United States, have joined in the hunt
for the girls by providing assistance to the Nigerian military, which has been
described privately by Western intelligence agents and diplomats as bumbling and
ineffective in the fight against Boko Haram, a ruthless insurgent group with
ties to Al Qaeda that has repeatedly struck with impunity in Nigeria, Africa's
most populous country.

In the weeks since the girls were seized, dozens of Nigerians in the group's
northeast regional stronghold have been killed by Boko Haram militants.

There was no corroboration of Air Chief Marshal Badeh's assertion about the
girls' location from American officials, who have sent drones to survey the
Sambisa Forest in northeast Nigeria, a 37,000-square-mile area where the girls
are thought to be held captive.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/27/world/africa/nigeria-military-claims-to-know-l
ocation-of-missing-girls.html

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


