                             1254 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Giving New Voice to Troubled Relationships

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 885 words


Teen

THE WAY AND COLOR

Teen, a four-woman band from Brooklyn, has de-fuzzed itself after its drone
-loving, low-fi, psychedelia-infused 2012 debut album, ''In Limbo.'' Clarity is
a must on Teen's second album, ''The Way and Color'' (Carpark), because the
band's new songs bloom with vocal harmonies and double down on intricate
counterpoint. With productions that rely on analog-sounding synthesizers and
drums both live and programmed, Teen can hint at Stereolab, Erykah Badu or Dirty
Projectors. Yet the songs also tend to metamorphose as they go, starting out
perky and pointillistic and ending up, perhaps, in a brass-section chorale or a
brawny rock guitar riff. Although Kristina (Teeny) Lieberson, the band's
founder, sings with sweet aplomb, the lyrics grapple with multiple pressures and
doubts: relationships betrayed, ambitions just out of reach. In ''Not So Long,''
a refrain warns, ''Danger oh danger, you might lose your balance.'' Teen's music
never does.

Jorge Drexler

BAILAR EN LA CUEVA

Science, history, sensuality and folklore dance together on ''Bailar en la
Cueva'' (Warner Music Latina), the new album by the Oscar-winning Uruguayan
songwriter Jorge Drexler. The album title translates as ''Cave Dancing,'' and
the songs put rhythm first: springy, Pan-American rhythms that are usually
defined by Latin percussion and nimble acoustic guitar, sometimes joined by
horns or subtle electronics. Mr. Drexler isn't singing simple dance ditties;
those wouldn't have drawn guests like Caetano Veloso from Brazil, the
French-Chilean Ana Tijoux, Visitante from the Puerto Rican group Calle 13 and Li
Saumet from the Colombian group Bomba Estéreo. From song to song, Mr. Drexler's
perspective leaps from the molecular to the personal to the cosmic. The album
includes songs about gravity and entropy (''Todo Cae'') and information overload
(''Data Datos''), while in ''Universos Paralelos,'' his desire for a woman he
can't have places his conscience and his longing in parallel universes.
Intelligence and romance shine through his gentle voice -- carried, on this
album, by grooves that are even more persuasive.

The Secret Sisters

PUT YOUR NEEDLE DOWN

The Secret Sisters -- Lydia and Laura Rogers, from Alabama -- are proudly
old-fashioned, reviving the close harmonies of the Everly Brothers and writing
songs that hark back to vintage country storytelling: ''If you want to know the
truth I don't want to be apart/But I don't like the way you've been careless
with my heart,'' they sing in ''If I Don't.'' It's no wonder the producer T Bone
Burnett teamed up with them; they're devoted to the rootsy anachronism, the
throwback with modern savvy. The sisters' new album, ''Put Your Needle Down,''
is filled with songs about love turned to trouble. An angry father murders an
eloping couple in ''Iuka''; a girl refuses a forced marriage in ''Pocket
Knife''; and a woman obsesses over the man she's losing in ''Let There Be
Lonely'' and ''Black and Blue.'' While the production has a 1950s aura, the
details are different, often richer, like the multiple fiddles in ''Bad Habit''
or the glimmers of piano and strings in ''Lonely Island'': these are not
archival recreations but glossy Hollywood renderings of the past. It's a
self-conscious project that, somehow, never affects the directness of the songs.

Inventions

INVENTIONS

Inventions, on its self-titled album (Temporary Residence), is the collaboration
of Mark T. Smith, a guitarist in the instrumental rock band Explosions in the
Sky, and Matthew Cooper, who makes ambient music -- often merging keyboards,
electronics and orchestra -- as Eluvium. They're good for each other, shifting
their usual proportions of drama and meditation. Mr. Smith often introduces the
kind of picking motifs that, in Explosions in the Sky, usually gather themselves
into grand processionals and thrilling buildups. But Inventions sets aside such
linear development; instead, in a track like ''Flood Poems,'' the background
looms up and submerges the guitar and percussion. Still, the album does head
somewhere; marches emerge as the beat strengthens in the album's closing tracks.
The big finale, ''Psychic Automation,'' feels forced, but the contemplative
tracks along the way savor the journey more than the arrival.

Esmé Patterson

WOMAN TO WOMAN

Esmé Patterson, a songwriter who's also a member of the Denver band Paper Bird,
grew irate when she paid attention to the lyrics of Townes Van Zandt's
''Loretta,'' about a barroom girl, and decided to give some women in songs the
chance to speak for themselves. Her mini-album ''Woman to Woman'' (Greater
Than/Illegal Pete's) does that for Loretta -- who boasts, ''I'll keep my dancing
shoes on long after you're gone'' -- and six other women, including Eleanor
Rigby, Elvis Costello's Alison, Lead Belly's Irene and Dolly Parton's Jolene,
who insists she has no interest in the original narrator's man and tartly
advises, ''Men, they should be chasin' you/Never chase a man.'' Her voice is
wiry and candid, backed by arrangements that roll along the folk-country
borderline. Some songs proclaim self-determination and defiance; others, like
''The Glow'' -- imagining the Beach Boys' Caroline -- hint at mystery and
mortality. With all the other women objectified in pop lyrics, it took restraint
to stop at just seven songs.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/27/arts/music/teen-jorge-drexler-and-secret-siste
rs-have-new-albums.html

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Esmé Patterson gives some women in popular songs their own
voice on her album. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RETT ROGERS)
Inventions is a collaboration between Mark T. Smith and Matthew Cooper.
Lydia Rogers, left, and her sister Laura, from Alabama, revive harmonies as the
Secret Sisters and write songs that hark back to vintage country storytelling.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY AUTUMN DE WILDE)
 The Uruguayan songwriter Jorge Drexler released a new album, ''Bailar en la
Cueva.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY THOMAS CANET)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


