                             122 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      June 25, 2014 Wednesday 11:13 AM EST

Seattle woman spots drone outside her 26th-floor apartment window, feels
'violated';
Lisa Pleiss said she felt violated when she saw a drone hovering outside her
apartment window on the 26th floor of her Seattle highrise.

BYLINE: Lindsey Bever

LENGTH: 495 words


Drone mystery solved! Operator apologizes for spooking Seattle resident -
http://t.co/3VOgjDxDjH pic.twitter.com/mfS41VQp44

On her Facebook page, Lisa Pleiss said she felt violated when she saw a drone
hovering outside her apartment window on the 26th floor of her Seattle highrise
on Sunday.

"It was freaky," she told KIRO. "You don't expect to be walking around indecent
in your apartment and then have this thing potentially recording you."

Pleiss, concerned it was looking into her apartment, called her concierge, who
reported it to police. The concierge went outside and saw two men piloting the
drone. They also had a video camera, according to a statement from the Seattle
Police Department.

The drone reportedly belongs to Joe Vaughn, founder of Skyris Imaging, a
Portland company that builds commercial drones. And when word of the so-called
peeping-Tom incident got back to him, he called the authorities to explain.

"I immediately contacted the Seattle Police Department, let them know my name,
the name of my company, what we were there for and who my client was," he told
KGW. "Then, they called my client to confirm that we were there for a reasonable
purpose."

The drone that surprised Pleiss was one of six the company uses to take photos
of skylines for architects, real estate agents and developers, but they are only
used when Vaughn has permission from property owners, he said. On Sunday, he
said he was using one to take pictures for a developer planning a 20-story
office building.

Drew Fowler, a Seattle Police spokesman, told the Los Angeles Times the drone
incident does raise legal questions. It may not have been illegal if the drone
was not equipped with a camera or if its camera was pointed down at a public
street, he said.

"It's fairly common that technology has outpaced legislation and lawbreaking. At
this point, there are [none] that we have found yet, laws, at least for Seattle,
as to how an unmanned [aerial vehicle] is to be operated in this city," he told
the Times. "If any laws were broken, they would lie in the realm of violation of
privacy laws, but there is no 'Hey, you can't fly a UAV this way or that way.'"

Fowler said a law may have been broken if police could prove the drone had a
camera aimed inside the building, but the pilots had not been located as of
Wednesday, the Times reported.

On Tuesday, Vaughn called Pleiss to explain.

"We had a very nice conversation and we'll be sending her a print of the
photograph we ended up taking on Sunday morning," he told KGW.

Pleiss posted a message about the experience on her Facebook page Tuesday night.

"He felt bad - assured me no topless pics exist and is sending me a cool pic
they took of Seattle skyline," she wrote. "Crazytown."

Pleiss also snapped a photo of the drone.

"It, like, swooped out of frame immediately, really quickly," she told KIRO,
"which made me think they were looking at me because they were reacting to my
actions."

That picture is now her Facebook cover photo.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


