                             1247 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Intelligence Chief Issues Limits on Press Contacts

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 647 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration has barred officials at 17 agencies from
speaking to journalists about unclassified intelligence-related topics without
permission, according to a newly disclosed directive.

The directive, issued by James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national
intelligence, also requires the agencies' employees to report any unplanned
contact with journalists. Officials who violate the directive may be disciplined
or fired, the directive says.

The directive prohibits unauthorized ''contact with the media about
intelligence-related information, including intelligence sources, methods,
activities and judgments,'' without regard to whether it is classified. It says
that employees who violate the policy ''may be subject to administrative actions
that may include revocation of security clearances or termination of
employment.''

''If failure to comply with this policy results in an unauthorized disclosure of
classified information, referral to the Department of Justice for prosecution
may occur,'' it says.

At a minimum, the directive adds, any violation of the policy ''will be handled
in the same manner as a security violation.''

Mr. Clapper signed the directive on March 20, and it was quietly posted on the
office's website last week. The same day, he also issued rules to protect
whistle-blowers who report information about waste, fraud or abuse via approved
governmental channels, although not to the news media.

Those rules, carrying out a presidential order, do not apply to intelligence
contractors, only agency employees, a gap that has attracted scrutiny amid the
debate over the leaks by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency
contractor.

The directive limiting contact with reporters was reported Monday by Steve
Aftergood, a government secrecy specialist for the Federation of American
Scientists. In a blog post, Mr. Aftergood portrayed the directive as seeking to
ensure that ''the only news about intelligence is to be authorized news.'' He
criticized the policy as going too far, arguing that routine interactions
between agency employees and reporters about unclassified matters did not pose a
threat to national security, but that limiting them would hurt the public.

''The new policy is likely to be effective in reducing the quality, independence
and critical content of intelligence-related information that is available to
the press and the public,'' Mr. Aftergood said.

But intelligence officials argued that the policy essentially codified and made
uniform rules that were generally in place across the intelligence agencies, if
not uniformly respected. Those policies generally require prescreening of
prepared remarks for unclassified events and self-reporting about unplanned
contact with journalists.

''This does not prohibit a member of the intelligence community from talking to
a member of the press,'' said Shawn Turner, a spokesman for Mr. Clapper.

In the spring of 2012 -- after a series of leaks about matters like drone strike
policy, cyberwar in Iran and the foiling of a bomb plot in Yemen -- the Senate
Intelligence Committee added an amendment to the annual intelligence bill that
would have sharply curtailed the ability of intelligence officials to provide
unclassified briefings. Advocates of press freedom and intelligence officials,
including those associated with Mr. Clapper's office, strongly lobbied against
the bill, saying it went too far. Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California
Democrat who is the chairwoman of the Intelligence Committee, eventually
withdrew most of the amendment.

But in June 2012, Mr. Clapper issued a directive requiring counterespionage
polygraph examiners to add a question about unauthorized disclosures to the news
media, and allowing the new intelligence inspector general to continue
investigations into leaks even if the Justice Department declined to bring
charges.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/us/politics/intelligence-chief-issues-limits-o
n-press-contacts.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: James R. Clapper Jr., director  of national intelligence, signed
the directive last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD HAMM/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


