                             120 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                          September 25, 2014 Thursday

DHL to Begin Deliveries by Drone in Germany

BYLINE: MARK SCOTT

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 486 words



HIGHLIGHT: A small pilotless aircraft owned by the logistics company DHL is set
to take off on Friday to ferry medicine to a sparsely populated island in
northern Germany, following in the footsteps of similar plans by the tech giants
Amazon and Google.


LONDON - In the world of drones, Europe is out to show that whatever the United
States can do, it can do better.

That's the plan for Friday, when a small pilotless aircraft, or drone, owned by
the German logistics company DHL is expected to take off and ferry medicine to
Juist, a sparsely populated island off the northwestern coast of Germany.

The flight - expected to take as long as 30 minutes, depending on weather
conditions - would be the first time a drone without the aid of even a
land-based pilot has been authorized for regular use in Europe, the company
said.

It also follows in the footsteps of similar drone delivery plans by American
technology giants.

Like Amazon, which is running tests in Canada, and Google, which is conducting
tests in Australia, DHL is hoping its monthlong trial will prove that the
technology - dubbed parcelcopter - can replace some of the traditional ways of
delivering parcels to remote locations.

Yet while Google and Amazon have outlined plans to potentially roll out their
drone services across large areas, DHL said that it probably would not expand
the trial across its global delivery network.

Instead, the German logistics company said the drone technology could be used in
special situations - in remote locations, for example - where it is more
cost-effective to use an unmanned aircraft than to send a delivery van or a bike
messenger.

That's the case for DHL's delivery service from Norden, near the northwestern
city of Bremen, to Juist, a German island with a population of fewer than 2,000
people. As part of the trial, DHL is expected to send medications twice a day,
weather permitting. The deliveries will take place when alternatives, like the
local ferry or aircraft services, are not available.

When DHL's drone, which weighs just under three pounds, lands on the island, one
of the company's couriers will then deliver the packages to local residents, a
spokeswoman said.

One of the major stumbling blocks for companies like Amazon and Google has been
a lack of regulatory approval for drone flights. Earlier this year, for example,
the Federal Aviation Administration banned a proposed aerial delivery service in
Minnesota that would have ferried beer from a brewery to nearby ice fishers.

To avoid similar problems, DHL said that it had worked with the German air
traffic agency and the country's Ministry of Transport and Digital
Infrastructure to create a restricted flight zone for the company's drone
project. The aircraft will hover 100 feet off the ground and reach speeds of up
to 40 miles per hour during the seven-mile journey from the mainland to Juist.

While the technology for DHL's drone project, which began last year, has been
well tested, a major stumbling block for the trial may be something the
logistics company cannot control: the weather. High winds forecast off the
German coast for Friday could delay the initial flight.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


