                             1229 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turning 40, but Infused With Youth and Vigor

BYLINE: By SIOBHAN BURKE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 505 words


As with so many dance companies, Ailey II, the junior ensemble of Alvin Ailey
American Dance Theater, exhilarates and disappoints at the same time. The
dancers are tremendous. The choreography, not so much.

Such was the case, with occasional exceptions, on Wednesday at the Ailey
Citigroup Theater, where the troupe is celebrating its 40th anniversary. Opening
night featured the first of two alternating programs, which showcases new works
from three young choreographic voices: Adam Barruch, Katarzyna Skarpetowska and
Jennifer Archibald.

In his introduction, the artistic director, Troy Powell, remarked on Ailey II's
special role as a second company. Not merely a miniature of its parent troupe,
it has ''gained its own identity,'' he said, an achievement he attributed to the
esteemed Sylvia Waters, who led the group for its first 38 years.

While that may be true of its intrepid dancers, with their breathtaking
combination of athleticism and poise -- they really seem capable of anything --
the three pieces were indistinguishable from much in contemporary dance and
even, at times, from one another. Certain gestures appear to be trending: one
hand on a partner's forehead; a finger pointing toward the sky.

The most potent sense of individuality came from Ms. Skarpetowska, whose ''Cuore
Sott'olio'' set adventurous, high-velocity partnering against the slow-motion
progression of a lone dancer, the stately Tyler Brown. Ms. Brown, in one of
Naomi Luppescu's handsome dresses, enters walking backward from one wing, toward
a cluster of six dancers. They absorb her into their amoebic, elastic
undulations, an image that reverses itself at the end, when she slips back out
the other side. Between those mirror images, the sextet pairs off into twos,
surging through convoluted duets to Vinicio Capossela's pungent, Latin-tinged
songs. Danica Paulos and Riccardo Battaglia are a particularly vigorous pair in
their chain-reaction interactions, like a swipe of her foot to the back of his
knee, which pins him to the ground. Their rapid sidestepping could be a
21st-century folk dance.

Periodic flashes of Ms. Brown, slowly crossing the stage from left to right (a
foreboding drone accompanies her), grow tedious. But Ms. Skarpetowska, more than
her colleagues, creates a world that we can feel invested in. Mr. Barruch's
''Alchemies,'' first on the program, tries hard to be dark and suspenseful. But
the outcome has a manufactured sheen, despite eye-catching aspects, like his
intricate latticework for the arms. In Ms. Archibald's ''Wings,'' muscular,
acrobatic displays (she likes handstands and high kicks) take priority over
nuanced relationships.

Expressively, these dances have a lot to do with yearning, striving, longing.
Shouldn't dancers with such a vast physical range get to play inside of a wider
emotional one? The human spirit, that cornerstone of the Ailey brand, is a
complicated place.

Ailey II continues through Sunday at the Ailey Citigroup Theater, 405 West 55th
Street, Clinton; 866-811-4111, alvinailey.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/08/arts/dance/ailey-ii-program-highlights-three-y
oung-choreographers.html

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ailey II: Tyler Brown, center, and fellow troupe members
performing Jennifer Archibald's ''Wings'' at the Ailey Citigroup Theater.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


