                             1207 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lobbyists Set to Fight Royalty Bill for Artists

BYLINE: By PATRICIA COHEN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1264 words


Lawyers for Sotheby's auction house paid an unusual visit to a few lawmakers on
Capitol Hill this month and brought along some high-powered lobbying muscle.
They had come to complain about a new bill that even some supporters acknowledge
faces a difficult road in this divided Congress: a proposal to give visual
artists -- or their estates -- a cut of the profits when their work is resold at
public auction.

Despite the long odds, Sotheby's and Christie's have spent about $1 million in
the last couple of years to hire well-known legal and lobbying talent in
Washington such as Paul D. Clement, a solicitor general under President George
W. Bush, and the Podesta Group, run by the Democratic super-lobbyist Tony
Podesta, whose brother, John D. Podesta, recently joined the Obama
administration as a top aide.

''We're taking it seriously, even though we don't think it's going to pass,''
said Jane A. Levine, Sotheby's director of worldwide compliance.

Art world deal making typically doesn't involve Congress, so elite auction
houses have not had much cause to spend time -- or money -- lobbying Capitol
Hill. And in this case, the effort might seem outsize -- a drone firing on a
beetle -- given that a version of the bill introduced in December 2011 by
Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York, and former Senator Herbert
Kohl, Democrat of Wisconsin, failed to attract a single co-sponsor. But a few
things have changed since then. One is that Mr. Nadler is now the ranking
Democrat on the courts, intellectual property and Internet subcommittee of the
House Judiciary Committee, which has jurisdiction. A second is that the United
States Copyright Office issued a report in December that backed off its longtime
opposition to the idea of resale royalties. The report noted that in the past 20
years, dozens of countries around the world have introduced some version of
resale royalties, known by the French phrase droit de suite.

Lobbying for resale royalties by organizations that license and monitor artist
copyrights is what helped resuscitate the long-dormant issue a few years ago.
Federal lobbying reports show that in the two years leading up to the
introduction of the 2011 bill, the Visual Artists Rights Coalition and the
Artists Rights Society spent $280,000 on lobbyists like Bruce Lehman, former
commissioner of the United States Patent and Trademark Office, and John
Weinfurter, a former congressional staff member.

''In the past, visual artists have not been able to get their nose under the
tent,'' Mr. Lehman said of the political process. The two lobbyists are
continuing to push for the latest version of the bill, introduced last month in
the House by Mr. Nadler and in the Senate by two Democrats, Edward J. Markey of
Massachusetts, and Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, who took over Mr. Kohl's seat.
(The coalition spent $176,000 on lobbyists in 2012 and 2013.)

Mr. Weinfurter said he is optimistic about the bill. Representative Louise M.
Slaughter, a New York Democrat and a chairwoman of the Congressional Arts
Caucus, has signed on as a sponsor and he is meeting Monday, Mr. Weinfurter
said, with a Senate Republican who he hopes will join her. ''We intend to do a
full-court press,'' he said.

As the art market has become a high-priced playground for billionaires and
hedge-fund moguls, interest in resale royalties has grown. A few celebrity
artists have shared in the tremendous growth in wealth, but most -- even those
whose work may now command millions of dollars -- don't benefit if prices
increase after the initial sale.

To alter that, Mr. Nadler introduced what he has called the American Royalties
Too Act. ''To me, the bill is a question of fundamental fairness,'' Mr. Nadler
said.

Sellers, museums and auction houses have generally opposed resale royalties,
which they view as an added tax that raises the cost of doing business and, in
the long run, would dampen prices. California was the only state that had a
resale royalty law, but a state court struck it down as unconstitutional in
2012, ruling that the statute was interfering in an issue under federal
jurisdiction. The case is now being reviewed by the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.

Despite the jaw-dropping prices for some works of art, Christie's and Sotheby's
have had trouble widening their profit margins in recent years, partly because
of incentives they've given to big-ticket sellers to win their business. The
auction houses worry that the proposed royalty bill would encourage more sellers
to abandon public auctions for private deals.

To make its case, Christie's has hired a veteran of royalty battles, David
Israelite, president of the National Music Publishers' Association and a former
staff member at the Republican National Committee. Before the Copyright Office
issued its report, it held a public round table on the subject, where minor and
major players -- like Sotheby's, Christie's, eBay, the Association of Art Museum
Directors, Internet company trade groups and several American and foreign groups
that represent artists' copyrights as well as dealers -- registered their views.
In response to criticism from the auction houses, Mr. Nadler said he made
several changes in the proposed legislation. The new bill would channel 5
percent instead of 7 percent of an artwork's resale price to the artist, for
example, and, unlike in the 2011 version, the total royalty on any one sale
would be capped at $35,000.

The new bill also covers smaller auction houses (with a minimum of $1 million in
art sales instead of $25 million). More important, it extends to online
auctions. This attempt to assuage the concerns of auction houses may have had
the effect of strengthening the resistance, however. EBay and the Internet
Association, the Washington-based trade group representing the biggest Internet
companies, have now joined Christie's and Sotheby's in their opposition.

''The Internet Association does not support the American Royalties Too Act,''
said the group's president and chief executive, Michael Beckerman, arguing it
will constrict the free market.

Sotheby's and Christie's have also argued that royalties would benefit only the
wealthiest artists and estates, because they are the ones most frequently sold
in the secondary market. To that, Mr. Nadler responds: ''This is not an
anti-poverty bill. It's a fairness and equity bill.''

A bigger flaw, auctioneers say, is that they are being unfairly targeted because
galleries and dealers are not covered by the proposed legislation. Although a
lot of art is sold privately, the ''bill narrowly targets only those companies
who conduct auction sales,'' Christie's said in a statement, explaining its
opposition.

Mr. Nadler, whose district includes the gallery gold coast in Chelsea, said that
the art industry's secrecy makes it extremely difficult to access information
about personal sales, but promised to ask the Copyright Office to examine the
issue further.

Now it is up to Representative Robert W. Goodlatte, a Republican from Virginia
and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, whether to schedule hearings on the
bill. His office declined to comment, but congressional staff members and
lobbyists familiar with the effort said resale royalties and other related
issues are likely to get swept into the wholesale overhaul of the copyright act
that Mr. Goodlatte is presiding over -- a yearslong effort, by most accounts.

Mr. Nadler deferred on offering a prognosis. Noting that the resale royalty bill
is still only a couple of weeks old, he said, ''The lobbying is just starting.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/24/arts/design/auction-houses-taking-no-chances-o
n-american-royalties-too-act.html

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sotheby's and Christie's have hired the Podesta Group, run by
the Democratic super-lobbyist Tony Podesta, to help defeat a bill. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY LUKE SHARRETT/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


