                             1202 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Ukraine Crisis and U.S. Policy

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 526 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Obama Made America Look Weak'' (Op-Ed, March 15):

Senator John McCain castigates President Obama for seeming weak over Ukraine,
but if you take chest-thumping out of the equation, what we realistically could
have done differently or what we can do differently now is far less obvious.

Russia's interference in Ukraine is a tragedy. It is, however, what Russia has
done to Ukraine for hundreds of years. We have no strategic interests there, or
the forces needed to enforce American will -- not unlike the position of other
global powers when the United States annexed Texas or Hawaii.

President Vladimir V. Putin clearly understands that American bluster can only
be just that. We are not in a position to do more. That is simply a sad
geographic and historical reality.

Unified action with our allies and economic sanctions (and standing firm in the
resulting new Cold War) are about all we've got, and about all we've ever had
for this scenario.

GRAYDON FORRER Washington, March 15, 2014

To the Editor:

I am certainly not a fan of Vladimir V. Putin, but I think that part of the
United States' difficulty in responding to the situation in Ukraine is our
failure to try to view the situation through Mr. Putin's eyes. That is where
Senator John McCain misses the mark.

For more than 200 years Russians have been concerned about invasions from the
West for good reason (Napoleon, Hitler) -- hence Russia's historical fear of the
establishment of a cordon sanitaire. (Indeed, some might wonder whether it was
necessary and perhaps provocative to expand NATO eastward.) Furthermore, Crimea
has historically been under Russian rule.

Moreover, Mr. McCain is wrong to suggest that President Obama has made America
look ''weak.'' Remember, Mr. Obama's the guy who took out Osama bin Laden. The
president has also made his predecessor, George W. Bush, look like a pacifist
with his dramatic use of drones. Have we forgotten our success with regime
change in Libya?

Finally, I disagree with Mr. McCain's assessment of how the world views Mr.
Obama's actions regarding Crimea. Neither Mr. McCain nor anyone else can
''know'' exactly what the world's opinion is.

MARC CHAFETZ Washington, March 15, 2014

To the Editor:

John McCain's Op-Ed essay serves as a reminder of how differently others would
have viewed America's credibility and international resolve if we had had a
McCain presidency. President Obama's international grade card has failing marks,
including our being bullied by Iran and China and allowing President Bashar
al-Assad of Syria to cross a ''red line'' by using chemical weapons on civilians
without real consequences from us.

And even though Mr. McCain is bluntly provocative in his description of Vladimir
V. Putin's ''brutish, cynical'' world ''where power is worshiped,'' his opinions
nevertheless seem, based on Russia's belligerent actions against Crimea, pretty
accurate.

Meanwhile, America's comparative inaction in this Ukrainian -- and increasingly
European -- crisis is not good policy; it is weakness, particularly in Mr.
Putin's eyes. It is not the kind of foreign policy that engenders confidence.

BRITT ISALY Chicago, March 15, 2014

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/18/opinion/the-ukraine-crisis-and-us-policy.html

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY LEWIS SCOTT)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


