                             1253 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hostile Climate

BYLINE: By KIM BARKER.

Kim Barker is a reporter for ProPublica. Her book, ''The Taliban Shuffle:
Strange Days in Afghanistan and Pakistan,'' was published in 2011.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1273 words


NO GOOD MEN AMONG THE LIVINGAmerica, the Taliban, and the War Through Afghan
Eyes

By Anand Gopal304 pp. Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt & Company. $27.

For the first time since 2001, more Americans believe it was a mistake to send
troops to Afghanistan than see it as the right call, at least according to a
recent Gallup poll. Almost 13 years after the attacks of Sept. 11, we're
conflicted about what we are still doing in Afghanistan and confused about what
happened there. Americans are tired of America's long war, especially as it
drones on.

The journalist Anand Gopal tries to make sense of the morass in his first book,
''No Good Men Among the Living: America, the Taliban, and the War Through Afghan
Eyes.'' It's an apt time for reflection on America's lingering Asian folly --
Afghanistan's presidential election was held earlier this month, and the United
States plans to withdraw most of its troops by the end of this year. Afghanistan
will either muddle along or again fall into chaos.

Gopal's book is essential reading for anyone concerned about how America got
Afghanistan so wrong. It is a devastating, well-honed prosecution detailing how
our government bungled the initial salvo in the so-called war on terror, ignored
attempts by top Taliban leaders to surrender, trusted the wrong people and
backed a feckless and corrupt Afghan regime. The book has its flaws, minimizing
the role of neighboring Pakistan in the Taliban's resurgence and letting the
Taliban off too easy. But it is ultimately the most compelling account I've read
of how Afghans themselves see the war.

Gopal, who covered Afghanistan for The Wall Street Journal and The Christian
Science Monitor, describes the intricate web of relationships in the country,
and how mutable those alliances are. In their desire to pick a side and see
Afghans in black and white, the Americans failed to realize that Afghanistan is
a gray country where today's ally can be tomorrow's enemy. There are no heroes
or villains in Afghanistan, as suggested by the book's title, taken from a
Pashtun proverb: ''There are no good men among the living, and no bad ones among
the dead.''

After moving to Afghanistan in 2008, Gopal learned the language, grew a beard
and traveled to remote corners other correspondents rarely ventured. (As the
former South Asia bureau chief for The Chicago Tribune, I met Gopal in
Afghanistan. I felt that many areas he visited were too dangerous -- for me, at
least.) His book, reported over four years, tells the story of the war through
the lives of three Afghans: a Taliban commander, a tribal strongman and a
village housewife. They are all Pashtun, members of Afghanistan's largest ethnic
group.

Gopal traces their lives through the country's struggles: the Soviet invasion of
1979; the subsequent C.I.A.-backed insurgency; the brutal civil war of the
1990s; and the strict rule of the Taliban, who sheltered Osama bin Laden and Al
Qaeda. Much of the book is devoted to what happened after the Taliban regime
fell in late 2001, when Hamid Karzai took over.

The strongman, Jan Mohammed, was a longtime Karzai pal who became the governor
of Oruzgan Province, where he racked up points and money with the Americans and
crushed anyone who opposed him. The housewife, Heela, fled Kabul for an Oruzgan
village during the civil war. She suffered various tragedies at the hands of Jan
Mohammed's men -- she found her husband's bullet-riddled body ''lying neatly on
the dirt road, on a bed of flour sacks,'' Gopal writes -- before winning a spot
in Afghanistan's senate.

And then there is Mullah Cable, the Taliban commander who earned his nickname
for his way with a whip. Mullah Cable, whose given name is Akbar Gul, retreated
to Pakistan as the Taliban fell. He later returned, renounced the gun and opened
a phone-repair shop. But his peaceful stint as a civilian didn't last. Upset
with the corruption of the local police and the continuing presence of the
Americans, Akbar Gul rejoined the Taliban.

Gopal's depiction of Akbar Gul is as murky as Afghanistan. If Heela is the
virtuous villager and Jan Mohammed the conniving heavy, Akbar Gul is the
reluctant man pressed into battle. Even his attempts to kill American soldiers
are described in somewhat muted terms. ''Many minutes passed as the firing
continued,'' Gopal writes, ''and in a haze of smoke and dust Akbar Gul could no
longer see what he was shooting at.''

Gopal shows how the Americans messed things up from the beginning. Civilian
casualties and night raids bred resentment. The United States also backed the
same warlords responsible for atrocities during the '90s. In the war's early
years, there was no rehabilitation for a former Talib, no re-entry program, no
probation, no real way to join the new government. For leaders of the Taliban,
unlike other Afghans with a bloody past, there was no way out -- except to run
or hide.

The American military was also naïve about how things worked in the country.
Afghan informants exacted revenge against rivals by calling in raids. Gopal
describes how one tribal elder was so successful in uncovering official
corruption that he was branded a Taliban spy, which was enough to get him
banished to Guantánamo Bay.

Such mistakes turned average Afghans against the United States, as did corrupt
local police and administrators who would shake down civiliansfor an easy buck.
By 2005, the Taliban had returned.

Yet even as Gopal offers key insights into the Afghan experience, he looks at
the war through a narrow lens. He barely acknowledges how Pakistan's main spy
agency, the ubiquitous Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, helped back the
resurgent Taliban in Afghanistan. (It is only toward the end of the book that
Gopal mentions how the ISI ''threw its support behind the insurgency -- even as
it publicly proclaimed support for the U.S. mission.'')

He also portrays the Taliban with an almost rosy hue, maybe enamored of the
access he must have worked so hard to win. The Taliban are largely depicted as a
groundswell of oppressed ethnic Pashtuns pushing back against a corrupt Afghan
government and an invading foreign force. Few atrocities are their fault;
rather, circumstances made them do it. The sole description of a serious Taliban
massacre comes nearly three-quarters of the way through, in an account of how
Talibs slaughtered a busload of Afghans on their way to find work in Iran.

Gopal seems to hold the warlords, the government and the West more accountable
for recent brutalities. That depiction is not entirely fair. The United States
certainly made mistakes. But the American military as a whole didn't target
civilians methodically and deliberately -- unlike the Taliban, which recently
stormed a hotel restaurant, shooting innocent women and children at point-blank
range.

I finished the book wanting more of a look forward. It's probably to Gopal's
credit that he resisted that urge: Afghanistan is impossible to predict. Many
Afghan observers figured that Karzai, barred from seeking a third presidential
term, would finagle a delay to Afghanistan's April election. But he didn't. Few
pundits thought that Afghans would defy the Taliban and turn out overwhelmingly
to vote. But they did. Others predicted rampant election violence. But there
wasn't.

Instead, Gopal's book left me looking back, feeling regrets and ''if onlys.'' If
only the United States had better understood the Afghan people, if only we knew
then what we know now, Afghanistan might have become a different place. Not
Switzerland, to be sure. But a place that could bottle the defiance and hope
shown on Afghanistan's Election Day, and put that energy to work.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/27/books/review/no-good-men-among-the-living-by-a
nand-gopal.html

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY CHI BIRMINGHAM) (BR18-BR19)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


