                             1276 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Haunting History Lesson With Your Hip-Hop

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 510 words


Conundrum, provocation, history lesson, ritual, chamber recital, jazz concert,
elegy -- the Roots' performance at the Public Theater on Tuesday night was
decidedly not a standard kickoff for a hip-hop album. That was clear when, near
the beginning of the show, balloon animals were dropped onto the stage, covering
it knee-deep; for the rest of the performance, each entrance and exit was
accompanied by balloons popping underfoot like gunshots. Dozens of nooses also
hung overhead.

The Roots are to release their 11th album, ''... and then you shoot your
cousin'' (Def Jam), next week. It's a brief, bleak collection of songs haunted
by the desperate, self-destructive cycles of poverty and by thoughts of death
and God. The music draws on gospel, soul, chamber music, electronic noise and
free jazz, along with brittle hip-hop samples. Songs from the album were heard
on Tuesday night primarily as recordings from the disc-jockey setup -- laptop
and turntables -- of the Roots' leader, Questlove (Ahmir Thompson). The Roots'
main rapper, Black Thought (Tarik Trotter), delivered poetic monologues instead,
including one that telescoped African-American history from slavery to the
present.

Questlove has thought deeply and broadly about African-American culture. He
remains idealistic about the potential role of hip-hop, even as much current
hip-hop endorses shallow materialism, and he determinedly places the Roots'
hip-hop in the lineage of forward-looking, socially conscious black music; the
concert also featured recordings of Albert Ayler, James Brown, Nina Simone and
Abbey Lincoln.

The musicians weren't the same Roots band seen regularly on NBC's ''Tonight''
show with Jimmy Fallon. They included the Metropolis Ensemble -- the conductor
Andrew Cyr, a string quartet and four singers -- and the jazz pianist D. D.
Jackson, who wrote dramatic, somberly dissonant arrangements for the ensemble.
Mr. Jackson also hurled crashing free-jazz clusters and tremolos in a duet with
Questlove on drums. Jeremy Ellis tapped out some two-handed workouts from a
sampler, and near the beginning of the concert, there was a primordial drone
from Craig Harris on didgeridoo, joined by the percussive vocals of Rahzel, a
pioneering beatboxer. Two male dancers also appeared, break dancing amid the
balloons.

It was a miscellany of grim tidings and stubborn determination, of sounds both
earthy and avant-garde, of bitter realities and electronic hallucinations. Songs
from the album concluded with ''Tomorrow,'' a resolutely optimistic tune with
the recorded voice of Raheem DeVaughn declaring himself ''thankful to be
alive.''

The Roots followed it with words from a Sun Ra recording -- ''If you're not a
myth, whose reality are you?'' (and vice versa) -- and then the kind of finale
that might be expected from a Roots concert: the appearance of the band's lead
guitarist, Captain Kirk Douglas, to wail and shred through a climactic version
of Funkadelic's ''Maggot Brain.'' This performance wasn't the rollout of a
consumer product; it was joining a cultural continuum.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/15/arts/music/the-roots-touch-on-poverty-death-an
d-god-at-the-public.html

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Roots: Questlove, this band's leader, presenting songs from
a new album, '' . . . and then you shoot your cousin,'' at the Public Theater.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY RUBY WASHINGTON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


