                             1206 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Insights May Skew Big Picture

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN.

Follow Edward Rothstein on Twitter; twitter.com/EdRothstein

SECTION: Section F; Column 0; Museums; MUSEUMS SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1901 words


Museums are born to wrestle with history. What else, after all, is a museum but
a collection of objects gathered to shape a narrative, to assert an
interpretation, to evoke memory and reaction -- in other words, to make a
history? So when I complain, as I often do in making my critical rounds, about
the way history is treated in museums, how could it be otherwise? History --
particularly in nonart museums -- is the point. And it is bound to be an issue
of debate.

But the theme has been taking a peculiar turn in recent years that almost makes
it seem as if history -- the fullest, richest story we can tell about ourselves
and our past -- is beyond the reach of most museums, however much they try. In
my reviews of exhibitions great and small, I have been sounding a drone of
cavils and qualifications:

A potentially important exhibition about the history of slavery and abolition in
Brooklyn at the Brooklyn Historical Society is marred by its simplification of
information, a lack of detail and language that is meant to link 19th-century
abolitionists to contemporary self-styled activists.

A major permanent exhibition, "Records of Rights,'' at the National Archives in
Washington chooses to introduce visitors to the nation's founding documents --
the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights -- by
focusing on American failures to guarantee those rights, thus skewing the
historical record.

An exhibition at the Field Museum about the influence of Chicago's 1893 World
Exposition is critical of the fair's celebration of consumption, its racist
condescension to non-Western peoples and its narrow-mindedness -- a portrait
that does nothing to explain that exposition's national impact in precisely
opposite directions.

An exhibition about Anne Frank at the Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles gives a
robustly detailed history but ends with bland homilies about making the world a
better place, as if intolerance and a lack of consideration were the defining
causes of the events.

The Autry National Center in Los Angeles has been trying to replace the
traditional cowboy-and-Indian history of the American West with a theme of
''convergence,'' bringing together competing narratives. But a recent exhibition
about one American Indian tribe's beliefs was celebratory without being
explanatory. And for now, the accounts of the American West drift with
ambivalence.

I could continue with complaints about a slew of other historical exhibitions
and museums I have seen in recent years: Jewish history as told in Berlin,
American Indian history recounted in Washington, Japanese-American history in
Wyoming and Los Angeles, the Civil War in the American South (and its
commemoration in Gettysburg) and world cultural history in Paris.

Here my complaint is about too little detail, there, about too much detail;
here, an incomplete vision, there, no vision at all; here, a simplified formula,
there, self-promotional pap. And while some exhibitions have been
extraordinarily insightful in their approach to history (including several at
the New-York Historical Society) -- sounding multiple themes, raising questions
and inviting curiosity -- those have been exceptions.

But are these problems as miscellaneous as they seem? Many have a distinctively
contemporary feel. Fifty years ago they might not have come up at all. History
was always present in museums, but until recently it didn't really play a major
role as a focus of reflection and debate.

Consider American historical societies, which were typically established in the
19th century to commemorate a community's origins. Here are the documents of our
founding and the relics from the early years of our settlement, they might say;
here are our deeds and maps, the signs of our growth, the achievements of our
citizens. Historical societies also often incorporated eccentric and
wide-ranging collections -- minerals, taxidermy, mummies -- gifts from patrons
who were municipal or regional leaders.

It was history as tribute, told from -- or accumulated from -- above. But in
recent decades, all over the country, traditional historical societies have been
elaborately reconfigured. Some have raised money and expanded ambitions,
creating major history museums, like those that have opened in the last two
years in Denver and in Seattle; others have, at the very least, shifted focus.
Goals have changed: not to tell the history of a place, but to recount its
histories.

In February, for example, I visited the Ohio History Center museum of the Ohio
Historical Society, which traces its origins to 1885. The society now runs a
network of 58 historical sites in Ohio and has a collection of 1.6 million
objects. The 250,000 square feet of exhibition space at the center in Columbus
incorporates natural history and local taxidermy, machinery used by Ohio
industries and recruitment posters from the Second World War, 1950s home
appliances and 1960s political buttons -- all housed in an immense building
designed by W. Byron Ireland in the mid-1960s and dedicated in 1970.

The building dates from the same era, in fact, that revisionist histories were
beginning in earnest. And since then, it seems, the museum's almost encyclopedic
displays have themselves been subject to waves of revision. You can almost trace
the museological strata here as Ohio history became an assemblage of narratives.
Its major history exhibition brings new attention to groups once neglected:
immigrants, women, blacks and ethnic groups who struggled at the margins.

That correction was one of the achievements of late 20th-century revisionist
history. But we also glimpse, here and there, the kinds of weakness latent in
any revision -- signs of simplification, as earlier views are set aside. A
recently mounted exhibition about the 1950s, for example, treats the Cold War --
which cast its shadow over the decade -- as a result of mutual and symmetrical
mistrust. This might be a way of distancing the exhibition from the era's
anti-Communist excesses, but as a result, the displays are apparently reluctant
to even hint at the brutalities and ambitions of the Soviet regime while
attentively chronicling American flaws.

This mixture of new insight accompanied by new simplifications has become
familiar elsewhere as well. The transformation of history that began in the
1960s (inspired by the American political left), took decades to have a full
impact on museums, but its perspectives have now become commonplace. Museums, in
their traditional roles, were almost mythological institutions, claiming to
display the origins and themes of a society, shaping understandings with a
coherent interpretation of the past. That model has now been remade with the
singular replaced by the plural, coherence displaced by multiplicity.

This new vision of history also gave birth to a museum genre that has become as
distinctive for our age as curiosity cabinets were in the 18th century: the
Identity Museum. Such museums -- which deal with Japanese-Americans, Jewish
Americans, American Indians, black Americans, Chinese-Americans, Arab-Americans
and others -- have developed primarily to tell the story of a particular group
and its struggles.

Sometimes the museum text freely uses ''we,'' implying a common ground between
museum and visitor. Here is how we confronted hardship and racism, the narrative
generally begins; here is how we worked for recognition; here is how we have
triumphed, our identities intact, as we shape new opportunities in our
hyphenated existence.

The correction to the general, then, has been the explosion of the particular.
The correction to a unified vision has been a kaleidoscope of special
perspectives, as if history were being democratized. And a patina of populism
has replaced earlier aspirations.

The style of history has changed as well. It has turned personal, embracing
sensation. Earlier tendencies toward self-celebration have also been replaced by
tendencies toward (selective) self-blame -- except in Identity Museums where the
self-celebration is part of the point. The museum highlights what was once
lacking by minimizing what was once venerated.

This description might seem fairly sweeping, but it is one way to begin to
understand the strengths and weaknesses of many contemporary museums as they
deal with history: in the midst of revision, some end up simplifying rather than
deepening understanding.

Perhaps the most egregious example of an Identity Museum gone awry has been the
National Museum of the American Indian in Washington, which opened in 2004: the
great collections of the Smithsonian were stripped of their particularity and
complexity, and the variegated histories and native cultures of two continents
were put in service to a morality play.

Sometimes the emphasis on identity turns into distorted self-celebration. One
recent international exhibition about Islamic science was saturated with
exaggerated promotional claims.

The spirit of identity doesn't even have to be explicit: One thing that at least
now prevents the evolving National World War II Museum in New Orleans from being
as powerful as it might yet become is its overly tight focus on the American
experience so we hardly see, for example, the importance of the Eastern front in
Europe.

And sometimes, revisionism works in strange ways: If the newer forms of history
are personal, populist and democratic, perhaps that is why an institution that
would seem destined for the Identity Museum model -- the Museum of Tolerance,
whose focus is the Nazi Holocaust -- is beset by sweeping humanistic homilies,
which engulf even Anne Frank.

We can also see revisionism too sweepingly applied. The National Archives
exhibition on rights made revisionism its primary purpose. It apparently wanted
to moderate or even undercut the reverential awe and homage typically paid to
the great national founding documents on display in the Rotunda -- the
Constitution, the Declaration of Independence and the Bill of Rights. So it
decided to focus on how their ideals have not been fulfilled: instead of
self-praise, it practices self-blame. It cast the net wide over American
history, incorporating material that does indeed need to be part of the
historical narrative, but it also ends up with a constricted perspective, unable
to see things whole.

This tendency is evident not only in the United States. Paris's Musée du Quai
Branly, for example, was conceived of by former President Jacques Chirac, who
called the $300 million museum, which opened in 2006, ''the debt we owe to the
peoples and countries'' of the former French empire. The museum, he said, would
help see ''justice rendered.'' But the result is a romanticized portrait of
those cultures, stripped of history and glowing with a patina of hallowed
victimization. It is a French version of Washington's American Indian museum.

What then, should we hope for? Much has been revealed by the transformations
that have taken place. History has broadened and often deepened; museums have
become more adventurous and often more ambitious. But the revisionist model,
like the one it displaced, has its fair share of distortions, prejudices and
orthodoxies. And as it has become more commonplace, it has become less carefully
scrutinized and too eagerly harnessed to support ready-made perspectives. It may
be time, then, to revive the quest for complexity that led to revision in the
first place.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/arts/artsspecial/new-insights-into-history-may
-skew-the-big-picture.html

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE WEST AND ABOLITION Exhibitions at, top, the Autry National
Center in Los Angeles
above, the Brooklyn Historical Society. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHANIE DIANI FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES
 BYRON SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (F28)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


