                             1226 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Good and Evil, Ritual and Nightmare, in Sight and Sound

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 570 words


''Concealed,'' by the British electronic-music duo Demdike Stare and the
filmmaker and animator Michael England, is an audiovisual project, no more or
less aural than visual, about dread and dreams, what happens in the world when
the conscious mind isn't noticing.

Commissioned by the concert organization Unsound, it had its first United States
performance on Friday night at the First Unitarian Church in Brooklyn Heights,
in a program called ''The Long Tone,'' as part of the Unsound Festival. (The
festival, which originated in Krakow, Poland, is staging its fourth New York
edition.) ''Concealed'' was Friday's headlined event, after a short performance
for electric guitar, made orchestral with digital effects, by the Polish
musician Jakub Ziolek, in a project he calls Stara Rzeka, and a generous,
resonant one by the composer Phill Niblock.

The fact that the music of ''Concealed'' -- a bit dark-ambient, a bit
post-techno, assisted by the live strings of the seven-piece Sinfonietta
Cracovia, often guided by regular beats and arranged with ordinary harmonies,
sometimes based in mysterious, decontextualized samples -- finally wasn't that
nourishing seemed beside the point. It had a function. That function was to
implicate you into some kind of secret, and to creep you out.

Mr. England's film arrived in discrete chapters. One showed clouds streaking
ominously in accelerated motion across a plain. One featured actors in military
uniforms, goose-stepping around in shoes with curled toes, and arranging
teaspoons bearing special insignia on some sort of dirt map. One featured a
Butoh dancer in slow, elegant contortions. So, you know: ritual, nightmare,
secret societies, good and evil, the freakiness of nature and the body.

The music was composed by Miles Whitaker and Sean Canty of Demdike Stare, with
orchestration by Danny Norbury. It came with a frustrating anonymity: dense or
spacious, with strings or without, these sketches often felt like semi-generic
atmospheres. It was music once removed: concerned with how sound can conjure
complicated emotion, but seldom settling in on the challenges and glories of
sound itself.

Mr. Niblock's new work ''Unipolar Dance'' settled in on the thing itself. (Now
80, Mr. Niblock is a local hero: a composer and filmmaker and director of the
Experimental Intermedia, in Chinatown, where he has been booking performances
for 40 years.) To make the piece, in two movements, he had the husband-and-wife
violinists Pauline Kim Harris and Conrad Harris record continuous tones, in
multi-track long strokes; there was always a steady drone chord at the music's
base, with layers of detail and dissonance on top.

And during the playback of it on Friday, as recorded sound boomed through the
speakers -- one gigantic chord, roaring and engulfing -- the string players
walked the side aisles of the church, further entangling with one another's
sounds, adding more texture and harmony, and making sense of the title, which is
an anagram of their first names.

Mr. Niblock showed an accompanying series of his own faded-color nature films:
reflections of bright sunlight on the water of a shallow creek, close-ups of
leaves rustled by wind or of water droplets on a rock, wobbling slightly but
cohering through surface tension. Basically, the images expressed the same
concern as the music. What was that concern? How to take in, and be astonished
by, an ever-changing continuity.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/arts/music/demdike-stare-plays-alongside-a-fil
m-by-michael-england.html

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Long Tone: Phill Niblock, above, and others played alongside
a  Michael England film at the First Unitarian Church in Brooklyn. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY JACOB BLICKENSTAFF FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


