                             1287 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday
                        The International New York Times

Go Beyond Diplomacy on Syria

BYLINE: By JONATHAN STEVENSON

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg.

LENGTH: 966 words


NEWPORT, R.I. -- Along with President Obama, most Americans disapprove of direct
military intervention in Syria. They believe it would immerse the United States
in another Middle East war with unpredictable consequences. They much prefer a
diplomatic solution.

They are correct. But Syria is not as distant a threat as some believe, and
limited, discreet military assistance to the Syrian opposition could enhance
American security and make diplomacy more likely to succeed.

It is true that Al Qaeda's senior leadership in Pakistan has urged jihadis in
Syria to focus on toppling its president, Bashar al-Assad, and worry about more
distant enemies later. But the senior leadership has less influence among its
affiliates than before.

One of the largest, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, known as ISIS, has
rejected the leadership's guidance in favor of more ambitious operations,
prompting Ayman al-Zawahri, Al Qaeda's senior leader, to disavow it in favor of
a more Syria-focused organization, the Nusra Front. But instead of backing down,
ISIS has taken on the Nusra Front for primacy in Syria, while its leader, Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, is challenging Mr. Zawahri for the leadership of Al Qaeda.

At the same time, ISIS appears to be developing closer relations with another
powerful Al Qaeda affiliate, the Yemen-based Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula,
whose leader has hinted that the two organizations might even merge.

Any alignment between the two would present a challenge to American security. Al
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula is the most capable of Al Qaeda's franchises: The
group orchestrated the 2009 attempt by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the so-called
underwear bomber, to blow up an airliner over Detroit; sent an explosives-laden
package to the United States in 2010; and threatened attacks on several American
embassies in 2013. It also provided sanctuary for Anwar al-Awlaki, the American
citizen who had a worldwide following as a Qaeda ideologue before he was killed
in a drone strike in 2011.

Still, as chaotic as Yemen can be, its government works closely with American
forces, and that has constrained Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula's operations.
Should it find a new base and set of resources in Syria through an alliance with
ISIS, it could become much more capable of hitting the United States. Such a
development could also mean that America's established methods of defending
against Al Qaeda franchises -- intelligence sharing, cooperative border security
-- would be substantially less effective.

All of which puts President Obama in a difficult situation: Like it or not, for
now the Assad regime and the United States' Shiite adversaries Iran and
Hezbollah constitute the best counter to resolutely transnational jihadist
groups that are combining forces in and around Syria and gaining strength. That
doesn't mean America should accept, let alone encourage, the perpetuation of the
horrors of the Syrian conflict. But it does mean that Mr. Obama must not merely
advance Mr. Assad's exit from office, but also ensure that the government that
replaces his regime is moderate and capable.

The power-sharing compromise that the administration has pursued would yield
countervailing checks on Sunni and Shiite extremism, and active American
diplomacy must continue to explore avenues for achieving it -- including
circumspect engagement with Iran.

However, in light of the entrenched positions of both Qaeda extremists and Iran
and Hezbollah in Syria, diplomacy is unlikely to be enough. The United States
needs to go further and provide sustained covert assistance to moderate Syrian
opposition groups. That would signal the determination and staying power of the
United States and its partners, and provide assurances that they intend to
mitigate the risks that Al Qaeda and other Sunni jihadis pose to a peaceful
political transition in Syria.

Some steps along these lines are already being taken. The administration has
hinted that it is ramping up Jordan-based covert training and coordination
programs for moderate opposition groups, and evidence has emerged that the
United States is supplying them with anti-tank missiles.

Such steps have a dual function: On the one hand, they reassure Iran and
Hezbollah that the United States is committed to an outcome that does not
empower Sunni extremists; on the other hand, because the moderate opposition too
is in conflict with Mr. Assad and his foreign allies, American covert assistance
raises the price of military engagement for Iran and Hezbollah, making them more
likely to come to the bargaining table.

More could be done. Washington could consider creating a trusted elite force of
heavily vetted and trained opposition fighters that could take on ISIS and the
Nusra Front, help defend smaller or less capable moderate groups against radical
jihadis and possibly form the core of a stabilization force for Syria.

This strategy might seem to detract from the administration's larger, strategic
goal of elevating soft power over hard power as a foreign policy tool. On the
contrary: If the United States is to achieve a diplomatic solution in Syria, and
thus prove the efficacy of soft power, it has to do so without compromising
homeland security.

To that end, by demonstrating America's determination to counter jihadist
terrorism to Iran and Russia, enhanced programs for vetting, training and
equipping the Syrian opposition could actually advance diplomatic efforts. By
tamping down global terrorist threats, they would also help secure the American
homeland.

Jonathan Stevenson, a professor of strategic studies at the United States Naval
War College, was the director for political-military affairs for the Middle East
and North Africa on the national security staff at the White House from November
2011 to May 2013.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/22/opinion/go-beyond-diplomacy-on-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


