                             1279 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reverend Billy Brings a New Sermon to Joe's Pub

BYLINE: By A.C. LEE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; WEEKEND
MISER; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 458 words


During Occupy Wall Street a few years ago, the Miser moseyed over to Zuccotti
Park for a firsthand look. A singular figure in a white suit over clerical garb
and collar, his blond-highlighted pompadour bopping in sync with his
sermonizing, stood out.

He immediately called to mind an angry televangelist, a species the Miser
happens to know, having grown up mere miles down the road from Jim and Tammy
Faye Bakker's empire and alongside sheep from the flocks of Falwell, Swaggart
and Robertson.

But the Bible tells us not to judge, and sure enough, while this pastor, who
went by Reverend Billy, was as telegenic as his predecessors, his preaching
couldn't have been more different. Reverend Billy, also known as Bill Talen, is
not exactly a man of God but rather a primate of the Church of Stop Shopping, a
veteran street activist and an Obie-winning performer.

More recently, Reverend Billy and his several-dozen-strong Stop Shopping Choir
have turned their focus to environmental activism. On Sunday afternoon, Joe's
Pub will become their cabaret-tabernacle for ''The Honeybeelujah! Show,'' which
highlights the fate of the honeybee in the face of the Harvard-designed RoboBee
drones intended to replace it.

Tickets are $15 and can be reserved on Joe's Pub website, so you won't have to
wait until the next time Reverend Billy and singers spontaneously swarm Times
Square or infest an unsuspecting conglomerate's lobby. The show runs through
June 22.

(Sunday at 2 p.m., 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village;
212-967-7555, joespub.com.)

MUSIC AND ART IN QUEENS

The effort and expense involved in reviving a musical means that typically only
critical and commercial successes enter the canon. Rodgers and Hammerstein
achieved that consensus with shows like ''Oklahoma!,'' ''South Pacific'' and
''The Sound of Music,'' all of which have been mounted and remounted in
countless settings.

In 1947 Rodgers and Hammerstein conceived the artistically ambitious
''Allegro.'' It polarized critics, ended early and is rarely revived. This
weekend, at the Good Shepherd United Methodist Church in Queens, you can judge
for yourself at the Astoria Performing Arts Center's production, which runs
through next weekend. Tickets are $18; $12 for students and adults over 65.

(Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.; 30-44 Crescent Street, at 30th
Road, Astoria; 718-706-5750, apacny.org.)

Another great reason to be in Queens on Saturday: the L.I.C. Springs! festival.
Four blocks of Vernon Boulevard in Long Island City will feature music, art,
exercise and dance classes. The festival coincides with the L.I.C. Arts Open and
the L.I.C. Flea.

(Saturday from 1 to 6 p.m., Vernon Boulevard between 50th and 46th Avenues, Long
Island City; licpartnership.org.)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/16/nyregion/reverend-billy-brings-a-new-sermon-to
-joes-pub.html

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Reverend Billy and the Stop Shopping Choir are  bringing ''The
Honeybeelujah Show'' to Joe's Pub. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KIM FRACZEK)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


