                             1243 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What to Expect When a Clinton Is Expecting

BYLINE: By JODI KANTOR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; POLITICAL MEMO; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 872 words


In some alternate universe, a distant political galaxy unlike our own, Chelsea
Clinton might be able to have her first child quietly. No one would care about
the size of her baby bump. If and when Hillary Rodham Clinton announces a
presidential run, her status as a grandparent would receive exactly the same
scrutiny as her male predecessors who were grandfathers.

That is not the country we live in. Here is what to expect now that Chelsea
Clinton is expecting: Her child, due in the fall, will arrive just months before
Hillary Clinton may announce her next run for president. Even nonfamous women
find that when they are pregnant, ''your body becomes a public object,'' as
Julia Cheiffetz, a book editor and new mother in Brooklyn, put it. So imagine
what could happen to Ms. Clinton, whose entry into motherhood could coincide
with her family's kickoff of a billion-dollar campaign in which biography and
family are central strategic assets. Most pregnant women make a birth plan for
when they go into labor: what to pack, how to get to the hospital. Chelsea
Clinton's arrangements might involve disguises, private security consultants and
public relations strategy.

Ms. Clinton has been in the public eye for so long that she may be prepared for
this kind of pregnancy. In 1992, at age 12, Ms. Clinton was featured in the
''Man from Hope'' video broadcast at the Democratic convention, assuring voters
about her father's character in the face of accusations of marital misconduct.
Her graduation party at Stanford included two receiving lines, one for those who
wanted to meet her father, another for meeting her mother, a fellow student
recalled. Her 2010 wedding drew so much attention that her parents had to turn
it into a covert operation, barring cameras and keeping the location secret.

To share her family news, Ms. Clinton could have issued a quiet written
statement. Instead she made a surprise announcement at an event on Thursday for
her mother's proto-campaign, a question-and-answer session with teenage girls.
''Marc and I are very excited that we have our first child arriving later this
year,'' she said of her husband, Marc Mezvinsky, beaming as her mother sat
beside her. ''And I certainly feel all the better that she or he will grow up in
a world full of so many strong young female leaders,'' she continued, wrapping
her personal news in a larger message about putting women in charge.

How will the public view the prospect of a grandmother presidential candidate, a
commander in chief who bounces a toddler one day and orders drone strikes the
next? Does the word ''grandmother'' connote authority, durability and wisdom, or
a less-flattering set of associations? Older candidates -- Bob Dole, John McCain
-- have found their age an issue in recent presidential contests, and
Republicans have already been trying to portray Mrs. Clinton, now 66, as too old
for the job.

Women past 50 or 60 often say they feel invisible in their workplaces, but they
are not Hillary Clinton, whose entry into national public life was marked by far
less favorable news about her family. In 1992, she faced interview questions
about her husband's liaisons with other women. If she runs for the 2016
Democratic nomination, she could be asked far easier questions about having a
toddler crawl under her desk, and keeping Cheerios in the small kitchen she once
installed in the private presidential residence: a happy denouement to what was
once a rocky family saga.

Being a grandmother also may lend reassuring maternal warmth to a politician who
often struggled in 2008 over what gender messages to send. ''Just by running for
president you're violating a lot of cultural assumptions about what women are
like, so you have to work to shore up your compliance with female stereotypes,''
said Marianne Cooper, a sociologist at Stanford University.

Perhaps for that reason, mothers can be especially potent on the political
stage. Kissing a stranger's baby is one thing; cradling your own bundle of
innocence and authenticity is another. Before Sarah Palin's vice-presidential
candidacy flamed out, she dazzled audiences by campaigning with her baby in her
arms. (The pregnancy of her daughter Bristol Palin turned into a messier drama.)

On Wednesday night at a Fortune magazine event in New York, Samantha Power, the
American ambassador to the United Nations, charmed female executives by
contrasting the toughness of her day job -- negotiating with China and Russia on
matters like Syria -- with tenderness of her other job, raising her two young
children.

She occasionally misses a call from President Obama while bathing her children,
she said, and she tries to tell her 5-year-old the truth about her work. ''One
of [my son's] very dear friends was trying to take the toys he was playing with
and my son said -- and I never guessed he would be capable of this -- 'You're
just like Putin!' '' she said, taking a whack at the Russian leader from an
unexpected angle. The audience howled in appreciation.

But in presidential politics, candidates who are grandmothers are still novel
figures. In the end, Chelsea Clinton's pregnancy could say very little new about
babies and a lot about being a woman who is decades and decades older.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/19/us/politics/what-to-expect-when-a-clinton-is-e
xpecting.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Chelsea Clinton announced on Thursday that she and her husband,
Marc Mezvinsky, will be having their first child. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BAZUKI
MUHAMMAD/REUTERS)
   Hillary Rodham Clinton's grandchild is due just months before she would be
expected to say if she is running for president. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH FREMSON/THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


