                             1289 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Grocery Deliveries in Sharing Economy

BYLINE: By FARHAD MANJOO.

Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; STATE OF THE ART; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1343 words


''I hope you realize that you are about to witness a remarkable display in
ineptitude,'' the technology investor Michael J. Moritz said as he entered a
Whole Foods store in San Francisco one recent afternoon.

Mr. Moritz, the chairman of the venture capital firm Sequoia Capital and a
recipient of a British knighthood last year, was wearing a bright green T-shirt
bearing a logo for Instacart, a two-year-old grocery delivery start-up that
Sequoia has invested in. He was here to show me what it's like to work for the
start-up -- in particular, how unexpectedly difficult it is to quickly and
accurately buy and deliver an assortment of groceries for a stranger.

Instacart might not sound like a novel service. It is one of several companies
that is trying to revive a dream first floated, and then shelved, during the
last dot-com boom -- the dream of ordering your staples online and having them
show up at your door a short while later. At least a half-dozen firms offer
grocery delivery across the country, including Amazon.com's AmazonFresh,
FreshDirect, Peapod and services run by big grocery chains.

But behind the scenes, Instacart is unusual and intriguing. It operates
according to a decentralized business model that borrows from services like
Uber, Airbnb and other firms in the so-called sharing economy. And it is not
only potentially lucrative, but also could redefine how we think about the
future of labor.

When you buy groceries from Instacart, the company summons a green-shirted
''personal shopper'' through the firm's smartphone app. The shopper receives
your list, scurries through a grocery store to pick up your items and then heads
across town in his own car to deliver your stuff.

Instacart's shoppers earn from $15 to $30 an hour, depending on how quickly they
deliver people's food. That's quite a high wage considering the job does not
require a college degree, is part time and can be done during flexible hours.
It's substantially more than the typical supermarket worker salary of about $9
to $11 per hour -- though of course without any benefits like health insurance.
The workers are independent contractors, responsible for paying for expenses
like their own Social Security taxes.

Still, Instacart's success suggests that rather than simply automate workers out
of their jobs, technology might create new labor opportunities for people who
haven't acquired formal credentials or skills in an economy where low- and
medium-skilled workers face a bleak outlook. Like the ride-sharing service Uber,
Instacart creates work by connecting affluent customers who have more money than
time with part-time workers who have the opposite problem -- lots of time, not
enough money.

But unlike ride-sharing or apartment rental services, Instacart isn't intruding
upon a regulated industry, and its service poses little risk to its customers'
health or property, so it faces few of the complications that have dogged other
sharing companies. Because it expands the customer base for physical stores, it
has also been welcomed by some grocery chains as a potential bulwark against the
wider rollout of Amazon's delivery service.

''When you ask what kind of niches we'll see for people who used to be in
traditional middle-class jobs, this is the kind of labor that could fit into
that,'' said Tyler Cowen, an economist at George Mason University whose book
''Average Is Over'' contemplates how technology is altering labor markets. ''I
wouldn't want to suggest people will become grocery-delivery millionaires,'' he
said, ''but if you don't have a college education but you're smart and
responsible, could you make a living doing this and maybe piecing it together
with some of these other kinds of jobs? Absolutely.''

Instacart was founded in 2012 by Apoorva Mehta, now 27, an engineer who spent
two years working at Amazon.com. ''I had this problem of never having groceries
in my fridge and never having the motivation and energy to go to the store,''
Mr. Mehta said. But he found most grocery services, including AmazonFresh, too
cumbersome. They required him to submit his order many hours in advance of
delivery, and they sometimes didn't offer the merchandise he was used to getting
at his local store.

What's more, traditional grocery delivery services are costly to set up,
requiring warehouses to store perishable food, a fleet of custom-painted trucks
for delivery and a staff of full- or part-time workers to package and deliver
the orders. ''We were the clowns who invested in WebVan, and we are only just
getting out of therapy from that,'' Mr. Moritz said, referring to the first
boom's spectacular grocery flameout.

Instacart does not maintain warehouses or trucks. Instead, the service is
assembled out of found parts -- existing supermarkets, willing part-time workers
and their cars. The model has many advantages. It creates vast selection for
customers by allowing them to shop at many different stores, from large chains
to specialty shops like San Francisco's worker-owned, vegan-friendly Rainbow
Co-Op. It allows for extremely quick delivery too, including an option that will
deliver your groceries in under an hour.

Though he declined to provide specifics, Mr. Mehta also said the firm had turned
a profit in certain markets. Instacart now operates in ten cities, including New
York, San Francisco, Chicago, Boston, Austin, Seattle and Los Angeles, and plans
to be in 17 by the end of the year. It has 50 full-time employees and more than
1,000 independent shoppers under contract, many of whom fall into two
demographic groups: college students and middle-aged mothers looking for
flexible work.

Despite its low-cost business model, Instacart isn't cheap. The service charges
a delivery fee of $3.99 for most orders, and it also makes money by marking up
store prices. The amounts vary depending on the item, but I noticed Instacart's
prices coming in at about 20 percent more than I could find at my local store.

The markup explains in part how Instacart can afford to pay shoppers such high
wages. But as I discovered as I shopped with Mr. Moritz, there's another factor
behind high pay: Shopping is a skill, and Instacart pays handsomely to get
people who are very good at it.

Though he could talk at length about the virtues of Instacart's business, Mr.
Moritz is a billionaire investor, but he turned out to be a poor shopper. As we
walked through Whole Foods, he often needed my help to locate a customer's
items. I had to show him where to find grapes, bananas and Perrier; neither of
us had any luck finding Babybel cheese.

A few days later, I went on another delivery with Sharon Schedler, a 43-year-old
mother who has been working for Instacart for about a year. She was a pro.
Despite my peppering her with questions, she completed an 11-item order in under
10 minutes, including giving the customer a call to suggest substituting chicken
breasts for chicken tenders, which were out of stock. Ms. Schedler was also
meticulous about picking produce. ''I try to be pickier than I would be for
myself,'' she said as she studied zucchinis for nicks.

Lawrence F. Katz, an economist at Harvard who studies technology and labor,
offered a few reasons to stifle excessive optimism about Instacart's model.
First, technology may yet one day render Instacart's shoppers obsolete. Drones
could pick our groceries, after all.

Another possibility, he said, is that wages will be bid down as more people
compete to become Instacart shoppers. Or, as the company's software becomes more
sophisticated, it could squeeze more efficiency out of workers; they may end up
doing more work and not earn any more money for it.

A third problem is the lack of job security and benefits, which were once
considered standard features of middle-class jobs. But Mr. Mehta says he doesn't
see that shifting. ''The advantage to this model is that you choose your own
hours,'' he said. More corporate control over work habits ''is something that
would drive a lot of people away. The independent contractor model -- I'm not
sure that's going to change.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/22/technology/personaltech/online-grocery-start-u
p-takes-page-from-sharing-services.html

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Apoorva Mehta founded Instacart in 2012. ''I had this problem
of never having groceries in my fridge and never having the motivation and
energy to go to the store,'' he said. But he found most grocery services
lacking.
 Dave Banse, a personal shopper for Instacart, at a San Francisco grocery
store. He uses his smartphone to check his shopping list, above right.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER DASILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)  DRAWING (DRAWING BY
STUART GOLDENBERG)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


