                             1274 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

De Blasio Looks Toward Sweden for Road Safety

BYLINE: By MATT FLEGENHEIMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; LIFE VS. TRAFFIC; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1372 words


STOCKHOLM -- Across this Scandinavian capital of graceful cyclists and
speed-regulating shrubbery, cabbies who drive Volvos and pedestrians who look
over their shoulders before jaywalking, a simple figure rules:

Zero. It is the number of people permitted to die in Swedish traffic, according
to national law.

For nearly two decades, every rising barrier and reduced speed limit has been
tailored to this seemingly impossible goal, of eradicating traffic deaths and
serious injuries, and its guiding premise: Every inch of street space must
anticipate, and accommodate, human error.

While roadway deaths have not been eliminated, the country's rate of fatalities
has been whittled down to an international low. Now its approach faces perhaps
its stiffest test: the streets of New York City.

In a bid to reverse generations of roadway unruliness, Mayor Bill de Blasio has
put the strategy, known as Vision Zero, at the forefront of his transportation
and policing agendas, targeting 2024 as the first year with no traffic deaths.

But in a city of 800 languages, nearly 14,000 taxis and 8.4 million potential
traffic rants, street safety promises to be a complicated import.

Surface similarities between New York and its European counterpart, like bike
lanes, pedestrian islands and a well-developed transit system, tend to wither on
closer examination.

Pillars of the Swedish model include the reduction of default speed limits and
the expansion of automated enforcement. Each requires the approval of state
lawmakers in New York, who have yet to embrace the ideas widely.

Roundabouts, a major traffic tool in Sweden, are difficult to imagine on the
high-density streets of Manhattan, transportation experts say. The term does not
appear in the de Blasio administration's Vision Zero Action Plan, released in
February.

In New York, the addition of planters and lawn chairs along pedestrian plazas
drew snickers. In Sweden, potted vegetation is a traffic tool, placed on local
roads to slow down drivers on straightaways.

In Stockholm, when the rare car horn sounds, the drone borders on polite, more
of a gentle suggestion than a throbbing demand.

While Sweden's population -- more than 9.5 million -- is only slightly larger
than New York's, the country has imposed sweeping reforms involving road
construction, pedestrian protections and other policies with relatively little
conflict. The Swedish Parliament adopted Vision Zero in 1997 as the national
foundation for all road safety operations, heeding the calls of transportation
planners who warned that the country's traffic strategy was ill equipped for the
next century.

The result has been a sort of social contract between state and citizen: If
residents follow the most basic traffic laws, engineers can design roads to
guard against all fatalities.

''You should be able to make mistakes,'' said Lars Darin, a senior official with
the Swedish Transport Administration, ''without being punished by death.''

Last year, 264 people were killed, less than half the number in 1997. The
fatality rate in Stockholm, 1.1 deaths per 100,000, is less than one-third of
New York City's rate. The national rate, 2.7 deaths per 100,000, is the lowest
in the world, according to transportation officials.

The Swedish reputation for prudence seems to have seeped into the lexicon. Those
raised in the Vision Zero age use the phrase ''typical Swede'' as something of a
playful insult.

''It's like you're too safe, you're too afraid of everything,'' Johanna Brundin,
20, said of the term, as a group of cyclists swept past her along the city's
Djurgarden waterfront. ''I like being a Swede.''

On many city streets, the speed limit has dipped below 20 miles per hour. In
suburban areas, median barriers have proliferated, separating two-way traffic on
high-speed corridors.

Officials say the barriers and roundabouts have in fact increased the potential
for crashes, vehicle damage and minor injuries for some users. The trade-off:
The sight of serious crashes at these locations has all but disappeared.

In a departure from most American traffic safety approaches, including New York
City's, Swedish authorities have generally dismissed the effects of education or
enforcement on pedestrian safety. They were critical of the blitz of jaywalking
tickets during Mr. de Blasio's early months in office and efforts by the New
York Police Department to distribute cards with safety tips in areas with a
recent history of fatal crashes.

''Design around the human as we are,'' said Claes Tingvall, the director of
traffic safety at the Swedish Transport Administration and a godfather of the
Vision Zero plan.

Though traffic deaths have fallen in many areas of the world, in large part
because of improvements in emergency care and vehicle safety, places that have
adopted Vision Zero-style programs have reported disproportionate success.
According to the New York City plan, fatality rates in American states with
Vision Zero policies, including Minnesota and Utah, fell at a pace more than 25
percent quicker than the national rate.

In New York, amid a flurry of street adjustments under Mayor Michael R.
Bloomberg, traffic deaths have decreased by about 26 percent since 2001. Last
year, according to the city's Transportation Department, 290 people were killed.
The department has been in contact with the Swedes, holding phone briefings with
Vision Zero experts and meeting in person with some who were visiting New York,
though no one from the administration has traveled to Sweden to look at the
strategy firsthand.

Polly Trottenberg, the city's transportation commissioner, emphasized that while
her international peers were a useful resource, New York was ''definitely not
going to be Stockholm.''

''You want to think carefully about culture change,'' Ms. Trottenberg said.
''New York City is one of the more remarkable pedestrian cultures in the
world.''

The city's plan has called for improved precinct-level police enforcement of
speeding rules, the widening of parking lanes and the placement of ''black box''
data recorders in taxicabs. Mr. Tingvall of the Swedish Transport Administration
called the set of proposals ''very impressive.''

In recent weeks, the city has also unveiled a series of ''arterial slow zones,''
reducing the speed limit to 25 m.p.h. from 30 in designated areas, among other
changes.

Street overhauls that provoked significant community turmoil under Mr.
Bloomberg, like the expansion of bike lanes, appear less politically divisive
when framed in the context of public safety.

At the city's urging, state lawmakers recently approved the addition of 120
speed cameras in New York City school zones, bringing the total to 140. Sweden
has more than 1,100.

Sweden has also installed a congestion-based toll plan, similar to the one
championed unsuccessfully by Mr. Bloomberg, that has reduced traffic volumes by
20 percent in the target areas. Its safety effects are twofold, officials say:
better cycling and walking conditions, with fewer cars on the road, and
increased revenues to pay for major road improvements.

At least some Swedish vigilance seems to predate Vision Zero.

About 20 years ago, a now-defunct program allowed some homeowners to decide
where speed bumps would be installed. The result: a hump every 20 meters in some
neighborhoods, and some very slow trips home.

A veteran taxi driver, Nabil Bellar, 42, said he had never been asked to speed
up.

''They say, 'I have time, you don't need to stress,' '' he said of his typical
passenger, as he waited outside Stockholm Central Station.

Others appreciate the country's zeal for traffic safety only in hindsight. In
1998, Mr. Tingvall said, a driver who had survived after crashing into a newly
constructed barrier sent the transport administration a cake.

For Nicklas Carlson, 32, an anthropology student at Stockholm University,
clarity arrived as he sat in the back seat of a New York taxi in 2009, after his
cabby left the vehicle to shout at a rival on the road.

''In broad daylight!'' Mr. Carlson marveled. ''This would never, ever happen in
Sweden.''

LIFE VS. TRAFFIC: A European Model: Articles in this series are examining Vision
Zero, the Swedish approach to traffic safety adopted by New York City under
Mayor Bill de Blasio.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/13/nyregion/de-blasio-looks-toward-sweden-for-roa
d-safety.html

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Swedish Parliament adopted Vision Zero in 1997, and the
fatality rate has since been whittled down to an international low.
 Morning traffic in Stockholm. Sweden has imposed sweeping  reforms on road
construction with relatively little conflict. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JONATHAN
NACKSTRAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News; Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


