                             1215 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 2, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tuneful Tribute Bridges Decades

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 592 words


Folkies, pop crooners, punks and soul singers could all latch onto something
from the catalog of Paul Simon on Monday night at Carnegie Hall. ''The Music of
Paul Simon,'' with about two dozen performers playing a song each, was the 10th
annual all-star songwriter tribute at Carnegie Hall produced by Michael Dorf of
City Winery. It's a series of benefit concerts that has raised nearly a million
dollars for music education. Among the performers was a duo of 13-year-old
songwriters, Megan Doyle and Snow Guilfoyle, from one of the beneficiary
institutions, the Church Street School for Music and Art, singing the
contrapuntal ''Scarborough Fair/Canticle.''

There's often an emotional counterpoint in Mr. Simon's songs: a shifting balance
of misgivings and consolations that demands an attentive singer. When Judy
Collins sang ''Bridge Over Troubled Water,'' her clear-voiced sympathy was as
much with the list of tribulations in the verses as with the comfort of the
refrain. Ann and Nancy Wilson, the sisters who lead Heart, presented the
plaintive camaraderie of ''Old Friends'' as an acoustic duet.

Joy Williams, from the Civil Wars, brought out the theological odyssey of ''The
Sound of Silence'' with a meticulous arrangement that moved from a violin drone
to folk-rock to stark a cappella harmonies. Madeleine Peyroux gave ''American
Tune,'' which in 1973 was already worried about the end of American ideals, a
wistful hint of the blues, while Joe Henry made ''The Boxer'' sound even more
haggard.

As a house band to handle the international rhythms of many Simon songs, the
concert had Antibalas, which is rooted in Nigerian Afrobeat but thoroughly
flexible. It may have been obvious to book the New Orleans songwriter and
pianist Allen Toussaint for ''Take Me to the Mardi Gras,'' but he and Antibalas
turned it into a two-fisted Mardi Gras mambo. Joined by the singer Tunde
Adebimpe from TV on the Radio, Antibalas devised a horn-driven Afrobeat hybrid
for the nervous groove of ''Think Too Much.''

Antibalas became a punky garage-rock band for John Doe's version of ''Mrs.
Robinson,'' a nod to the Lemonheads' 1992 remake, and for Bob Mould's revved-up
''Fakin' It.'' It got even rowdier for the concert's deep-catalog rediscovery:
''Motorcycle,'' a rocker Mr. Simon (calling himself Jerry Landis) released in
1961, sung by a group billed as Tico & the Triumphs; the song was happily
growled by Gibby Haynes of the Butthole Surfers and Bob Forrest from Thelonious
Monster.

While some performers were content to emulate Mr. Simon's recordings, a few
showed more imagination. L. P. (the songwriter Laura Pergolizzi) had an elfin
whistling-and-ukulele version of ''Slip Slidin' Away,'' with backup vocals from
Antibalas. Ben Sollee made one of Mr. Simon's more prosy songs, ''Wartime
Prayers,'' a solo for voice and cello that captured its hope and mourning.

Wisely, the concert had soul singers for its peak. Sam Moore, of Sam & Dave,
brought gospelly improvisation to ''Loves Me Like a Rock.'' Bettye LaVette found
her own message in ''50 Ways to Leave Your Lover'': ''Set yourself free!'' she
crowed, as she strutted the stage.

Casting an African woman to sing a song about a tourist in Africa -- Angélique
Kidjo from Benin singing ''You Can Call Me Al'' -- was probably inevitable. But
it also brought the audience to its feet as Ms. Kidjo, resplendent in an orange
dress and headdress, bore down on the lyrics, danced across the stage and lent
her voice to the song's irresistible horn hook, banishing all misgivings for the
joys of beat and melody.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/arts/music/tuneful-paul-simon-tribute-bridges-
decades.html

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Music of Paul Simon:  Among the singers at this year's
annual tribute concert at  Carnegie Hall, clockwise from top,  Angélique Kidjo,
Bettye LaVette,  Bob Forrest and Gibby Haynes  (in green shirt), and L. P.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JULIETA CERVANTES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


