                             1285 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

As an Enigmatic Tension Mounts

BYLINE: By SIOBHAN BURKE

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; DANCE REVIEW; Pg.

LENGTH: 483 words


It's been two years since Liz Santoro presented ''We Do Our Best'' at St. Mark's
Church, and still, sounds and images from that spartan trio linger in the mind:
the repetitive, echoey click of high heels on a wooden floor; an interminable
drone that enveloped everyone in the room, locking us into one tense, protracted
moment. There was a peculiar placelessness to this world, only intensified by
the exacting placement of everything within it.

Ms. Santoro's latest project, ''Relative Collider,'' which had its premiere at
the Chocolate Factory on Wednesday, exists within that same liminal universe.
Collisions abound: between structure and chaos, numbers and words, definitive
gestures and inscrutable expressions. Ms. Santoro, who has a background in
neuroscience, is interested in how we give and receive attention. Over the 45
obsessive, intriguing minutes of ''Relative Collider,'' a co-presentation with
Abrons Arts Center, she stimulates many parts of the mind: the part that wants
to solve equations, crack codes, as much as the part that prefers not to have
any answers.

The performers -- Ms. Santoro, Cynthia Koppe, Stephen Thompson and Pierre Godard
-- enter the bright white space with brisk but unassuming intention, like four
latecomers, looking just the right amount of casual but dancerly in Reid
Bartelme's costumes. You almost expect them to sit down in the audience, but
instead they pause at a distance, a few feet from one another. Mr. Godard stands
behind a laptop poised on a minimalist pedestal and sets off the sound of a
ticking metronome. This count of eight -- while sometimes accelerating or
slowing down or subject to sly disruptions -- will not rest until the show is
over.

Nor will the corresponding movement, which begins simply: the dancers tapping
their heels in time with the measured tick (Brendan Dougherty designed the
sound), alternating left and right in a pattern that repeats and repeats but is
tough to pin down. On top of this miniature march, which blossoms into
understated jumps, wide-legged lunges and prancing runs, Ms. Santoro layers
semaphoric arms and choreography for the face and eyes. She invites the gaze to
indulge in detail: What are those cupped palms, hitchhiking thumbs, clenched
fists, fidgeting mouths, shifting pupils trying to tell us?

Language doesn't offer any explanations as Mr. Godard's text -- what seem like
randomly generated words -- replaces the beat of the metronome. His breathless
incantations could be drawn from the Bible or a grocery list. Periodically
counting from one through eight, he converses with the pattern of the dancers'
feet.

''Relative Collider'' is like a continuous transition, a drawn-out crescendo,
governed by a crystalline but elusive logic. One fragment of Mr. Godard's
looping text stands out every time it comes around: ''and that's why the.'' You
want him to finish that sentence, but you also don't.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/21/arts/dance/liz-santoros-relative-collider-at-c
hocolate-factory.html

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


