                             1227 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Skyway Route Is Closed, Drivers Lose a Crucial Link

BYLINE: By MATT FLEGENHEIMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 937 words


NEWARK -- Here is the view of New Jersey transportation from an eight-acre tow
yard on the edge of the city:

More than 1,000 cars, most felled by potholes or the maneuvering of the state's
less-than-celebrated drivers, fill the grounds. Planes drone over the tangle of
highways just outside the fence.

And overhead, the Pulaski Skyway towers.

''This,'' said Vernon Bradshaw, 24, a tow driver for the lot, ''is going to be
terrible.''

On Saturday, northbound traffic on the skyway will be shut down for an estimated
two years for a reconstruction project, severing a critical link for roughly
40,000 vehicles in and around Jersey City and Newark and complicating commutes
to New York City for those who use the bridge to reach the Holland Tunnel.

The integrity of the structure, which opened in 1932, has grown increasingly
worrisome in recent years, officials said; its roadbed and concrete railings are
so frayed that the state installed netting to catch the falling debris.

''We can't put any more Band-Aids on the bridge,'' James S. Simpson, the New
Jersey transportation commissioner, said on Monday as he examined the underside
of the bridge from a construction lift in Jersey City. ''The patient is 82 years
old.''

The skyway has also attracted attention in recent months because of the George
Washington Bridge lane-closing scandal, which has shined a light on Gov. Chris
Christie's opportunistic relationship with the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey.

In 2010, Mr. Christie ignited a controversy when he canceled construction on a
rail tunnel beneath the Hudson River and claimed billions of dollars in planned
Port Authority spending as New Jersey's money.

Much of that money is being used to pay for the Pulaski reconstruction, which is
estimated at more than $1 billion, including more than $300 million for the work
during the two-year shutdown.

And so, more than eight decades after its opening, the Pulaski Skyway has
achieved a singularly New Jerseyan celebrity: It is an impending traffic
nightmare, infused with political machinations.

Named for a mustachioed general of the American Revolution and immortalized
during the opening sequence of ''The Sopranos,'' the crossing has come to occupy
a special place in the state's collective consciousness.

It is not just a rickety bridge, residents say, but their rickety bridge,
three-and-a-half miles of steel that has passed its prime, gently rising up
above the Meadowlands of New Jersey and dropping down again.

''It's part of Newark,'' said Sergio Sousa, 39, the branch manager of a Hertz
equipment rental business that faces the bridge. ''You have a bunch of other
bridges that look more like an eyesore than that thing.''

To see New Jersey from the skyway is to be engulfed by the state's industrial
trappings: smokestacks and shipping containers, a procession of truck repair
shops and a smattering of solar panels, environmentally friendly but woefully
outgunned.

The bridge design is itself the product of bare-knuckled local politics.
According to Steven Hart, the author of a book on the building of the skyway,
the midsection was tugged back to earth as part of a deal engineered by Frank
Hague, the mayor of Jersey City, who insisted that the span include an off-ramp
in neighboring South Kearny to help the area's economic development. ''The
skyway design is a classic example of engineering principles undone by
politics,'' Mr. Hart said in 2007.

Some early admirers were undeterred. The American Institute of Steel
Construction deemed it the most beautiful steel bridge the year it was finished.
By 1938, the crossing had achieved sufficient renown to be destroyed by Orson
Welles's fictional Martians in his famous ''War of the Worlds'' radio broadcast.

The skyway received intense scrutiny nearly seven years ago, after the fatal
collapse of a Minneapolis bridge of the same design.

Since then, the bridge has continued to age rapidly.

''I can break it off like a wafer cookie,'' Mr. Simpson said from inside the
construction lift in Jersey City, reaching for a hole-riddled sheet of steel
beneath the bridge deck.

Samuel I. Schwartz, the former New York City traffic commissioner, has been
enlisted as a consultant in recent weeks to help mitigate the disruption to
commuters and advise on the repairs. He said the fragile state of reinforcing
bars and other deterioration called to mind the collapse of a slab from the
underdeck of Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive in 1989, when hundreds of pounds of
concrete rained down, fatally crushing a Brooklyn dentist in his car.

''That has stayed with me ever since,'' Mr. Schwartz said.

Among the alternate routes proposed for drivers, the eastbound shoulder of the
New Jersey Turnpike Newark Bay-Hudson County Extension will be converted into a
third lane during the morning and evening rush. Travelers can also shift to the
adjacent highway used for trucks, which are barred from the Pulaski Skyway.

Officials acknowledge that the delays could be significant.

''This is with the Pulaski open,'' Mr. Schwartz said on Monday beneath the
bridge in Jersey City, gesturing toward the traffic stopped on the truck route.

Inside the trailer office of Dente Brothers Towing, which operates the Newark
lot, workers braced for the shutdown's dual impacts: It stands to hinder both
employee commutes and their response time for tow jobs.

''I thought that was one of the better roadways,'' said Frank Dente, 50, the
company's manager.

''It's not the road,'' said a colleague, Anthony Reis, 71, an unlit cigar
between his lips. ''It's the structure.''

Mr. Dente turned to his team and grimaced.

''We're going to be stuck here,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/08/nyregion/drivers-in-new-jersey-to-lose-link-as
-pulaski-skyway-route-closes.html

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: James S. Simpson, the New Jersey transportation commissioner,
points to damage under the decaying bridge, which is more than 80 years old.
Roughly 40,000 vehicles take the skyway north each day, and it is a popular
route for drivers heading to New York City by way of the Holland Tunnel.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL KIRBY SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The Pulaski Skyway, seen from Lincoln Park in Jersey City, will be closed to
northbound drivers as it undergoes renovation for two years starting Saturday.
(A18)
 Estimates say the reconstruction of the Pulaski Skyway will cost more than $1
billion. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)  MAP: The
closure will be felt around Jersey City and Newark. (A20)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


