                             1307 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dealing With Boko Haram

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 473 words


It has been more than six weeks since nearly 300 schoolgirls were kidnapped by
the Boko Haram extremist group in Nigeria. The militants have spent the last
five years wreaking havoc and killing civilians -- about 4,000 have died -- in
the northeastern section of the country. But it took a horrifying mass abduction
to touch hearts around the world and persuade Nigeria -- whose president,
Goodluck Jonathan, initially rejected outside help -- to join with other
countries to try to find them.

The United States has sent about 30 specialists from the State Department, the
F.B.I. and the Pentagon with medical, intelligence counterterrorism and
communications skills to advise Nigerian officials. It has been flying manned
and unmanned surveillance aircraft over the heavily forested northeastern region
of Nigeria where intelligence officials believe the girls are held. And last
week, about 80 armed American troops were sent to Chad, where Predator
surveillance drones will be operated from a large air base near N'Djamena.

France, which has taken a lead in the fight against militant groups in Mali and
the Central African Republic, is helping, as are Britain, Canada and Israel. On
the regional front, five West African countries -- Nigeria, Cameroon, Niger,
Chad and Benin -- have agreed despite longstanding differences to share
intelligence and strengthen military cooperation.

The militants, who easily traverse porous regional borders, have displaced close
to half a million people and destroyed hundreds of schools in a wave of terror
aimed at establishing an Islamic state in one of Nigeria's poorest regions. A
committee of the United Nations Security Council recently put Boko Haram on the
sanctions list in an effort to cut off funding.

Despite the current emergency, it would be unrealistic to expect America, or any
foreign nation, to come to the rescue every time there is a problem like this.
Every state is responsible for its own citizens' safety. On this score,
Nigeria's record is abysmal. Corruption is pervasive, and citizens rightly
complain that they have not shared in the nation's considerable oil wealth.

In many parts of the country, the government cannot provide security, good
roads, water, health, reliable power and education. The problems are especially
acute in the mostly Muslim northeast. The army, accused of human rights abuses
and starved of essential resources, is itself a threat to stability. A top
defense official on Tuesday claimed that the military knew where the girls were
but did not plan a rescue effort out of fear for their safety.

A military response is only part of the answer. Mr. Jonathan's government has to
attack the root causes of disaffection by reducing corruption; reforming the
police and army; and providing jobs, schools and other vital services for all of
Nigeria's citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/31/opinion/dealing-with-boko-haram.html

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


