                             1318 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2nd China Army Unit Implicated in Online Spying

BYLINE: By NICOLE PERLROTH; David E. Sanger contributed reporting from
Washington.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1395 words


SAN FRANCISCO -- The email attachment looked like a brochure for a yoga studio
in Toulouse, France, the center of the European aerospace industry. But once it
was opened, it allowed hackers to sidestep their victim's network security and
steal closely guarded satellite technology.

The fake yoga brochure was one of many clever come-ons used by a stealth Chinese
military unit for hacking, said researchers at CrowdStrike, an Irvine, Calif.,
security company. Their targets were the networks of European, American and
Japanese government entities, military contractors and research companies in the
space and satellite industry, systematically broken into for seven years.

Just weeks after the Justice Department indicted five members of the Chinese
army, accusing them of online attacks on United States corporations, a new
report from CrowdStrike, released on Monday, offers more evidence of the breadth
and ambition of China's campaign to steal trade and military secrets from
foreign victims.

The report, parts of which The New York Times was able to corroborate
independently, ties attacks against dozens of public and private sector
organizations back to a group of Shanghai-based hackers whom CrowdStrike called
Putter Panda because they often targeted golf-playing conference attendees. The
National Security Agency and its partners have identified the hackers as Unit
61486, according to interviews with a half-dozen current and former American
officials.

Those officials say the N.S.A. and its partners are currently tracking more than
20 hacking groups in China, over half of them units of the People's Liberation
Army, as they break into public and private sector companies ranging from
satellite, drone and nuclear weapon component makers to technology and energy
companies and research groups.

Unit 61486, researchers say, in some instances shared computing resources and
communicated with members of Unit 61398, the P.L.A. unit whose members were the
focus of last month's indictments.

''If you look at all the groups that we track in China, the indictments are just
the very tip of the iceberg,'' said George Kurtz, a co-founder of CrowdStrike.

Knowledge of the attacks, which continue even now and are being reported for the
first time, emerge amid an escalating conflict between the United States and
China over online espionage.

Tensions had been simmering for years, but grew more pointed last year when an
American cybersecurity company, Mandiant, identified Unit 61398 as the source of
thousands of attacks on foreign companies. The Justice Department's indictment
last month named five members of that group and, for the first time, named some
of its victims, which included Alcoa, Westinghouse Electric and the United
States Steel Corporation.

In response, Chinese officials have denounced the indictments, denied the
charges, cited recent revelations that the United States has engaged in its own
cyberespionage, and announced retaliatory measures, including new inspection
procedures for American technologies, all raising the prospect of a trade war.

The decision to issue indictments against the members of Unit 61398 has proved
controversial, even inside the Obama administration. The members of the unit are
almost certain never to see the inside of an American courtroom, and American
officials fear that it could become more difficult to negotiate norms of
behavior with China.

The same issue will arise in the case of this newly disclosed unit, whose
operations pose as large a threat to American infrastructure as the one whose
members have been indicted.

CrowdStrike's forensic investigation revealed that members of Unit 61486 took
steps to hide their origins -- by using compromised foreign websites to launch
their attacks, for instance -- but left behind digital traces of their
identities and whereabouts. The report does not name the companies that were
targeted because of confidentiality agreements CrowdStrike has with clients.

The hackers' tools were developed during working hours in Chinese time zones,
researchers say, and Internet records show that in one case hackers used the
same I.P. address as members of Unit 61398 to launch their attacks. The use of
that address for simultaneous attacks suggests cooperation between Unit 61398
and Unit 61486, said Adam Meyers, CrowdStrike's head of threat intelligence.

CrowdStrike, founded by two former executives of the security software company
McAfee, is one of a new generation of computer security companies that
specialize in so-called computer forensics.

Rather than reacting to attacks by hackers, the company tries to understand who
hackers are and what methods they are using. It has released several reports on
global hacking over the last year.

The firm's investigation revealed that the group targeted its victims with
custom malware disguised as emails containing PDF invitations to aerospace and
satellite conferences, job postings and, in one case, the brochure for a yoga
studio in Toulouse.

Once victims clicked on decoy files, they inadvertently downloaded malicious
programs onto their computers. That opened the door for attackers to enter the
victim's network, see which other devices and networks their victim was
connected to, and eventually steal trade secrets and design schematics for
satellite and aerospace technology.

CrowdStrike's researchers said they traced attacks on dozens of the company's
clients in the space and satellite industry to the group; the researchers say
the list of victims could number in the hundreds, if not thousands.

In some cases, researchers said, attackers slipped up and registered websites
used in their assaults under the same email address they used to register
personal blog and social media accounts. In one case, an attacker deployed a
remote access tool, or RAT, from a web domain registered to an email address
that belonged to a onetime student at the School of Information Security
Engineering at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, a top university long suspected of
being a state recruiting ground for hackers.

Representatives for Shanghai Jiaotong did not respond to fax messages requesting
comment.

In another case, an email address -- which popped up repeatedly in Internet
records for attack domains -- was used to register a personal blog on Sina.com,
the Chinese Internet portal, to a 35-year-old who listed the military as his
profession. The soldier did not return requests for comment, but in security
discussion forums, CrowdStrike's researchers uncovered discussions between that
person and two other hackers, whose noms de guerre, ClassicWind and Linxder,
have been linked to members of Unit 61398.

The 35-year-old's Picasa albums show photos of him in military training and
celebrating his birthday with friends in military garb, and pictures of his
dormitory, where P.L.A. officer hats are conspicuously in the background. And in
his album labeled ''office,'' photos show a tall white building in Shanghai,
surrounded by satellite dishes and dormitory-style residences. Researchers at
CrowdStrike believe it is the headquarters for Unit 61486.

Visited by The New York Times, the P.L.A. headquarters -- just north of downtown
Shanghai in the Zhabei district -- were clearly marked as a ''military zone.''
Soldiers guard the entrance to the building, which is surrounded by tall walls
topped with wire fencing, a moat and trees that camouflage military satellite
dishes. Viewed from nearby landmarks, the building is full of military personnel
and patriotic military slogans.

Military analysts at the Project 2049 Institute, a defense research group in
Arlington, Va., suspected that Unit 61486 supported China's space surveillance
network and maintained close ties with the Beijing Remote Sensing Research
Institute, a state-sponsored organization whose mission is to explore ''leading
technologies in earth observation and the mechanisms for acquiring and
distributing remote sensing information,'' according to its website. The
analysts never presented any evidence.

CrowdStrike believes its report offers the final proof. ''We've got the gun, the
bullet and the body,'' Mr. Meyers said of evidence connecting attacks on its
clients, in the space and satellite sectors, back to Unit 61486.

''The awareness level may be going up,'' said Mr. Kurtz of CrowdStrike. ''But
the Chinese are not slowing down. They keep plowing away.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/10/technology/private-report-further-details-chin
ese-cyberattacks.html

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: George Kurtz, chief of CrowdStrike, which issued a  new report
on Chinese online attacks. At left, a  People's Liberation Army compound in
Shanghai,  which CrowdStrike believes is headquarters to a  group of Chinese
military hackers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAM HODGSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


