                             1357 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Forces Begin Assault on Militant Strongholds

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH; Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud and Ismail Khan contributed
reporting from Peshawar, Pakistan, and Salman Masood from Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1120 words


LONDON -- For a decade now, the tribal town of Miram Shah in North Waziristan
has been a slow-burning embarrassment to the Pakistani military.

Right at the gates of an army base, Taliban kidnappers used the town telephone
exchange to make ransom demands. Suicide bombers bided their time in high-walled
compounds there before attacking Pakistan's major cities. Notorious militants
like the former Taliban leader Hakimullah Mehsud kept houses a few miles from
the base.

Those factors made Miram Shah a magnet for jihadists from across the region, and
the world -- Punjabi sectarian killers, Uighurs fighting China, Al Qaeda
commanders plotting mayhem in the West. ''The bazaar is bustling with Chechens,
Uzbeks, Russians, Bosnians, some from E.U. countries, and of course our Arab
brothers,'' David Headley, an American who joined the Pakistani terrorist group
Lashkar-e-Taiba, wrote in a 2009 email.

The Pakistani military moved to erase that blemish early Monday, when soldiers
fanned out across the town, occupying bus stands and shops as they began
wresting the town from militant control.

Infantry and special forces units moved from house to house, uncovering networks
of tunnels and bomb factories, the military said in a statement. At least 15
militants were killed and three soldiers injured in sporadic exchanges of gun
and rocket fire, it said, in an account that could not be independently
verified.

The sweep through Miram Shah marked the second phase of a broader operation
against the Pakistani Taliban and allied militants in North Waziristan. For the
past two weeks, the military unleashed air and artillery strikes as up to
500,000 civilians fled the area for neighboring districts.

More than 30,000 troops are said to be involved in the North Waziristan
operation, ostensibly prompted by a deadly militant assault on Pakistan's
largest airport, in Karachi, on June 8. But military officials said the
offensive had been in the works for months, as government-led peace talks with
the Taliban faltered, then collapsed.

Information on the fighting, however, is highly limited. Waziristan is a
restricted and perilous area for journalists in normal times, and in recent
weeks the military has pushed even local reporters out.

In its news release on Monday, the military press office said that 376 militants
and 17 soldiers had been killed in fighting so far. The Pakistani Taliban, whose
forces have reportedly fled towns like Miram Shah for the thickly forested
mountains of North Waziristan or safer neighboring districts, have not offered a
toll.

The Pakistani military's implicit claim that no civilians have died seems
unlikely, particularly given its track record of such casualties in previous
campaigns in the tribal belt. Refugees from Waziristan told of a more
indiscriminate assault.

In Peshawar on Saturday, a 15-year-old girl named Zubana lay on a hospital bed
at the Khyber Teaching Hospital, her mother and two brothers at her side. Her
lower body was swathed in bandages that covered what doctors described as
serious burns. She moaned from pain as she spoke.

''I was preparing lunch for my husband when there was an explosion, and the room
went on fire,'' said Zubana, who has just one name. ''I don't know what happened
after that. My mother says our house was destroyed. I wish I had died.''

Her mother, Toraan, said her daughter looked like a piece of ''burned coal''
when she rescued her from the rubble of their home in Khaisoor Zar, south of Mir
Ali town. She believed the army had carried out an airstrike near their house.
''We saw big planes in the sky that suddenly started dropping bombs,'' she said.

The attack occurred on June 9, one day after the militant assault on Karachi
airport, she said. On that day, the military reported retaliatory airstrikes in
Khyber district, 100 miles to the northeast, but none around Mir Ali. But it is
not unusual for military actions in the secluded tribal belt to go unreported.

For now, the fighting is concentrated in the towns of North Waziristan, Miram
Shah and Mir Ali, where military experts say they expect Pakistani soldiers to
face relatively light resistance. The fight is expected to be harder, however,
if they push into the surrounding mountains.

The determined military drive follows years of American pressure to crack down
on militant havens in North Waziristan, which has been the target of at least
273 Central Intelligence Agency drone strikes since 2004 -- more than any other
area in the world.

American officials suspected that Pakistan's reluctance to fight in Waziristan
stemmed from the military's desire to protect the Haqqani network, a formidable
fighting group that is a central element of the Afghan insurgency and enjoys
longstanding ties with the military's Inter-Services Intelligence agency.
Pakistani generals have staunchly denied any collusion with the Haqqanis, but
have admitted that their spies maintain contacts with the group.

Whatever the exact nature of that relationship, in launching the North
Waziristan ground assault, Pakistani officials seem to have acknowledged that
allowing militants to control a major town was bad news for their own country,
as well as for the West.

North Waziristan's jihadi influx started in 2001. Jihadis first fled the
American invasion of Afghanistan, then later, as the area became a rear base for
the Taliban insurgency, they arrived to join the fight against NATO and Afghan
forces. But the proliferation of jihadis also strengthened Pakistan's homegrown
Taliban fighters, who drew money and inspiration from the foreign visitors,
emboldening them to form a formidable threat to the Pakistani state.

The potency of that challenge was underscored by the June 8 attack on the
Karachi airport, and, more recently, an attack on a landing passenger jet at
Peshawar airport that killed one passenger and caused several airlines to
suspend their services to the area.

Monday's assault on Miram Shah included the mobilization of tanks, artillery and
gunship helicopters in support of infantry forces, a senior security official
said in Peshawar, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ''This is the
beginning of the search, eliminate, clear and control phase,'' he said. ''There
is no turning back.''

The other challenge is humanitarian in nature. About 500,000 villagers have fled
into the adjoining Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, creating the country's biggest
conflict-driven humanitarian crisis since 2009. The United Nations says that at
least 66,000 people have also fled into Khost Province in neighboring
Afghanistan.

Inside Pakistan, refugees have complained bitterly about lodging conditions and
inadequate facilities provided by the government at local hospitals in
northwestern towns.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/01/world/asia/pakistan-army-begins-ground-assault
-on-militants.html

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MAPS (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


