                             1311 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Journey by Rail

BYLINE: By JOSHUA HAMMER.

Joshua Hammer, a freelance foreign correspondent based in Berlin, is the author
of three nonfiction books. His next, ''Taking Timbuktu,'' will be published in
2015.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 1313 words


TRAINRiding the Rails That Created the Modern World -- From the Trans-Siberian
to the Southwest Chief


By Tom Zoellner346 pp. Viking. $27.95.

In an era of railway mediocrity, epitomized by Amtrak, it's easy to forget that
train travel was once a romantic adventure. Riding the rails to Boston in 1924,
George Gershwin listened to the roar of the steam engine and the turn of the
wheels and found the inspiration for ''Rhapsody in Blue,'' his hymn to
urbanizing, Jazz Age America. ''It was on the train, with its steely rhythms,
its rattle-ty bang, that is so often so stimulating to a composer,'' he told a
biographer, describing the moment of creation. ''I frequently hear music in the
very heart of the noise.'' W. C. Handy and other African-American musicians
heard a similar sound on the Illinois Central, the Midwestern line that spirited
them away from the Deep South on the Great Migration that began during World War
I. They married the whistle and drone of the locomotive to the plaintive chants
of sharecroppers and invented the ''city blues.'' Steve Goodman, a little-known
composer, was inspired by a ­journey on the same line to write a dirge that
became one of the anthems of the Vietnam War era -- ''The City of New
­Orleans.''


Tom Zoellner's ''Train: Riding the Rails That Created the Modern World -- From
the Trans-Siberian to the Southwest Chief'' is an engaging attempt to recapture
the power and poetry of train travel. More than 100 million people around the
world ride a train every weekday morning, the Los Angeles-based railway buff
points out at the beginning of his book. Yet the railway has become an
''underappreciated marvel,'' especially in the United States, its rich history
and technological wizardry forgotten amid the drudgery of the daily commute.

Zoellner sets off on a series of railway adventures -- across America, India,
Spain, Russia, Britain, China and the Peruvian Andes -- that provide him with
ample opportunities to contemplate the railways' influence on everything from
pop culture to dietary habits to national identity. Along the way he has
fleeting, and sometimes flirtatious, encounters with his fellow passengers, many
of whom share his passion for what he calls the ''Train Sublime: the tidal sway
of the carriages, the chanting of the wheels striking the fishplates, . . . the
glancing presence of strangers on their own journeys and wrapped in private
ruminations.''

Zoellner begins his journey in the ­birthplace of the locomotive, the United
Kingdom. In the early 19th century, Richard Trevithick, an eccentric inventor
from Cornwall, mounted rudimentary steam engines on wheels and placed them on
tracks. He showed the contraptions to George Stephenson, a shrewd promoter from
a village near Newcastle-upon-Tyne, who made improvements, rounded up investors
and debuted what Zoellner calls ''the world's first true railroad,'' the
Stockton & Darlington line, on Sept. 27, 1825, in the town of Stockton. ''An
­immense concourse of spectators,'' according to one newspaper, watched in
amazement as 11 coal wagons, a wagon full of flour sacks, a coach with padded
seats reserved for wealthy backers and 14 cars filled with uniformed workmen
lumbered down a track, pulled by a smoke-belching, wheezing engine with a
nameplate reading ­locomotion. The train reached a top speed of less than 25
miles per hour, and embers from the smoke landed on the spectators, burning tiny
holes in the ladies' parasols. Stephenson's success building rail lines kicked
off a ''railway mania'' that soon gave Britain more than 6,000 miles of track.
(Trevithick, alas, died broke and forgotten.)

The passion for railways spread to India, where the mid-19th-century visionary
governor general James Andrew Broun-Ramsay overrode skepticism and covered the
subcontinent with train tracks. Zoellner writes with grudging admiration of
Indian Railways, the government-owned monopoly, a bloated but functional
institution that provides work for an estimated 1.5 million people, houses its
upper-level staff in comfortable ''colonies'' and almost guarantees that its
employees will hold their jobs for life. He examines some of the more
unpalatable aspects of India's railway system -- the deaths of countless souls
who wander onto the tracks at poorly patrolled crossings, the vast amounts of
human excrement that corrode the rails -- and he nicely evokes the joys of
rolling through the Indian countryside. ''The colors grew deeper in the
afternoon light,'' he writes of a journey through the mustard-green and
sugarcane fields of Uttar Pradesh. ''It may be the softest glow in the world,
this Indian light, making the horizon smudgy with obscure whites and grays, but
nearby objects seemed numinous, almost radiating from the inside.'' Without the
railroad, most Indians believe, their country ''might have never risen to status
as a 21st-century power and would have fallen into postcolonial victimhood, like
a Congo or a Cambodia.''

Zoellner's most lyrical chapter recounts his leisurely journey from New York to
Los Angeles aboard a series of regional trains -- including the Cardinal to
­Chicago and the Southwest Chief to Los Angeles. ''Peer under the surface of
almost any American city that lies away from the Eastern Seaboard,'' he writes,
''and you are almost certain to find a railroad buried in its nativity story.''
America's trains transformed a country of small farmers and shopkeepers into an
industrial powerhouse, forged a sense of nationhood and inspired some of the
country's most memorable art and literature. Zoellner celebrates the opulent
stations that awed travelers in the first half of the 20th century and laments
the rise of the interstate highway system and the airline network, which have
nearly driven the railways out of business. Today the country makes do with
Amtrak, scraping by on government subsidies, and with depots like Penn Station,
a subterranean afterthought below Madison Square Garden. ''The lighting is
sterile white, the ceilings are oppressively low and the air is dank,'' Zoellner
writes. ''The trains are shut away in the basement, as unseen as sewerage.''

The rest of his book can't quite match the depth of the early chapters. His trip
on the Trans-Siberian Railway starts out promisingly with reflections on the
gulag, Tolstoy's ''Anna Karenina'' and a menacing encounter with drunken
soldiers on leave from Chechnya. But it ends abruptly, through no fault of his
own, when he's bitten by a feral dog on his way to a rail yard interview and has
to rush back to the United States for rabies shots. His high-­altitude
adventures in Tibet and on a Peruvian train transporting zinc over the Andes
have some fine descriptive prose and memorable encounters, but they seem
perfunctory compared with his odysseys through America and India.

''Train'' concludes with a look at the next generation of railway travel. In
Spain, the Alta Velocidad Española (AVE), ''which looks like a pencil-thin
version of the old Concorde supersonic jet,'' races between Barcelona and Madrid
at a speed of over 200 miles per hour. Spain has laid more miles of high-speed
rail than any other country except China, reducing highway congestion and
creating prosperous ­bedroom communities along the rail line. High-speed trains
have also proliferated across Japan and France.

Not so in the United States, where attempts to create a similar rail program
have faced fierce political opposition and where Amtrak's showpiece, the Acela
that runs between Boston and Washington, rolls along, Zoellner reports, at a
less-than-breathtaking average speed of 68 miles per hour. ''Our economy is now
far more oriented toward what is microscopic than what is large,'' he writes at
the end of this keenly observed book. ''The countryside -- its soil, its raw
physicality -- has been completely divorced from our ideas about what makes a
nation rich.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/books/review/tom-zoellners-train.html

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Trans-Siberian Railway locomotive in the mid-1950s.
(PHOTOGRAPH FROM THREE LIONS/GETTY IMAGES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


