                             1374 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Border Crisis

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 786 words


There is a reasonable way to confront the influx of Central American children at
the southern border, and the White House is getting it mostly right.

It has asked Congress for $3.7 billion in emergency funds to pay for more
immigration judges, for legal assistance to children and parents, and to help
care for tens of thousands of children in shelters in Texas and elsewhere.

The request seeks more money for the Border Patrol, and for speedier
prosecutions and deportations of adults with children, repatriating migrants and
addressing causes fueling the exodus in El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. And
it includes an ad campaign to urge parents there to keep their children at home.

The request would be a good step toward tackling the problem, though it should
have included much more for immigration lawyers and humanitarian aid, and less
for agents and drones at the border. Congress should swiftly approve it, since
it contains pretty much everything that lawmakers -- even President Obama's
Republican critics -- have been demanding.

But instead of supporting the package, Republicans are throwing up roadblocks.
And through dangerous overreaction, some are urging actions that would make the
situation worse. They want to make the children's deportations speedier by
amending or repealing the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, a
2008 law signed by President George W. Bush that gave new legal and humanitarian
protections to unaccompanied migrant children from countries other than Mexico
or Canada.

The law was meant to prevent the deaths of innocents. Removing its protections
would compound a tragedy. Mr. Obama needs to make that clear.

Unfortunately, he sent the wrong signal on a visit last week to Texas, where he
conflated the emergency appropriations bill -- an urgent, immediate task -- with
a separate request to give the Homeland Security secretary more ''flexibility''
under the 2008 law. ''Part of what we're looking in the supplemental,'' Mr.
Obama said, ''is some flexibility in terms of being able to preserve the due
process rights of individuals who come in, but also to make sure that we're
sending a strong signal that they can't simply show up at the border and
automatically assume that they're going to be absorbed.''

Beware that word. ''Flexibility'' and due process don't go well together. Not
with badly understaffed immigration courts, and not in the middle of a refugee
disaster, as children flee for their lives from violent gangs.

An article in The Times by Frances Robles on Thursday portrayed the crisis in
chilling detail. In El Salvador, murders of children 17 and under were up 77
percent from a year ago. More than 2,200 children from San Pedro Sula, a city in
Honduras with the world's highest homicide rate, arrived in the United States
from January through May, far more than from any other city in Central America.

The article described the overnight shift at the San Pedro Sula morgue, where
more than 60 corpses, all victims of violence, ''were seen piled in a heap, each
wrapped in a brown plastic bag.'' One was a 15-year-old boy who had been shot 15
times. ''At first we saw a lot of kids who were being killed because when the
gang came for their parents, they happened to be in the car or at the location
with them,'' a doctor said. ''Now we see kids killing kids. They kill with guns,
knives and even grenades.''

Lawmakers who would cut legal corners to send more children back to such peril
are showing appalling blindness to a humanitarian tragedy.

But blindness to the unintended consequences is a hallmark of immigration
politics. Decades of militarizing the border -- without visa reforms to improve
the legal immigrant flow -- have sealed people out. They have also sealed them
in. Immigrants who would have been inclined to work here and go home are induced
to stay. They put down roots, and try to bring their families over.

When crossing the border gets more treacherous, the people trying to cross fall
into the hands of criminals -- smuggling operations that already have lucrative
businesses moving drugs and money over the border. Smugglers are profiting
mightily from the fear that propels children north and the fear that locks our
country down.

Republicans are feeding the cycle, stoking panic about a border under assault,
even to the point of demanding that Mr. Obama call out the National Guard.
Nativist protesters are blocking buses of migrants in places like Murrieta,
Calif. Homegrown militias are issuing calls to arms. Illegal border crossings,
meanwhile, are still lower than they have been in years. The besieged border is
a myth, and the arrival of a few thousand weary refugee children on buses does
not make the myth true.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/13/opinion/sunday/congress-must-act-to-help-child
ren-crossing-the-border.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


