                             1361 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Calculated Risks

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER.

Peter Baker is the chief White House correspondent for The Times and author of
''Days of Fire: Bush and Cheney in the White House.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1407 words


HARD CHOICESBy Hillary Rodham Clinton

Illustrated. 635 pp. Simon & Schuster. $35.

In 1969, the night before a Wellesley College senior named Hillary Rodham gave a
commencement address that would draw national attention, she was introduced to
Dean Acheson, the legendary former secretary of state who had come to campus for
his granddaughter's graduation. ''I'm looking forward to hearing what you have
to say,'' Acheson told Rodham. At the time, many in the country were looking
forward to hearing what Acheson had to say. He had just put the finishing
touches on ''Present at the Creation,'' his landmark memoir that would come out
a few months after his encounter with the young Rodham, providing a seminal
portrait of his role in helping Harry S. Truman forge a new national security
architecture at the outset of the Cold War.

Forty-five years later, Hillary Rodham Clinton has delivered a memoir about her
own time in the job Acheson once occupied. But ''Hard Choices'' is no ''Present
at the Creation.'' Where Acheson offered a bracing, at times blunt, account of
his four years as secretary of state -- he eviscerated his wartime predecessor,
Cordell Hull, and titled one chapter about Congress ''The Attack of the
Primitives Begins'' -- Clinton has opted for a safe and unchallenging volume,
full of bromides and talking points.

To its credit, Clinton's memoir is serious, sober and substantive. What it is
not is revealing. Taking the reader along on her journey representing the United
States as President Obama's top diplomat, she provides a sophisticated analysis
of many of the world's most complicated hot spots, but no analysis of one of the
world's most complicated political figures. We learn about the progress of
Botswana and the challenges facing the Democratic Republic of Congo, but we
learn little about Hillary Clinton.

To compare ''Hard Choices'' with ''Present at the Creation'' may be unrealistic.
Acheson was done with his career and wrote for history. Clinton is not and has
not. Much as we may yearn for her to pull back the mask after more than two
decades on the national stage, that's hardly a practical expectation for someone
with the Oval Office still on her to-do list. So perhaps it's more fitting to
compare her memoir not with the diplomatic histories of other secretaries of
state but with the pre-campaign books of other would-be presidents. In that
context, ''Hard Choices'' stands a cut above. It certainly demonstrates a
greater mastery of the world than, say, ''The Audacity of Hope,'' by Barack
Obama, or ''A Charge to Keep,'' by George W. Bush.

No fair-minded reader could finish this book and doubt Clinton's essential
command of the issues, whatever one might think of her solutions for them. She
roams widely and delves into war and peace, terrorism and Russia, economic
development and women's rights. She knows the players and the history. If
nothing else, she implicitly makes the case that if she were to occupy the Oval
Office there would be no need for the kind of on-the-job training in foreign
policy required by the last three presidents, including one she happens to know
well.

Hers is a cold-eyed view of international affairs. ''Our relationship with
Pakistan was strictly transactional,'' she writes, ''based on mutual interest,
not trust.'' The administration's demand that Israel stop building settlements
''didn't work.'' And the desire to abandon autocrats like Egypt's Hosni Mubarak
was unwise: ''Were we really ready to walk away from that relationship after 30
years of cooperation?''

In some ways, we do learn about one side of Clinton, the earnest wonk genuinely
absorbed by the environmental and health implications of cookstoves in the
developing world. When she devotes three pages to Mongolia, it's because she
finds each of the places she visits fascinating in its own way, as anyone who
has traveled with her knows. Indeed, she devoted three pages to Mongolia in her
last book, ''Living History,'' about her time as first lady. But she gives
little sense of the other side of the Clinton story, of the politics and the
ambition that drove her to the verge of the presidency. She discusses how her
husband ordered missile strikes on Qaeda camps in Afghanistan in 1998 without
mentioning that it happened just after he admitted his affair with Monica
Lewinsky and she was making him sleep on the couch. She gives little sense of
the darker corners of Hillaryland, as her aides took to calling her world -- a
world characterized at times by feuding courtiers who vie with opponents,
reporters and one another.

Even when she flavors the narrative with a little revelation, the portions are
stingy. She got into ''a shouting match'' with Leon Panetta, then the C.I.A.
director, over a proposed drone strike, but doesn't say which one, who prevailed
or why she dissented. She supported the military operation in Libya over the
objections of Vice President Biden and Robert Gates, then the defense secretary,
but doesn't take us into the Situation Room to hear the debate. Indeed, much to
the relief of the White House, she stays resolutely away from the sort of candor
that marked Gates's own recent memoir. In his book, for instance, Gates reported
that he and Clinton tried unsuccessfully to get rid of Karl Eikenberry, the
ambassador to Afghanistan, and Douglas Lute, the White House coordinator for
Afghanistan. ''I've had it,'' he quoted her saying. Clinton makes no mention of
that. When she discusses internal debates, her adversaries are often vaguely
described as ''some of the president's advisers.'' There's no score-settling
here.

While Gates entitled his memoir ''Duty,'' Clinton might have called hers
''Dutiful.'' Every box that needs checking has been filled. Latin America?
Check. Benghazi? Check. The book demonstrates that in at least one way she's
ready to be president -- it amounts to a 600-page State of the Union address, in
which every constituency and every issue receives due mention.

Clinton traveled to 112 countries as secretary of state, more than any of her
predecessors, and she seems determined to cite each one of them. (The index
lists 105, but missed some she mentions, like Belarus, Brunei and Nepal.) At
times, ''Hard Choices'' feels like the book you might have gotten by picking up
your iPhone and asking Siri to write a politically safe memoir. ''All the
set-piece speeches and procedural mumbo-jumbo can often be deadly boring,'' she
concedes at one point.

If ''Living History'' left readers wanting to know more about the author's
relationship with the 42nd president, this new book leaves us wanting to know
more about her relationship with the 44th. Unlike Acheson, Clinton had the
challenge of forging a partnership with the man who beat her for the
presidential nomination and then asked her to serve in his cabinet. By all
accounts, she did a remarkable job of overcoming that history, and yet she
doesn't tell us how she did it or dwell on whatever personal or political
trade-offs must have been involved.

Barack Obama is a peripheral figure in ''Hard Choices.'' Meeting with him just
after their nomination battle was ''like two teenagers on an awkward first
date,'' she allows, without much elaboration. He ''took me to the woodshed''
over impolitic comments by her special envoy to Egypt after he left office, she
writes, without letting us hear Obama's voice. They disagreed at pivotal moments
-- on cutting Mubarak loose, on arming Syrian rebels -- but she mentions them
only gently.

Clinton's overarching philosophy as secretary of state seems primarily to
involve engagement and hard work, the idea that showing up is as important as
any treaty or ideology. Perseverance matters. Sometimes this pays off, as with
the pressure campaign that eventually forced Iran to slow its nuclear program,
temporarily at least. At times, though, this approach seems maddeningly
inconclusive, as when Clinton works two mobile phones in the back of a car to
hold together a peace deal between Armenia and Turkey, only to have it fall
apart again later. She finds solace in the hope that someday the groundwork she
laid will yield the breakthroughs that eluded her.

Rather than putting in place a new foreign policy, as Acheson did, Clinton
portrays her tenure as a transition period and herself as just one runner in a
relay race, passing along the baton. Acheson won a Pulitzer Prize for his
memoir. Clinton seems to have a bigger prize in mind.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/books/review/hillary-rodham-clintons-hard-choi
ces.html

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton look toward North  Korea during a visit to South Korea in 2010.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK WILSON/GETTY IMAGES ASIAPAC, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


