                             1314 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq's Best Hope

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 866 words


SULAIMANI, Iraq -- I am a sucker for commencements, but this one filled me with
many different emotions.

As Dina Dara took the stage -- the student speaker and valedictorian of the 2014
graduating class of the American University of Iraq, Sulaimani, in Kurdistan --
the sun was just setting, turning Azmar Mountain in the background into a
reddish-brown curtain. The class was about 70 percent Kurds, with the rest
coming from every corner, religion and tribe of Iraq. Parents bursting with
pride, cellphone cameras in one hand and bouquets in the other, had driven up
from Basra and Baghdad, dressed in their finest to see their kids get their
American-style college degrees. Three Kurdish TV stations carried the ceremony
live.

''It has been quite a journey,'' Dara, who's going on to graduate school at
Tufts, told her classmates. (Since the university opened in 2007, all the
valedictorians have been Iraqi women.) ''We went through a whole different
experience living in the dorms. This evening ... we are armed with two things:
first, the highly valued American education that makes us as competent and
qualified as the rest of the students in the world. And, second, the empowerment
of a liberal arts education.'' As we ''exercise critical thinking techniques
that have been the core of our education here, and as we try to move beyond the
traditional conventions, beyond what others suggest, we may struggle. But isn't
this how nations are built?''

Sitting near Dara (I was the commencement speaker), I thought: This is how the
Iraq story was supposed to end, but hasn't, not yet. Kurdistan remains the
unsung success story of the Iraq war, one thing U.S. veterans can take pride in
having helped to create -- first by protecting the Kurds from Saddam Hussein
with a no-fly zone and second by toppling Saddam, who had tried to wipe out the
Kurds with poison gas in 1988.

But it was the Kurds who used the window of freedom we opened for them to
overcome internal divisions, start to reform their once Sopranos-like politics
and create a vibrant economy that is now throwing up skyscrapers and colleges in
major towns of Erbil and Sulaimani. Everywhere I've gone here, I've met
''reverse immigrants,'' Kurds who've come back to their homeland in northeastern
Iraq because of all the opportunities.

Kurdistan represents everything that has not happened in Shiite-dominated
Baghdad and the Sunni regions of Iraq, where Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki
has behaved like a visionless, pro-Shiite sectarian chief and violence remains
rife. Maliki was ''our guy.'' So you could say that we left two big ''gifts''
behind in Iraq: an American-installed autocrat and an American university that
is teaching the values of inclusiveness that Maliki doesn't practice. In the
long run, after Maliki is gone, we can still hope -- as partially happened in
Vietnam -- that our values will triumph where our power failed. It's still a
long shot, but that's clearly what the American University students are hoping.

Bery Hoshiar, 20, a female engineering student, told me: ''People graduating
here feel they can make a change. They come here as people bounded by social
conventions, and they leave as individuals with values that they implement in
their lives. We all believe that we can be future leaders. [Iraq] is not over.
We are just getting started. We are building from scratch. It is going to take
time.''

Karwan Gaznay, 24, a Kurd, told me he grew up on books about Saddam: ''Now we
have this American education. I did not know who Thomas Jefferson was. I did not
know who James Madison was. So when the government is doing something wrong, now
we can say: 'This is wrong. I have been educated.' ... I ran for student
president, and Arab guys voted for me. We are living as a family in the
university. I am not pessimistic about Iraq. We can work together if we want
to.''

As student president, Gaznay persuaded the Kurdish government to create a
special ID card for Sunni and Shiite AUIS students to use to easily pass through
checkpoints that protect this region from the rest of Iraq. Isa Mohamed, 22, a
Shiite from Baghdad, told me this was why he supported Gaznay: ''Any Arab [AUIS]
student can now go through all the checkpoints and airports'' in Kurdistan
without difficulties.

Shayan Hamed, 23, said: ''You hear democracy being used by your political
leaders, but they are just defining it the way it suits them. But when you
really learn what it is about in the real texts, then you realize that this is
not the democracy in your country.'' I thought Iraq was finished, I said to her.
''Germany was not over after Hitler. Russia was not over after Stalin. So why
should Iraq be over after Saddam?'' she replied.

Mewan Nahro, 23, put it all in perspective: ''My dad was in the mountains as a
Pesh Merga [Kurdish guerrilla] fighter in the '80s and '90s, and now [our
family] has gone from him in the mountains to me here at an American University
and getting to say what I want.''

Yes, this is an elite school, and Kurdistan is an island of decency in a
still-roiling sea. But the power of example is a funny thing. You never know how
it can spread. More American universities, please -- not just drones.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/04/opinion/friedman-iraqs-best-hope.html

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


