                             130 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Taliban Gather to Select Successor to Leader Killed in U.S. Drone
Strike

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH, ISMAIL KHAN and SALMAN MASOOD; Declan Walsh reported
from London; Ismail Khan from Peshawar, Pakistan; and Salman Masood from
Islamabad, Pakistan. Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed reporting from
Islamabad, and Zia ur-Rehman from Karachi, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 924 words


LONDON -- Pakistani Taliban commanders met Saturday to choose a successor to
Hakimullah Mehsud, their leader who was killed Friday in an American drone
strike, as mainstream political leaders stepped up their criticism of the United
States and vowed to press ahead with peace talks.

Pakistani officials said the Taliban shura, or governing council, started to
gather at a mosque in Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, on Friday
night. Early Saturday, fighters buried Mr. Mehsud, who had a $5 million United
States bounty on his head, and six others in Danday Darpakhel, the village where
they were killed.

Officials said Mr. Mehsud's body was damaged beyond recognition, after several
missiles hit the vehicle in which he was traveling as it entered a compound in
the village on Friday.

Four candidates are thought to be in the running to replace Mr. Mehsud in an
opaque process rived with tribal rivalry and personality-driven tensions. The
favorite, Pakistani officials and militants said, is Khan Said, a commander who
had been a rival to Mr. Mehsud, and was thought to have the support of powerful
factions, including the Haqqani network.

Mr. Said is commonly known by the nom de guerre Sajna, which means beloved.
Speaking by telephone, a Taliban spokesman, Azam Tariq, said the decision would
be made ''within a few days.''

Mr. Mehsud's death represented another success against the Pakistani Taliban for
the C.I.A., which killed his deputy, Wali ur-Rehman, in May. To the Obama
administration, the killing of a high-profile enemy offered a welcome diversion
from a growing debate in the United States over civilian casualties from drone
strikes.

But in Pakistan, news of the American attack was met with anger, highlighting
how, despite their technological prowess and laser-guided precision, drone
strikes can have messy aftereffects.

In Miram Shah, defiant tribesmen opened fire with AK-47s and other small arms on
American drones hovering overhead. In the port city of Karachi, members of Mr.
Mehsud's tribe fired into the air in ethnic Pashtun areas.

Senior government ministers and opposition politicians united in condemning the
drone strike, which they called an American effort to doom putative peace talks
with the Taliban. ''It is the murder of peace in this region,'' said the
interior minister, Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan.

The government summoned the American ambassador, Richard G. Olson, and according
to Mr. Khan, warned him: ''Ambassador, take this government seriously. If drone
attacks don't cease there will be a standoff.''

The political temperature was set in large part by Imran Khan, the former
cricket star whose party runs Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, and who has
threatened to cut NATO supply lines running through the province into
Afghanistan as early as Monday.

He painted the drone strike as a defining moment for Pakistan's political
parties. ''The nation is asking who does not want peace in the country,'' he
said at a news conference in Lahore.The ostensible basis of the criticism, in
addition to the usual argument over sovereignty, was that the Taliban had been
on the verge of peace talks when the American drones struck. Analysts, however,
said such talks were far from certain.

In Waziristan, the perspective was complex. Some tribesmen condemned the strike,
others quietly applauded it and many lamented that in death, Mr. Mehsud -- a
flamboyant figure with a reputation for both joking and ruthless violence --
would be transformed into a hero. ''One thing is clear: Anyone who is killed in
a drone strike becomes a true Muslim holy warrior, no matter how sinful he is,''
said a tribal elder, speaking by phone on condition of anonymity.

Few Pakistanis dared voice public support for the killing. The main exception
were retired military officials, some of whom spoke of their delight at the
demise of a hated figure, which highlighted an apparent divide between military
and civilian thinking over the virtues of peace negotiations.

The military has bitter experience of talks with the Taliban, having entered
into several controversial agreements from 2005 to 2007 that eventually crumbled
and which ultimately only gave the militants time to consolidate their strength.

If it seemed odd that Pakistanis were equivocating over the death of a figure
who orchestrated attacks that killed thousands of Pakistanis, the explanation
was rooted in a complex mix of politics and psychology. Anti-Americanism is rife
in Pakistan, and the drones are widely despised across the country -- with the
exception, paradoxically, of some corners of the tribal belt, where some
tribesmen quietly say they support any measure to oust militants from their
area.

''It shows how society has become radicalized,'' said Omar R. Quraishi, an
editor at The Express Tribune newspaper. ''People keep asking why the Americans
are violating our sovereignty. They don't seem to realize that, in the tribal
regions, the state has lost all control.''

In addition, despite the regular official outcries over sovereignty, the
government has quietly cooperated with at least some of the strikes.

The challenge for the Pakistani Taliban now is to avoid splitting as they choose
a new leader. Although Mr. Said is the clear favorite, Pakistani officials said
he had a well-known rivalry with Mr. Mehsud.

That rivalry spilled over into violent clashes between their supporters in
Karachi this year. However, like Mr. Mehsud, Mr. Said is from the Mehsud tribe,
which has dominated the leadership of the Pakistani Taliban since its inception
in 2007.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/world/asia/pakistani-taliban-gather-to-select-
successor-to-leader-killed-in-us-drone-strike.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


