                             1301 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is This Music Ideal for Ballet? A Leaping Reply

BYLINE: By BRIAN SEIBERT

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; DANCE REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 571 words


What could Bach's Double Violin Concerto have in common with the songs of George
Gershwin? George Balanchine, who found both to be appropriate music for ballet,
might have answered, ''They both got rhythm.'' Or at least that correspondence
was apparent at the David H. Koch Theater on Tuesday, when his ''Concerto
Barocco'' (1941) and ''Who Cares?'' (1970) opened and closed a program of New
York City Ballet.

From the first strains of Bach in ''Concerto Barocco,'' and throughout, the
corps of eight women attacked the steps with enlivening snap, pouncing on Bach's
and Balanchine's rhythms and making the clean, contrapuntal patterns crackle.
Sara Mearns, as one of the two lead women who personify the score's two violins,
was even more exact. Only her counterpart, Maria Kowroski, showed any
hesitation.

In the second movement adagio, Ms. Kowroski was at home, her long legs reaching
in singing lines. She had an attentive partner in Justin Peck, who, as the music
picked up, seemed to lift and lower her into a more acute relationship to the
rhythm. By the third moment, her imitative exchanges with Ms. Mearns were
tighter.

''Other Dances'' (1976), a pas de deux by Jerome Robbins to Chopin piano pieces,
has a freer rhythm. For a dancer of Tiler Peck's extraordinary musicality,
that's room to play. Percussively precise and yet as delicate and flowing as her
skirt, she danced every millisecond of the music, sustaining the illusion that
it was impelling her and at the same time illustrating her -- that she and the
music were somehow independent but also identical.

But that duet was created for Mikhail Baryshnikov and Natalia Makarova -- two
big personalities. Although Ms. Peck's partner, Gonzalo Garcia, was technically
adequate, he was too square to pull off the dance's twinkles of wit. And while
Ms. Peck, curving around and up to regard Mr. Garcia, had striking glamour, some
dressed-in-furs moments eluded her. Her performance could use more perfume.

Benjamin Millepied's ''Neverwhere,'' returning after its premiere at the
company's fashion-themed fall gala last year, remains trapped in its Iris van
Herpen costumes: glittering black plastic and, for the women, point-shoe boots.
That annoying crinkling you hear isn't the person next to you unwrapping cough
drops; it's the couture.

The rhythmic strategies of Nico Muhly's undistinguished score -- strings
slashing through a drone, repeated two-note figures -- are simple though
effective enough, and Mr. Millepied's choreography for three couples, which
hints at a primitive-futuristic rite, has drive, flow and some invention. A line
of men gather up the women like a radar sweep. But the final paper-doll
silhouette makes for a harsh comparison with the sublime daisy chains of
''Barocco.''

''Who Cares'' is encumbered by the conventionalizing orchestrations of Hershy
Kay, but once it gets going, the interplay between Balanchine's classical steps
and Gershwin's syncopations is analogous to that between Balanchine and Bach. In
her debut as one of the female soloists, Ashly Isaacs grabbed onto the rhythms
with impressive force. For lessons in modulation, she could look to Ms. Peck. Or
to Megan Fairchild, characteristically crisp and uncharacteristically sultry in
her own debut as the woman who dances ''The Man I Love.''

New York City Ballet's spring season runs through June 8 at the David H. Koch
Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-496-0600, nycballet.com.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/arts/dance/new-york-city-ballet-in-a-broad-pro
gram-at-the-koch-theater.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: New York City Ballet: Sara Mearns, center, and other members of
this company during ''Concerto Barocco'' at the David H. Koch Theater.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


