                             138 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            December 8, 2013 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

Drone delivery is a bold idea

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 392 words


"Disruptive" is probably Jeff Bezos' favorite word.

It's how the Amazon CEO describes the impact of his online retail business.

And it's how he views the delivery by drone idea he unveiled in an interview on
"60 Minutes" last Sunday.

It may sound crazy, but it's an example of the kind of innovation that made this
country into an economic power and keeps it that way.

Having said that, we recognize that the drone delivery idea, which has only been
broadly outlined, has a lot of issues to work through.

But we would hope the Federal Aviation Administration, which is formulating
rules for the commercial use of drones, is at least open to tackling them in the
next few years.

Bezos' drone revelation was part of a wide ranging interview that showcased the
complexity of the Amazon model, which layers online ordering on top of
sophisticated warehouse, inventory and delivery systems.

Bezos showed "60 Minutes" correspondent Charlie Rose contraptions that looked
like miniature helicopters. A video illustrated how they could pick up packages
from a warehouse conveyor belt and fly them to a customer's house within 30
minutes of having been ordered.

Disruptive? You bet.

Yet, there are hurdles, and significant ones. These drones would be unpiloted
craft, navigating via GPS.

There would have to be technological assurances the mini aircraft wouldn't land
on someone's head instead of their front porch.

There are also privacy concerns that travel with drones. Expanded commercial use
of drones should come with clear rules that protect the privacy of people in
their homes.

Another less bureaucratic but equally important hurdle for widespread commercial
use is public acceptance. As it stands, "drones" are associated with U.S.
efforts to take out terrorists with firepower and unmanned aircraft.

And let us not forget the strange saga that has unfolded in Deer Trail, a
Colorado town that is set to vote on an ordinance that would create a $25 drone
"hunting license."

The guy who conceived the license has already said he would, without hesitation,
shoot down an Amazon Prime Air drone if it crossed his property.

There's probably no hope for some people.

As the country moves toward routine commercial drone flights, the FAA and
federal lawmakers should remain open to different and creative uses of the
unmanned aircraft while ensuring that privacy is protected.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This undated image provided by Amazon.com shows the so-called Prime Air
unmanned aircraft project that Amazon is working on in its research and
development labs. (AP Photo/Amazon)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


