                             1372 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Hackers Pursue Key Data on U.S. Workers

BYLINE: By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT, DAVID E. SANGER and NICOLE PERLROTH; Michael S.
Schmidt and David E. Sanger reported from Washington, and Nicole Perlroth from
San Francisco. Richard A. Oppel Jr. contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1139 words


WASHINGTON -- Chinese hackers in March broke into the computer networks of the
United States government agency that houses the personal information of all
federal employees, according to senior American officials. They appeared to be
targeting the files on tens of thousands of employees who have applied for
top-secret security clearances.

The hackers gained access to some of the databases of the Office of Personnel
Management before the federal authorities detected the threat and blocked them
from the network, according to the officials. It is not yet clear how far the
hackers penetrated the agency's systems, in which applicants for security
clearances list their foreign contacts, previous jobs and personal information
like past drug use.

In response to questions about the matter, a senior Department of Homeland
Security official confirmed that the attack had occurred but said that ''at this
time,'' neither the personnel agency nor Homeland Security had ''identified any
loss of personally identifiable information.'' The official said an emergency
response team was assigned ''to assess and mitigate any risks identified.''

One senior American official said that the attack was traced to China, though it
was not clear if the hackers were part of the government. Its disclosure comes
as a delegation of senior American officials, led by Secretary of State John
Kerry, are in Beijing for the annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue, the
leading forum for discussion between the United States and China on their
commercial relationships and their wary efforts to work together on economic and
defense issues.

Computer intrusions have been a major source of discussion and disagreement
between the two countries, and the Chinese can point to evidence, revealed by
Edward J. Snowden, that the National Security Agency went deep into the computer
systems of Huawei, a major maker of computer network equipment, and ran many
programs to intercept the conversations of Chinese leaders and the military.

American officials say the attack on the Office of Personnel Management was
notable because while hackers try to breach United States government servers
nearly every day, they rarely succeed. One of the last attacks the government
acknowledged occurred last year at the Department of Energy. In that case,
hackers successfully made off with employee and contractors' personal data. The
agency was forced to reveal the attack because state disclosure laws force
entities to report breaches in cases where personally identifiable information
is compromised. Government agencies do not have to disclose breaches in which
sensitive government secrets, but no personally identifiable information, has
been stolen.

Just a month ago, the Justice Department indicted a group of Chinese hackers who
work for the People's Liberation Army Unit 61398, and charged them with stealing
corporate secrets. The same unit, and others linked to the P.L.A., have been
accused in the past of intrusions into United States government computer
systems, including in the office of the secretary of defense.

But private security researchers say the indictments have hardly deterred the
People's Liberation Army from hacking foreign targets, and American officials
are increasingly concerned that they have failed in their effort to deter
computer attacks from China or elsewhere. ''There's no price to pay for the
Chinese,'' one senior intelligence official said recently, ''and nothing will
change until that changes.''

The indictments have been criticized as long on symbolism and short on real
punishment: There is very little chance that the Chinese military members would
ever see the inside of an American courtroom, even if the F.B.I. has put their
pictures on wanted posters.

''I think that it was speaking loudly and carrying a small stick,'' said Dennis
Blair, the former director of national intelligence during President Obama's
first term, who was a co-author of a report last year urging that the United
States create a series of financial disincentives for computer theft and
attacks, including halting some forms of imports and blocking access to American
financial markets.

Not long after several members of Unit 61398 were indicted, security researchers
were able to pin hundreds more cyberattacks at American and European space and
satellite technology companies and research groups on a second Shanghai-based
Chinese military unit, known as Unit 61486. Researchers say that even after
Americans indicted their counterparts in Unit 61398, members of Unit 61486 have
shown no signs of scaling back.

The same proved true for the dozen other Chinese military and naval units that
American officials have been tracking as they break into an ever more concerning
list of corporate targets including drone, missile and nuclear propulsion
technology makers.

The intrusion at the Office of Personnel Management was particularly disturbing
because it oversees a system called e-QIP, in which federal employees applying
for security clearances enter their most personal information, including
financial data. Federal employees who have had security clearances for some time
are often required to update their personal information through the website.

The agencies and the contractors use the information from e-QIP to investigate
the employees and ultimately determine whether they should be granted security
clearances, or have them updated.

A representative of the Office of Personnel Management said that monitoring
systems at the Department of Homeland Security and the agency office allowed
them to be ''alerted to a potential intrusion of our network in mid-March.''

In the past, the Obama administration has urged American companies to share
intrusion information with the government and reveal breaches to consumers in
cases where their personal information was compromised and could be used without
authorization.

But in this case there was no announcement about the attack. ''The
administration has never advocated that all intrusions be made public,'' said
Caitlin Hayden, a spokeswoman for the Obama administration. ''We have advocated
that businesses that have suffered an intrusion notify customers if the intruder
had access to consumers' personal information. We have also advocated that
companies and agencies voluntarily share information about intrusions.''

Ms. Hayden noted that the agency had intrusion-detection systems in place and
notified other federal agencies, state and local governments about the attack,
then shared relevant threat information with some in the security industry. Four
months after the attack, Ms. Hayden said the Obama administration had no reason
to believe personally identifiable information for employees was compromised.

''None of this differs from our normal response to similar threats,'' Ms. Hayden
said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/10/world/asia/chinese-hackers-pursue-key-data-on-
us-workers.html

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


