                             1316 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2014 Thursday
                        The International New York Times

A Nigerian Awakening?

BYLINE: By ADEWALE MAJA-PEARCE

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER; Pg.

LENGTH: 1042 words


LAGOS, Nigeria -- There's a political sea change brewing in Nigeria, fanned by
angry demonstrations over the government's failure to rescue more than 200
schoolgirls abducted by Islamic militants -- and the government's clumsy efforts
to suppress those protests.

Ever since the girls were seized by the Boko Haram insurgents from their school
in Chibok in northeast Borno State on April 14, a group of several hundred
supporters has camped out at the Unity Fountain in a downtown park in Abuja, the
capital, and refused to budge until ''our girls are brought back.''

Hundreds of protests have also been held in Lagos, Kaduna, Lokoja and other
cities and towns across Nigeria, all of them united under the
''#BringBackOurGirls'' hashtag. The demonstrations have been peaceful, at least
on the part of the protesters. Although it is widely known that the government
would love to end them, officials have been loath to send in the police because
of the unrelenting international attention the abductions have received.

Instead, last week, the government opted to hire a mob to stage a
counter-protest. According to Jibrin Ibrahim, an organizer of the demonstrations
in support of the return of the girls, protesters first noticed thousands of
counter-protesters massing near the park on May 26. Using a slogan current among
Christian fundamentalists, they chanted, ''Holy Ghost fire, pursue Boko Haram,''
as they descended on the protesters, warning them to leave the government alone
and direct their wrath against the Islamic insurgents instead.

The following day, the counter-protesters appeared in even greater numbers, many
of them transported in dozens of government buses, witnesses said. The day after
that, they were back again. This time the crowd included hundreds of young men
on motorbikes, revved at full throttle ''to drown out our voices,'' Mr. Ibrahim
said. He then described what followed: ''They first went for the foreign and
national television crews, smashing their cameras with clubs, and the cameramen
fled for their lives. They then came for us, forcibly seizing telephones and
handbags of our women. We all stood our ground.''

Despite the mayhem, he said, the protesters remained mostly calm and the
incident ended without any fatalities.

There's little doubt that many of the counter-protesters were organized at the
behest of President Goodluck Jonathan -- the Cable, a news website, reported
that ''a campaign bus bearing the photos of President Goodluck Jonathan and Vice
President Namadi Sambo circled the venue.'' Moreover, the government's strict
command structure makes it likely that the police had been ordered not to
interfere with the counter-protesters

This was not the case the week before, when the police tried, unsuccessfully, to
get the ''BringBackOurGirls'' people to move on. ''I am not going anywhere,''
one of their leaders, Oby Ezekwesili, a former minister of education and former
World Bank vice president for Africa, reportedly told police officials. ''My
rights will not be violated.''

But on Monday, the police commissioner for Abuja, Joseph Mbu, banned all
protests concerning the abducted girls. ''I cannot fold my hands and watch this
lawlessness,'' he told reporters, adding that the authorities had received
information that ''soon, dangerous elements will join groups under the guise of
protest and detonate explosives aimed at embarrassing the government.''

Ms. Ezekwesili condemned the ban as a violation of constitutional guarantees to
''our rights to freedom of expression, peaceful association and assembly,'' and
said the protesters would challenge it in court. But then, on Tuesday, the
police inspector general, Mohammed Abubakar, rescinded Mr. Mbu's order, though
he urged protesters ''to apply caution.''

To a certain extent, the confusion is understandable. After all, this is new
territory, for the government as much as for ordinary citizens. Ordinarily, the
government would have responded to the protests with the usual platitudes about
being on top of the situation, and business would have continued as usual, which
is to say that the abductions would have gradually been forgotten by all but the
families and friends of the victims. But national indignation has provided a
much-needed fillip for Nigerians to declare that enough is enough. The louder
the protests, the more foolish efforts to suppress them appear.

It took almost three weeks for the president to call a press conference to admit
his government's failure to rescue the girls. Most Nigerians were relieved when
he finally agreed to accept foreign military assistance, but the slight to our
country's sovereignty was unsettling. Whether any of this will cost Mr. Jonathan
a second term come next year's elections remains to be seen.

In the meantime, we know that the military is ill-equipped relative to the
insurgents' superior firepower -- despite huge security budgets, currently
running at about $5.8 billion, much of which is looted at the source. Just one
example: In 2006, the military bought several drones from an Israeli company,
Aeronautics Defense Systems, each at an estimated cost of between $15 million
and $17 million. They ought to be of use in the search for the abducted
schoolgirls, except that they are all grounded for lack of maintenance.

This official ineptitude doesn't only apply to the big picture. Not long after
the counter-protesters left the park, many of them complained about the
government's nonpayment of the $25 they said they were each promised for every
day they took part. ''Getting the money is a very difficult process because
there are so many of us jostling to receive payment for our hard work,'' one of
them told a reporter.

This, again, is a familiar story. Perhaps even those willing to take occasional
work as government stooges are themselves slowly waking up from a slumber that
has gone on for far too long. The #BringBackOurGirls campaign might just signal
the end of this debilitating state of affairs. If nothing else, Boko Haram has
shown us the powerlessness of the combined forces of the state we once cowered
before.

The question is: Where do we go from here?

Adewale Maja-Pearce is a writer and critic, and the author of ''Remembering Ken
Saro-Wiwa, and Other Essays.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/05/opinion/a-nigerian-awakening.html

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


