                             1395 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 28, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Says Its Forces Did Not Kill Palestinians Sheltering at U.N. School

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER and BEN HUBBARD; Isabel Kershner reported from
Jerusalem, and Ben Hubbard from Gaza City. Fares Akram contributed reporting
from Gaza City, Jodi Rudoren from Jerusalem, and Somini Sengupta from the United
Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 749 words


JERUSALEM -- Israel and Hamas went back and forth on Sunday over proposals for a
new cease-fire in the fighting in the Gaza Strip, and Israel sought to bolster
its claim that its forces were not responsible for the deaths of 16 Palestinians
reportedly killed in an attack on a United Nations school.

Palestinians who brought their dead and wounded relatives to a Gaza hospital
after the attack on Thursday said that hundreds of people who sought shelter in
the school had gathered in its courtyard, believing that buses were on the way
to take them somewhere safer. Then a number of munitions fired by Israeli forces
hit the school, they said, killing and wounding scores of people.

The United Nations also reported the attack but said it could not confirm the
source.

On Sunday, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an Israeli military spokesman, acknowledged
that an errant mortar round fired by Israeli troops had exploded in the school's
courtyard that afternoon but said the yard had been empty at the time. He
provided a video with 10 seconds of black-and-white footage shot by an Israeli
drone that showed a blast in what appeared to be an empty courtyard. ''It is
extremely unlikely that anyone was killed as a result of that mortar,'' he said.

It was not immediately possible to reconcile the accounts.

A visit to the school two days after the attack revealed a small crater from a
blast in the courtyard, shrapnel scars on the school walls and large blood spots
on the ground near the blast site. Colonel Lerner said the mortar strike shown
in the video was the only Israeli ordnance that hit the school that day. The
video did not include a time code, but Colonel Lerner said it was shot between 2
and 4 p.m. The United Nations said the attack had taken place at 2:55 p.m.

The diplomatic push for a cease-fire continued as the United Nations Security
Council issued a statement early Monday supporting the call for a humanitarian
cease-fire in Gaza. On Sunday, President Obama called Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu of Israel and expressed growing concern about the rising death toll
and urged Israel to embrace an immediate truce. Secretary of State John Kerry
also kept up his efforts to attain a long-term cease-fire, even as Israel and
Hamas, the militant group that governs Gaza, seesawed on whether to begin a new
humanitarian lull in the fighting.

Early Sunday, Israel said its military was resuming its offensive in Gaza
because of rocket fire by Hamas during what was supposed to have been a
cease-fire from midnight Saturday until midnight Sunday. Huge clouds of smoke
from explosions could be seen rising from the eastern neighborhoods of Gaza City
near the border with Israel, and ambulances rushed new cases to Shifa Hospital
in Gaza City.

But by afternoon, Hamas had called for a new 24-hour pause, saying it was both
responding to a request from the United Nations and because Palestinians were
preparing for the Eid al-Fitr holiday, to be observed Monday.

There was no immediate response from Israel, but fighting appeared to slow
around Gaza in the evening. The Israeli military said it bombed 40 sites and
targeted six militants on Sunday, while Gaza fighters fired scores of rockets
into Israel, most of which fell in open areas.

Both sides appeared to want to dictate the timing of any lulls.

In an interview on the ''Fox News Sunday'' program, Mr. Netanyahu said, ''Israel
is not going to let a terrorist organization determine when it's convenient for
them to fire at our -- at our cities, at our people, and when it's not, when
they can restock.''

Prof. Shmuel Sandler, a political scientist at Bar-Ilan University near Tel
Aviv, said that Hamas, too, ''feels it cannot accept even a humanitarian
cease-fire when it is not the one that sets the time.''

Some Israeli politicians have talked of the possibility of escalating the
offensive against Gaza's militant groups as intense international efforts over
the weekend to press for a broader cease-fire appeared to have failed.

More than 1,000 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza, most of them civilians,
according to the Palestinian Health Ministry and monitoring groups. It said that
at least 10 people were killed by Israeli fire on Sunday and that three more had
died of injuries.

An Israeli reserve soldier was killed overnight by mortar fire from Gaza,
according to the military, bringing the number of Israeli soldiers killed since
the beginning of the campaign, on July 8, to 43. Three civilians in Israel have
also been killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/28/world/middleeast/israel-gaza-strip.html

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Relatives on Sunday mourned Jalila Ayad, a Palestinian
Christian woman killed in an airstrike. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)
 The mother and sister of Barak Refael Degorker, an Israeli soldier killed
Saturday evening. (PHOTOGRAPH BY URIEL SINAI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


