                             1347 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 28, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tensions Continue to Simmer as Attacks in Gaza Escalate

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER and FARES AKRAM; Isabel Kershner reported from
Jerusalem, and Fares Akram from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 524 words


JERUSALEM -- Two Palestinian men suspected of being militants were killed in an
Israeli missile strike in Gaza on Friday, according to the military and
witnesses, and Israel's minister of defense warned that he would not tolerate
rocket fire from Gaza against Israel or any other attempt to harm Israeli
civilians and soldiers.

Earlier Friday, an explosive device was detonated against Israeli forces
operating near the border fence with Gaza, causing no casualties, according to
the military. The forces responded with tank fire that wounded five
Palestinians, including a woman and a boy, 11, who was seriously wounded from
shrapnel but was in stable condition after surgery, according to Ashraf
al-Qedra, a spokesman for the Ministry of Health in Gaza. Witnesses said the
shells also damaged the minarets of two mosques.

''We will pursue and strike with force anyone who acts or plans to act against
us, as we did today,'' Moshe Yaalon, the Israeli defense minister, said in a
statement.

The attacks and stern warning came against a background of simmering tensions
along the Israel-Gaza border in the two weeks since three Israeli teenagers were
kidnapped in the West Bank.

Israel has blamed Hamas, the Islamic militant group that dominates Gaza, for the
abduction. Alongside the search for the missing youths, its military has
conducted a campaign of arrests and raids across the West Bank aimed at
weakening Hamas's infrastructure there.

The events in the West Bank have been accompanied by more rocket fire from Gaza
into Israel and retaliatory airstrikes by the Israelis. The Israeli military
said it had attacked more than 20 sites it described as ''terror targets''
across Gaza in retaliation for at least 26 rockets launched against Israel.

Of those, at least 15 hit Israeli territory, causing no casualties; five were
intercepted by Israel's missile defense system; and others fell short and landed
in Gaza, one of them apparently killing a 3-year-old girl. A few Palestinians
were injured in the Israeli airstrikes, mostly from broken glass.

Mr. Qedra of the Gaza Health Ministry identified the two men killed on Friday as
Osama al-Hussomi, 29, and Muhammed al-Fasih, 24. The Israeli military said they
were involved in firing rockets in recent weeks and were planning further
attacks against Israelis.

There was no immediate statement from any militant group in Gaza claiming them
as members, but they were buried wrapped in the black flags of the radical
Islamic Salafi movement.

The men were riding in a car west of Gaza City at the time of the strike, which
took place about 50 yards from the home of the former Hamas prime minister of
Gaza, Ismail Haniya, in the Beach refugee camp.

Witnesses said an Israeli drone fired a missile at the car, a silver Kia Forte.

''I heard the sound of a blast, I turned round and saw the front part of the car
burning,'' said Shadi Massoud, 24.

Mr. Massoud said the driver's body was thrown out of the car, which continued
driving for a few yards until it crashed into a wall. Among the debris were two
trays of rice and chicken covered with aluminum foil, the yellow grains of rice
scattered on the ground.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/28/world/middleeast/tensions-continue-to-simmer-a
s-attacks-in-gaza-escalate.html

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   Palestinians carried the body of a man who was killed on
Friday in an Israeli airstrike in Gaza  City. Israel's minister of defense
warned that he would not tolerate rocket fire against his country. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


