                             133 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congress Restricts Drones Program Shift

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 847 words


WASHINGTON -- In an unusual move, Congress is placing restrictions on the Obama
administration's plan to shift responsibility for armed drones more toward the
military and away from the C.I.A., congressional and administration officials
said Thursday.

Lawmakers inserted wording into a classified annex to the $1.1 trillion federal
budget approved by Congress this week that would make it more difficult to
transfer control over the drone campaign or the authority to carry out strikes.

The scope of the restrictions remained unclear because of their classification.
But the provision does not appear to entirely block a shift described last May
by administration officials as a ramification of President Obama's intention to
move the country off a decade-long war footing.

Lawmakers allowed the president to waive the constraints under certain
circumstances or to permit the transfer if the administration certifies that the
military meets certain standards in drone operations, congressional aides said
Thursday.

Even before the new provision in the budget bill, administration and
congressional officials said the schedule for shifting control to the military
was being revised -- if not shelved.

''D.O.D. has some work to do,'' a senior House Intelligence Committee staff aide
said Thursday, referring to the Department of Defense. ''It's a lot more
challenging than they thought.''

But the measure, first reported on The Washington Post's website on Wednesday
night, is a rare move by Congress to dictate how covert operations like the
drone program are carried out. It also reflects the simmering suspicion among
many lawmakers on the Intelligence Committees that the military's Joint Special
Operations Command is not up to the task of killing terrorism suspects with
Predator or Reaper drones, a notion the Pentagon rejects.

That skepticism was underscored on Dec. 12, when a strike by the United States
military, launched from a base in Djibouti, killed at least a half-dozen
innocent people in Yemen, according to a number of tribal leaders and witnesses,
and provoked a storm of outrage in the country.

The murky details surrounding the strike have raised questions about how
rigorously American officials are applying the standards for lethal strikes that
Mr. Obama outlined in a speech on May 23 at the National Defense University --
and whether such standards are even possible in such a remote and opaque
environment.

At the time, administration officials said that authority over most of the drone
strikes would gradually shift to the Pentagon from the C.I.A., a move officials
said was intended partly to lift the shroud of secrecy from the targeted killing
program.

But nearly eight months later, the C.I.A. still carries out a majority of drone
strikes in Yemen, with the remotely piloted aircraft taking off from a base in
the southern desert of Saudi Arabia.

Spokesmen for the White House, the C.I.A. and the congressional committees
responsible for the language declined to comment on Thursday.

''The president when he spoke at N.D.U. was very clear about his desire to be as
transparent as possible with respect to those operations,'' Rear Adm. John
Kirby, the Defense Department press secretary, told reporters on Thursday,
declining to discuss the specific congressional provision. ''That's a message
that we got loud and clear here in the Pentagon.''

That is a sentiment shared by many on Capitol Hill. Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a
Vermont Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, told MSNBC on Thursday,
''There should be far better control of what we do with our drones.''

The measure has also laid bare a spirited debate among rival congressional
committees and their senior members, for jurisdiction over the armed drone
operations in the coming years. Also at issue is whether the spy agency should
maintain a role in lethal counterterrorism operations or return to its
traditional intelligence-gathering focus.

The House and the Senate Armed Services Committees, with oversight of the
military, have generally backed the administration's plan.

''I believe the majority of the responsibility for this should rest with the
military,'' Senator John McCain of Arizona, a senior Republican on the Armed
Services Committee, said last year.

''The majority of it can be conducted by the Department of Defense,'' Mr. McCain
said. ''It's not the job of the Central Intelligence Agency. It's the military's
job.''

But members of the Intelligence Committees say the bulk of the program,
including the longstanding though diminishing operations in Pakistan, should
stay with the C.I.A. because the agency has developed the most accurate
information for targeting terrorism suspects -- and generally avoiding
civilians.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat who is chairwoman of the
Intelligence Committee and a member of the Appropriations Committee, said last
year that she had seen the C.I.A. ''exercise patience and discretion
specifically to prevent collateral damage'' and that she ''would really have to
be convinced that the military would carry it out that well.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/17/us/politics/congress-restricts-drones
-program-shift.html

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Senator John McCain supports plans to shift responsibility for
drone strikes more to the military and away from the C.I.A. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YURI
GRIPAS/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


