                             1363 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 7, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kiev's Military Finds Footing Against Rebels

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN; Daniel Rzhenetskyy contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1565 words


KIEV, Ukraine -- When pro-Russian rebels first fanned out across eastern Ukraine
in April, seizing public buildings, ousting local officials and blockading
streets and highways, the government's security forces -- a ragtag lot of poorly
equipped and understaffed military and police units -- were largely paralyzed by
dysfunction and defection. They seemed to remain so for months.

In the past week, however, after President Petro O. Poroshenko called off a
cease-fire and ordered his troops to end the rebellion by force, an entirely
different Ukrainian military appeared to arrive at the front. Soldiers retook an
important checkpoint at the Russian border, routed insurgents from the
long-occupied city of Slovyansk, and, on Sunday, began to tighten a noose around
the regional capital of Donetsk ahead of a potentially decisive showdown.

The insurgency is far from over, and Ukraine's leaders say they still fear a war
with Russia that they would certainly lose. Still, the recent success, however
tentative, reflects what officials and analysts described as a remarkable,
urgent transformation of the military and security apparatus in recent months.

''The military themselves learned to fight,'' said Mykola Sungurovskyi, the
director of military programs at the Razumkov Center, a policy research
organization here in the capital of Ukraine.

By most standards, the Ukrainian armed forces remain in a pitiful state. But
they have benefited from the enlistment of thousands of volunteers into new
militias, financial donations by ordinary citizens -- including a Kiev
Internet-technology entrepreneur who raised $35,000 and built a surveillance
drone -- and an aggressive push to repair and upgrade armored personnel carriers
and other equipment.

There has also been aid from abroad. The United States has sent $23 million in
security assistance since March, including $5 million for night-vision goggles,
body armor, communications equipment and food.

But even more important, experts said, was a reorganization of the chain of
command and a crucial psychological shift: Soldiers surmounted a reluctance to
open fire on their own countrymen, a serious issue after riot police officers
killed about 100 protesters last winter during civil unrest centered on Maidan,
the main square in Kiev.

''They have overcome that psychological barrier in which the military were
afraid to shoot living people,'' Mr. Sungurovskyi said. ''They had this barrier
after Maidan, after the death of that hundred -- not simply to shoot living
people, but their own people. After the forces were restructured a bit, and it
became clear who were our people, who were foes, the operations became more
effective.''

The biggest test is just ahead.

After fleeing south from Slovyansk, large numbers of rebels appeared Sunday to
be regrouping in Donetsk, a city of one million, where any push to contain them
will involve dangerous urban warfare. Signaling resilience, insurgents on Sunday
seized a building belonging to the state penitentiary service.

In Luhansk, the region's second-largest city after Donetsk, other rebels
attacked a jail, allowing eight prisoners to escape. In each case, officials
said the rebels, after suffering losses, appeared to be searching for weapons.
In recent days, rebel leaders have pleaded with President Vladimir V. Putin of
Russia to send additional aid.

Officials and experts agreed that the most urgent task facing the Ukrainian
government was sealing its border with Russia to prevent any further influx of
fighters or weapons, and the military has made progress doing so. And though he
is hardly trusted by Ukrainians, Mr. Putin also sent signals that he would not
order a full-scale invasion, announcing, for instance, that Parliament had
withdrawn formal authorization for him to use military force in Ukraine.

It is not clear why Mr. Putin eased some of the military pressure, but it
appears as if he has decided to put his emphasis on peace talks being
coordinated by a close friend of his, Viktor V. Medvedchuk, a Ukrainian
businessman and political operative. Although similarly supported by the leaders
of Germany and France, the talks have sputtered.

While the fears among officials of a Russian invasion and psychological barriers
among Ukrainian troops were quite real, experts said that most of the obstacles
confronting the Ukrainian military were far more concrete.

When Russia invaded Crimea in February, for example, Ukraine's military had
shrunk to roughly 128,000 troops, including civilians -- about one-tenth of its
size during Soviet Union times. Of those, only a small fraction were prepared
for fighting, said Oleksiy Melnyk, a former Air Force pilot and now a security
analyst at the Razumkov Center.

''They were wearing uniforms and going to work every day,'' Mr. Melnyk said.
''The difference with the civilians was just the clothes. They were not trained.
They were not equipped.'' The military's vehicles were decrepit and its weapons
outdated, its budget routinely pilfered by corrupt officials.

For instance, from 2005 to 2013, according to public Defense Ministry
inventories, the number of helicopters fell to fewer than 75, from more than
300. In February, as Russian forces entered Crimea, there was virtually no way
to fight back.

The insurrection that followed in the east then presented an entirely different
-- and even more confounding -- challenge: an insidious type of warfare
involving masked rebels who looked and acted like terrorists but had access to
weapons and intelligence from Russia, among the world's most advanced military
powers.

As Ukrainian leaders considered how hard to push back, they had to confront the
danger to civilians of fighting in heavily populated cities, as well as the risk
of provoking a full-scale invasion by the conventional Russian forces massing
along the border.

It is a fight that experts said had to be carried out largely by special forces,
carefully coordinated with the conventional military, including artillery and
air force squadrons, which, in the end, have had a limited role.

It is also a fight that Ukraine was not prepared for, but one that Andriy
Parubiy, the leader of Ukraine's National Security and Defense Council, said
should grab the attention of the world's major powers because of its
implications for modern conflict.

''I am convinced that there are many other countries which are not ready --
properly speaking, their armed forces are not ready, are unprepared, for this
type of war,'' Mr. Parubiy said in an interview last week. ''We, of course,
studied the experience of both Croatia and Israel, but here a lot of new
features are added. And, if Russia sees that this experience is successful, this
experience can very easily be used in any Baltic countries, and even in Belarus
and Kazakhstan.''

Mr. Parubiy invoked Igor Girkin, a Russian military intelligence officer who has
been a commander of the insurrection in eastern Ukraine, under the name of Igor
Strelkov. ''If we do not stop Putin here,'' Mr. Parubiy said, ''nobody knows
where his Girkins will appear next.''

In the interview, Mr. Parubiy laid his hands on a table and, exhaling in
disgust, described the paralysis of the initial response to the insurgency.

''The key tactic of Russian saboteurs is: Capture a building, station an armed
garrison there and have a picket around, mostly Communists, who would provide a
human shield,'' he said, offering an example he witnessed. ''They had it this
way in Luhansk. There is a five-story building where each window is a firing
spot and, right next to the building, are 500 people -- a picket.

''When we tell Alpha, a special unit of the S.B.U., whose purpose is to fight
terrorists, to enter the building and conduct the operation, they tell us, 'Take
away the people because the operation can only be conducted when we are able to
enter without a scuffle with civilians,' '' he said. ''When we tell the interior
troops to make a corridor and drag away civilians, they say, 'How can we do that
when terrorists in windows point guns at us? We're not able to fulfill this
task.' ''

The military was so underfinanced that the government issued a plea for
donations from citizens. Some of the country's richest businessmen used their
personal fortunes to create militias that are now effectively part of a new
national guard.

''As one colleague from the United States said, we have to repair a plane during
flight,'' Mr. Parubiy said.

As part of a continuing shake-up of the military, last week Mr. Poroshenko
appointed a new defense minister -- the country's fourth this year -- and a new
chief of staff of the armed forces.

Visiting Slovyansk on Sunday, where he praised troops for expelling rebels and
where the authorities were delivering food, water and other aid, the new defense
minister, Valeriy Heletey, said that the effort to crush the insurgents would
continue.

''We will conduct the antiterrorist operation in its active phase until not a
single terrorist will remain on the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions,''
he said.

Mr. Melnyk, the security analyst, cautioned that despite recent improvements,
the military's work was far from done. ''It's still premature to make the
assessment that, wow, this is a great success,'' he said. ''There's something
going on in Donetsk. Those separatists, terrorists -- whatever we want to call
them -- have decided to make one stronghold.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/07/world/europe/ukraine-military-finds-its-footin
g-against-pro-russian-rebels.html

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above, people waiting for food aid from Ukrainian soldiers on
Sunday in Slovyansk, where government  forces routed insurgents. Left, troops
checking a house for pro-Russian separatists. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GLEB
GARANICH/REUTERS) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


