                             1352 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hot Spots, Anyone? Racy Preferred

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 973 words


The website is called Vice News, so it's fair to expect racy images in a video
titled ''Posing as a Prostitute in a Turkish Brothel: Correspondent
Confidential.''

There are no salacious pictures. There isn't even any salacious video.

As Mimi Chakarova, a Bulgarian-born journalist, describes how she tried to
infiltrate the forced prostitution business, her account is illustrated with
exquisite watercolor drawings that faintly recall Matisse's paintings of
Morocco. Ms. Chakarova didn't get very far -- she wore a skimpy dress and high
heels to a seedy nightclub with male friends and saw other women who were not
there by choice. Nothing terrible happened, though she did feel violated when
one of her companions took advantage of the situation to put his hand on her
knee.

Hers is a first-person, unusually understated commentary about the sex slave
industry that could just as easily be posted by an organization that combats
human trafficking.

And virtue is not what most people expect when they click on Vice.com, the Vice
News and Noisey websites, or any of the other Vice channels on YouTube, let
alone tune into ''Vice,'' the company's niche documentary series on HBO.

In the media business, Vice is a hot commodity -- it's being courted by Fox and
Time Warner, and it reportedly aims to emerge with a television channel and a
movie deal. Vice appeals to advertisers because its videos supposedly appeal to
younger male viewers.

The web promos have swagger and brio, but the actual news stories are not
particularly raunchy or even all that juvenile. With some exceptions, of course:
In one segment, a Vice reporter traveled to rural Colombia to seek men who have
sex with donkeys, and found one. (On the video, the private parts of man and
beast were blurred.)

There have also been some infamous news stunts, most notably a Vice documentary
on HBO that sent Dennis Rodman to play basketball in North Korea.

That said, most of the videos have straightened up since ''The Vice Guide to
Everything,'' a 2010 series on MTV.

The online channels are less gonzo journalism than they are a hitchhiker's guide
to news. Young reporters go to dangerous, exotic or just bizarre places, blend
in and hang out.

Many of the topics featured on Vice News also show up on Al Jazeera, CNN and
other news organizations: clandestine trips across the border alongside illegal
immigrants, war zones, drone warfare, drug raids in Brazil, Syrian refugee
camps, African hospitals or cuddle cafes in Tokyo.

The reporting style is distinctive. The stories are close up, raw and in one way
at least oddly respectful: Correspondents stay out of the camera's way and let
their subjects -- a Ukrainian separatist, an Iraqi tribal elder, the mother of
an Indian rape victim, a teenage bullfighter in Mexico -- speak in their native
language, with subtitles (sometimes misspelled) but without interruption or
voice-overs.

Simon Ostrovsky sent dozens of such dispatches from Ukraine when Russia invaded
Crimea, and he became part of the story as he interviewed soldiers, pro-Russian
separatists, babushkas and gnarled drunks at barricades, in shabby headquarters
and apartments strewn with vodka bottles. Other news organizations may have
produced broader, more polished reports about the conflict, but Mr. Ostrovsky
communicated the tension and also the humdrum drabness of life there. He also
overstayed his welcome, and was held captive for three days in April by
pro-separatist militias paranoid about the Western media.

Vice's documentaries on HBO are more expertly produced and less off the cuff but
still have an informal, knowing tone, like the guides in Pompeii, Italy, who
used to take tourists aside and offer, for a fee, a look at ''forbidden'' Roman
erotica. Basically these films are ''60 Minutes'' for the young and the
restless: reporters wear hoodies and episodes are 30 minutes long. Many of the
correspondents are from the regions they cover, though Vice's founder and chief
executive, Shane Smith, acts as a senior anchor and occasional field reporter,
dressing up like an Afghan tribal chief in black turban and shalwar kameez for a
story on the waste and fraud built into American aid to Afghanistan.

There are rival sites courting the same demographic, including Esquire, but that
magazine online still looks like a magazine, and its 24-hour cable channel looks
like Spike and a lot of other cable networks that rely heavily on reruns.
Esquire TV has some original series, like ''Brew Dogs'' (beer tasting) and
''Friday Night Tykes'' (kiddie football), but not enough to fill a schedule. For
the moment, at least, Vice's television footprint is small and selective,
whereas its online presence looms larger.

And there, the blurring of advertising and content is artful. Intel, the
computer giant, has its own rubric on Vice called ''The Creators Project'' that
keeps the Intel and Vice logos firmly in place at the top of stories that
celebrate the primacy of technology in fields like music, fashion and design.
They include a look at solar-powered outfits by the fashion designer Pauline van
Dongen, who says that the panels sewn into her dresses can recharge a
smartphone.

Motherboard, a Vice science and technology web channel, has a more classic
journalistic bent. A story about a ''smart'' rifle gives a pro/con frame to a
weapon that self-aims and shoots. Jason Schauble, a chief executive of
TrackingPoint (he has since left the company), maintains that the company's
rifle provides an ''ethical kill shot,'' but his critics call it ''skill-free
killing.'' It's hard to watch Mr. Schauble's pitch without being impressed by
his Silicon Valley technobabble (''We've democratized accuracy and we've
entirely disrupted the shooting experience''), but even harder not to see the
problems with his invention.

There's a lot to learn on Vice and vice versa.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/arts/television/vice-the-news-entity-grows-on-
hbo-and-online.html

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: An illustration for a Vice report on prostitution. (C1)
 Kim Jong-un, left, with Dennis Rodman in a Vice report. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON
MOJICA/VICE MEDIA) (C6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


