                             1305 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Listings: Classical

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1778 words


Full reviews of recent classical performances: nytimes.com/classical. A
searchable guide to these and other performances is at nytimes.com/events.

Opera

&#x2605; NY Phil Biennial: 'Gloria -- A Pig Tale' (Friday and Sunday) The New
York Philharmonic had success in 2011 with H. K. Gruber's uproarious
''Frankenstein!!,'' and as part of its inaugural new-music biennial, the
orchestra presents another Gruber romp, about farm animals and social etiquette.
Alan Gilbert, the Philharmonic's music director, conducts the Juilliard School's
Axiom Ensemble and a cast that includes Lauren Snouffer, Brenda Patterson,
Alexander Lewis, Carlton Ford and Kevin Burdette. The director and designer is
Doug Fitch, who with his theatrical company Giants Are Small has collaborated
with the Philharmonic on several acclaimed projects (Ligeti's ''Le Grand
Macabre,'' Janacek's ''The Cunning Little Vixen'' and ''A Dancer's Dream'').
Friday at 7 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m., Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, Metropolitan
Museum of Art, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org; $60. (Zachary Woolfe)

&#x2605; NY Phil Biennial: 'The Raven' (Friday and Saturday) As part of the New
York Philharmonic's first biennial of new music, Gotham Chamber Opera presents
the United States premiere of Toshio Hosokawa's ''The Raven,'' a monodrama
starring Fredrika Brillembourg and the ballerina Alessandra Ferri, based on the
Edgar Allan Poe poem. André Caplet's ''Conte Fantastique (Le Masque de la Mort
Rouge)'' for harp and string quartet, also based on Poe, rounds out the program.
At 8 p.m., Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John Jay College, 524 West 59th Street,
Clinton, 212-279-4200, gothamchamberopera.org; $30 to $175. (Woolfe)

Classical Music

American Classical Orchestra (Thursday) This ensemble presents a program of
works written in or for Prague in the late 18th century. Thomas Crawford
conducts Mozart's ''Prague'' Symphony and Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 1, with
Bart van Oort performing on fortepiano. The concert also features Johann
Strauss's ''Sounds of Moldavia'' Waltz and a rarity: the Symphony in D by the
Czech composer Josef Myslivecek. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center,
212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org, americanclassicalorchestra.org; $35 to $90; $15
for students. (Vivien Schweitzer)

American Symphony Orchestra (Friday) Ahead of the 100th anniversary of the break
out of World War I, the conductor Leon Botstein and this ensemble present the
program ''Forged From Fire.'' The evening opens with a work by Reger that
expressed German imperialist ambitions. It will be followed by pieces by Ives
and Szymanowski (his Third Symphony) that convey new currents of awareness in
America and Poland, and Bloch's ''Israel'' Symphony, which captures new Jewish
nationalism during this fraught period. Mr. Botstein will lead a preconcert Q.
and A. at 7 p.m. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium, Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800,
carnegiehall.org, americansymphony.org; $12.50 to $50. (Anthony Tommasini)

Arvo Part Project (Saturday) This Estonian composer has made a rare trip to the
States to hear this concert, produced by the St. Vladimir's Seminary. On the
program are some of Mr. Part's greatest hits -- including ''Fratres,'' ''Cantus
in Memoriam Benjamin Britten'' and ''Adam's Lament'' -- performed by some of his
greatest interpreters, the Estonian Philharmonic Chamber Choir and Tallinn
Chamber Orchestra. Tonu Kaljuste conducts. At 8 p.m., Isaac Stern Auditorium,
Carnegie Hall, 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org; limited availability. (Corinna da
Fonseca-Wollheim)

Bargemusic (Friday) This floating concert hall in Brooklyn presents the latest
in its Here and Now Series, hosting the Voxare String Quartet in a performance
of David Del Tredici's ''String Quartet No. 1'' and ''Piano Trio.'' The group
will be joined by the violinist Mark Peskanov, the pianist Steven Beck and the
cellist Michael Nicolas. At 7 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing, next to
the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org; $35, $30 for 65+,
$15 for students. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)

&#x2605; Budapest Festival Orchestra (Sunday and Monday) One of the most
dependable conductor-ensemble pairings in classical music is Ivan Fischer and
the Budapest Festival Orchestra. For this visit to Lincoln Center, Mr. Fischer
and his players offer two Dvorak programs. On Sunday, the major works are the
Piano Concerto (with Garrick Ohlsson) and the Eighth Symphony. Monday's program
includes Dvorak's Cello Concerto (with Daniel Müller-Schott) and the ''New
World'' Symphony. You should expect to hear fresh accounts of these familiar
works. Sunday at 3 p.m., Monday at 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center,
212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org; $35 to $100. (Tommasini)

Contact! at the NY Phil Biennial (Saturday) The German composer-conductor
Matthias Pintscher leads musicians from the New York Philharmonic and the
radiant soprano Jennifer Zetlan in ''Beyond Recall,'' a program of new works
inspired by the visual arts. Nine composers react to sculptures commissioned by
the Salzburg Foundation over the past decade, including Bruno Mantovani, whose
''Spirit of Alberti'' was inspired by Marina Abramovic's ''Spirit of Mozart,''
and Dai Fujikura, whose ''silence seeking solace'' drew on a sculpture by
Stephan Balkenhol. At 10 p.m., Agnes Gund Garden Lobby, Museum of Modern Art,
212-875-5656, nyphil.org; $20. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)

Flux Quartet (Friday through Sunday) This adventurous ensemble concludes its
weeklong residency at the Stone, with two events nightly. Offerings include a
program dedicated to downtown visionaries and works by drone pioneers; an
electro-acoustic lineup with Michael Schumacher; a program of pieces by jazz
innovators; and premieres by the Canadian composer Barbara Monk Feldman. At 8
and 10 p.m., Avenue C and Second Street, East Village, thestonenyc.com; $15.
(Schweitzer)

&#x2605; Mannes Beethoven Institute Concert (Monday) As part of its annual
Beethoven Institute, Mannes College The New School for Music presents two
intriguing faculty concerts that will juxtapose chamber and piano works by
Beethoven and by the important American composer Stephen Hartke. The first
program includes Mr. Hartke's Piano Sonata (Thomas Sauer is the pianist) and
Sonata-Variations for Violin and Piano (with the violinist Mark Steinberg and
the pianist Alan Feinberg). (The second program is on June 6.) At 8 p.m., Mannes
College The New School for Music, 150 West 85th Street, Manhattan, 212-580-0210,
Ext. 4817, newschool.edu/mannes; $20. (Tommasini)

NY Phil Biennial: Bang on a Can (Friday and Saturday) Bang on a Can presents
Julia Wolfe's ''Anthracite Fields,'' an oratorio for instrumental ensemble and
eight-part chorus inspired by the coal-mining legacy of Pennsylvania. The work
will be performed on a double bill with Steven Mackey's ''Dreamhouse,'' a genre
hybrid that will be played by the Philharmonic. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 7
p.m., Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, lincolncenter.org; $49.
(Schweitzer)

NY Phil Biennial: Circles of Influence: George Benjamin (Sunday) Atmospheric,
dramatic and intensely colorful, the music of Mr. Benjamin is always a visceral
experience. Here it is placed in the context of the British composers Helen
Grime, Ryan Wigglesworth and Colin Matthews. The fiery conductor Pablo
Heras-Casado leads the Orchestra of St. Luke's. At 5 p.m., Rose Theater,
Frederick P. Rose Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway,
212-875-5656, jalc.org; $45. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)

NY Phil Biennial: Circles of Influence: Pierre Boulez (Saturday) Pablo
Heras-Casado will conduct the Orchestra of St. Luke's in a program exploring the
legacy of Mr. Boulez, the composer and conductor, whose works will be performed
alongside those of Bruno Mantovani, Heinz Holliger, Philippe Manoury and
Marc-André Dalbavie. Mr. Heras-Casado will host the program with Ara Guzelimian,
dean of the Juilliard School. At 2 p.m., Rose Theater, Frederick P. Rose Hall,
Jazz at Lincoln Center, 60th Street and Broadway, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org; $45.
(Schweitzer)

&#x2605; NY Phil Biennial: Marino Formenti (Wednesday) The breadth of the
offerings of the biennial organized by the New York Philharmonic is indicated by
the inclusion of this pianist in a solo recital titled ''Liszt Inspections.''
The program focuses on pieces that reveal the mystical, progressive, even
radical side of Liszt, including some with provocative titles, like ''Bagatelle
Without Tonality.'' Mr. Formenti will juxtapose these with contemporary works by
Ligeti, Berio, Feldman, John Adams and Gyorgy Kurtag. The Kaplan Penthouse is an
ideal setting for this exploratory program, which offers table seating and
complimentary wine. At 9:30 p.m., Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center, 165 West
65th Street, 212-721-6500, lcgreatperformers.org, nyphil.org; $45 and $60.
(Tommasini)

NY Phil Biennial: Christopher Rouse Premiere (Thursday and June 7) Alan Gilbert
conducts the Philharmonic, accompanied by the violinist Midori, in this new work
by Mr. Rouse and in the New York premiere of ''DoReMi'' by the Hungarian
composer Peter Eotvos. The program opens with a new work by an undisclosed
emerging composer selected through the EarShot National Orchestral Composition
Discovery Network. Thursday at 7:30 p.m., June 7 at 8 p.m., Avery Fisher Hall,
Lincoln Center, 212-875-5656, nyphil.org; $39 to $69. (Schweitzer)

NY Phil Biennial: Very Young Composers of the Philharmonic (Saturday) ''Let's
Play'' is the motto of this first biennial of the New York Philharmonic, but
it's also one that inspires its year-round educational activities in schools and
neighborhoods. Audience members will hear the compositions resulting from these
musical play dates, with Michael Adelson leading musicians and teaching artists
of the New York Philharmonic. The hosts are Theodore Wiprud and Jon Deak. At 11
a.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, 212-875-5656,
nyphil.org; free. (da Fonseca-Wollheim)

Riverside Symphony (Wednesday) For its season-ending concert, this group offers
another typically imaginative program, this one titled ''Composers Without
Boundaries.'' Each piece shows its composer looking to other cultures and eras
for inspiration. George Rothman conducts this lively orchestra in works by
Nielsen and Marius Constant, as well as Prokofiev's Violin Concerto No. 1 (Haik
Kazazyan is the soloist) and Bizet's exhilarating Symphony in C. At 7:15 p.m.,
the orchestra presents the Constant piece in a preliminary performance, so
curious ticket-holders can hear it twice. At 8 p.m., Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln
Center, 212-721-6500, riversidesymphony.org; $28 to $55. (Tommasini)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/arts/music/classical-music-opera-listings-for-
may-30-june-5.html

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


