                             1399 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 30, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Verse as a Cold Compress for Those of Us on the Verge of Fainting

BYLINE: By DWIGHT GARNER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 855 words


SELECTED POEMSBy Mark Ford

149 pages. Coffee House Press. $20.

If you take poetry seriously, or even half-seriously, you read the dead-tree
editions. Poetry seems tinned and trebly in digital formats, like Brahms's
Requiem played through smartphone speakers.

One of the dirty literary secrets of the Internet, though, is that nearly every
poem ever published is lurking out there somewhere, for those willing to spend
3.7 seconds to find it. I mention this only because in recent months, in need of
flintier forms of solace, I've increasingly and somewhat guiltily been
bookmarking on my laptop the poems of Mark Ford.

Mr. Ford, born in Kenya, is a British poet, academic and critic. He's edited an
edition of John Ashbery's poetry for the Library of America and a volume of
Frank O'Hara's verse for Alfred A. Knopf. He writes regularly, and sharply, for
The New York Review of Books and The London Review of Books.

He's a reticent poet. He musters a book a decade. So far there have been three,
each better than the previous: ''Landlocked'' (1992), ''Soft Sift'' (2001) and
''Six Children'' (2011). His ''Selected Poems'' is a tidy and welcome overview.
It's packed with cerebral pleasures and a complicated awareness of what Mr.
Ashbery has called ''the public gravitas of things.''

Mr. Ford's stanzas do not resemble flowers slowly fainting in their vases. He's
a poet who pitchforks clashing detail into his lines, as if to destabilize them,
to proclaim, as he does in ''I Wish,'' that ''every second is underwritten/by an
invisible host of dubious connections.''

Just as often, though, his work opens up emotionally, like a rolling vista that
unfurls after a long hike through dense woods. In a poem called ''The Gaping
Gulf,'' Mr. Ford pauses to declare:

I thinkOf all those on the verge of faintingToday -- teachers and alcoholics,
long-distance runners, Tokyo-boundCommuters crushed rib to rib. Their
lungsWheeze and labor, and would rest; they needA cold compress, a caressing
breeze, someRespite from the rattling drone of dried peasIn the inner ear.

This same poem -- it's about time, about lineage, about the faded British Empire
-- ends just as memorably.

My father (born October 1934, diedThe last day of May 2007) kept his medal in a
safeCleverly hidden in the utility room.The institutions that formed him, bade
him donA tin hat at Suez, shimmer like elegant, gauzy backdropsFloating down
from the flies. He weptRarely, ate powdered egg through gritted teethAs a child,
believed in the beneficentStride of progress. ''WhoWould true valour see,'' we
sangAt the crematorium, ''Let himCome hither.''

Mr. Ford's poems swivel between urban and rural worlds. He deploys high and low
culture to brisk effect. (One poem begins, ''It was in Berlin you mixed up John
and J. J. Cale/And we found ourselves watching Jacques Tourneur's 'Out of the
Past' yet again.)'' He has a stethoscopic ear for the sounds disappointment can
squeeze from a human heart.

Among these disappointments is, on many mornings, the face we present to
ourselves. In ''She Spears,'' Mr. Ford observes: ''One rainy morning, the mirror
brutally informed me/that a) anything went, and b) one wrong move and I'd have
no/moves left at all.''

Mr. Ford's best-known poem, his greatest hit, is, awkwardly, probably his worst
poem. (Never hold this against any artist.) This poem is ''A Swimming Pool Full
of Peanuts,'' from his first book, a slice of whimsy about a man who stumbles
upon a swimming pool full of peanuts. Then he pulls out his nine-iron.

From the start, however, Mr. Ford has been, when he wants to be, genuinely
funny. An early poem called ''Christmas'' begins: ''I very much enjoyed your
latest book I lied having/NOT read it. Hurrah! We're all of us bright as
chickens/As if Jack liked Chrissie and Chrissie liked Jack.''

The title poem of his collection ''Six Children'' takes its title from a line
from Walt Whitman, who wrote, ''Though unmarried I have had six children.'' From
this line Mr. Ford imagines six serio-comic encounters, the first of which is
encapsulated this way: ''The first woman I ever got with child wore calico/In
Carolina. She was hoeing beans; as a languorous breeze/I caressed her loins,
until her hoe lay abandoned in the furrow.''

Mr. Ford's ''Selected Poems'' contains some new work, and I'm interested in the
direction he's taking. He's begun to keep tabs on the online world, alert to the
multiplicity of life and language beneath the tantrums and sophistries. One of
his narrators is ''On loan/to a new media outfit.'' Another poem begins, ''Trust
me, or rather text me.''

A miraculous poem called ''Adrift'' imagines online connections with the female
relatives of some sulfurous men. ''Is there a more ferocious texter than General
Pinochet's/daughter?'' the narrator asks. ''I've no idea how she got my
number.''

For the artful Mr. Ford, logging out brings more pleasure than plugging in. A
new poem called ''Show Time'' begins:

Tempus fugit every sundialproclaims, yet over and overtime seems to swoon, or to
expand, evento grindto a juddering haltwhen I blog; a dreadful dayonline, I
think I mean, is a dreadfulday forever.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/30/books/selected-poems-by-mark-ford-covers-a-car
eer.html

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARY HINKLEY)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


