                             1336 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Hard Choices in Iraq and Syria

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 447 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Don't Fight in Iraq and Ignore Syria'' (Op-Ed, June 18):

Anne-Marie Slaughter tries to equate the situation in Syria with the crisis in
Iraq, and accuses the Obama administration of being ''blind'' and of
''profoundly'' missing the point in considering an intervention in Iraq but not
Syria. But the two cases are very different.

In Syria, the debate was about arming the rebels against the regime. The risks
were that the assistance would fall into the wrong rebel hands and that
intervention would simply make the situation worse. The Syrian opposition (both
moderate and radical) is not at all unified and suffers from considerable
infighting.

By contrast, in Iraq, the militant group ISIS (the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria) threatens the very existence of a unified state, and the United States is
considering bolstering the central government (however unsavory and sectarian)
to prevent Iraq from becoming a haven of terror and anarchy that would
destabilize the rest of the region.

It is much better to have a sectarian regime that needs to become more inclusive
than a complete state breakup with no domestic authority whatsoever, since a
breakup poses a risk to all countries in the region, including American allies.

By equating the debate about Syria with Iraq, it is Ms. Slaughter who misses the
point.

MATTHEW SUPPELSA Evanston, Ill., June 18, 2014

To the Editor:

Anne-Marie Slaughter urges President Obama to ask questions regarding a ''course
of action that will be best'' in both Iraq and Syria in the short and long term.
These questions have obviously been asked and considered by the National
Security Council, the State Department and others.

There are no clear answers as to the ''best'' course other than the covert aid
that has been provided. Military action by us and others would probably worsen
the conflict rather than resolve it. And we would become the target.

The causes of the conflict are deep-rooted and long-lived, and their resolution
will be long and costly. Ms. Slaughter says force ''may well'' be needed in both
countries, suggesting drones and airstrikes. But in the fluid situation in Iraq
and Syria, distinguishing friend from foe is difficult and requires detailed
ground intelligence, which is not available.

All the possibilities and pros and cons of action are on the table. We and
others may help in limited ways, but any actions taken are unlikely to be
sufficient to bring foes to the negotiating table.

Present and future solutions lie with the Iraqi and Syrian people and their
leaders. We can supply humanitarian aid and continuing covert assistance, but we
cannot cure the infection.

PHIL TRUE Glen Allen, Va., June 18, 2014

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/opinion/the-hard-choices-in-iraq-and-syria.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


