                             1396 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 28, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Moves to Shield Anti-Iran Group's Files

BYLINE: By MATT APUZZO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1213 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration has gone to court to protect the files of
an influential anti-Iran advocacy group, saying they likely contain information
the government does not want disclosed.

The highly unusual move by the Justice Department raises questions about the
connections between the American government and the group, United Against
Nuclear Iran, a hard-line voice seeking to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear
weapons. The group has a roster of prominent former government officials and a
reputation for uncovering information about companies that sometimes do business
with Iran, in violation of international sanctions.

The Justice Department has temporarily blocked the group from having to reveal
its donor list and other internal documents in a defamation lawsuit filed by a
Greek shipping magnate the group accused of doing business with Iran. Government
lawyers said they had a ''good faith basis to believe that certain information''
would jeopardize law enforcement investigations, reveal investigative techniques
or identify confidential sources if released.

Judge Edgardo Ramos of the United States District Court for the Southern
District of New York called the government's involvement ''very curious.'' But
since March, he has agreed not to force the group to reveal the information. The
government has until Thursday to say whether it will formally claim law
enforcement privilege and try to keep the information secret permanently.

The intervention by the Justice Department added a new layer of mystery to an
already intriguing case. Lawyers for Victor Restis, who filed the defamation
suit, have accused the group of being funded by unidentified foreign interests
and are trying to force the testimony of Israeli's former intelligence chief and
a prominent Israeli businessman.

''This raises so many questions about what is going on behind the scenes,'' said
Abbe D. Lowell, a lawyer representing Mr. Restis.

There are no suggestions in the government's court filings that United Against
Nuclear Iran -- also known as the American Coalition Against Nuclear Iran Inc.
-- has done anything improper. And the Justice Department, which has cracked
down on officials who reveal secrets to journalists, has not indicated any
concern that the group has the information -- only that it might become public.

If the group has information belonging to the American government, it is not
clear how it obtained it. American intelligence agencies are prohibited from
secretly working with organizations to influence American public opinion and
media. If the information does not belong to the government, it is not clear
what makes it so sensitive.

Either way, the court filings indicated close ties between the American
government and a group that has proved adept at pressuring the government and
corporations to isolate Iran economically. Tough economic sanctions are
generally credited with forcing Iran to the negotiating table over its nuclear
future.

Nicole Navas, a Justice Department spokeswoman, would not answer questions about
the case.

Mark D. Wallace, chief executive of United Against Nuclear Iran and a former
Bush administration official, also would not discuss it. In court documents, the
group's lawyers call Mr. Restis's lawsuit ''little more than a thinly veiled
effort to silence a U.S. organization's efforts to prevent business transactions
with Iran and thwart Iran's efforts to obtain nuclear weapons.''

Founded in 2008, United Against Nuclear Iran is run and advised by a long list
of former government officials. Its advisers include Joseph I. Lieberman, the
former Democratic senator from Connecticut; Francis Townsend, the former
homeland security adviser to President George W. Bush; Dennis B. Ross, a former
Middle East adviser to both Republican and Democratic presidents; and former
intelligence chiefs from Israel, Germany and Britain.

With about $1.7 million a year in donations, the group has lobbied Congress and
helped draft legislation. But it is best known for its ''name and shame''
campaigns, which unearth information about Western companies suspected of doing
business with Iran. Using news releases, letters, Facebook and its website, the
group pressures them to stop.

Companies frequently respond by cutting ties with Iran. The group has directed
letters to Caterpillar, Ingersoll Rand and the accounting firms
PricewaterhouseCoopers and Ernst & Young. But the response was different last
year when Mr. Wallace sent a letter to Mr. Restis, accusing him and his company
of being ''frontmen for the illicit activities of the Iranian regime.'' Mr.
Restis sued for defamation in a Manhattan federal court.

The group said it had uncovered a letter proving there was a plan to do business
in Iran. It also accused Mr. Restis of using his ships in support of Iran's oil
industry.

Mr. Restis said the letter was fraudulent, the illicit Iranian deal never
existed, and his ships made only authorized humanitarian shipments. He accused
the group of shaking down companies for donations; the group in turn accused him
of being a ''master criminal.''

The group said it based its accusations on ''valid research, credible documents,
distinguished relationships, and pre-eminent sourcing.'' In court, Mr. Restis
demanded that the group disclose those documents and its relationships.

Soon after that demand, Mr. Restis said he was approached by an Israeli
businessman, Rami Ungar, with no direct connection to United Against Nuclear
Iran.

According to court documents filed by Mr. Restis's lawyers, Mr. Ungar knew
details about the case and said he was ''authorized to try to resolve the
issues'' on behalf of the group's supporters.

It was not clear who those supporters were. Like many nonprofit groups, its
donor list is secret. Mr. Restis's lawyers said in a letter to the judge in
April that they had uncovered information that United Against Nuclear Iran ''is
being funded by foreign interests.''

Mr. Ungar did not respond to phone and email messages seeking comment. Mr.
Restis has filed court documents seeking Mr. Ungar's testimony. He is also
seeking testimony from Meir Dagan, the former Israeli intelligence chief and an
adviser to United Against Nuclear Iran, who Mr. Restis believes served as a
conduit between the source and the group.

It is not unusual for lawyers to demand documents and lob unfounded allegations,
particularly in the early stages of a case. The threat of embarrassing
disclosures can make both sides eager to settle before a trial. But the Justice
Department's court appearance lent credibility to the idea that larger, hidden
interests were at stake.

One of the government lawyers on the case, Anthony J. Coppolino, specializes in
national security litigation. He has defeated challenges to the Bush
administration's warrantless wiretapping program and President Obama's authority
to launch a drone attack on an American citizen.

If the Justice Department formally asserts the law-enforcement privilege this
week, Judge Ramos has said he will have ''a great number of questions'' about
how and why.

''I am particularly concerned,'' he said in April, ''that the defendants are
able to utilize certain information in its public statements, and then not have
to answer to their actions on the basis of a privilege.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/28/us/politics/us-justice-dept-moves-to-shield-an
ti-iran-groups-files-united-against-nuclear-iran.html

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


