                             131 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 28, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Party Claims It Identified Top C.I.A. Spy In Pakistan

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH; Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad,
Pakistan, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 682 words


The political party of the former cricket star Imran Khan on Wednesday
identified a man it described as the C.I.A.'s top spy in Pakistan, in an
escalation of Mr. Khan's campaign to end American drone strikes in the country.

In a letter to the Pakistani police, Mr. Khan's information secretary, Shireen
Mazari, accused the C.I.A. director, John O. Brennan, along with a man
identified as the agency's Islamabad station chief, of ''committing murder and
waging war against Pakistan.''

In Washington, a C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment on the case.

Ms. Mazari demanded that the authorities prevent the station chief, whose
identity has not yet been confirmed, from leaving the country so that he could
face prosecution in a Pakistani court.

That seems unlikely, but the move is expected to infuriate American officials,
who had to recall a previous C.I.A. station chief in 2010 after he was
identified in the local news media, also in relation to a legal suit brought by
anti-drone campaigners.

But while blame for that outing was placed on smoldering tensions between the
C.I.A. and Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence spy agency, this time it
appears to be driven more by Mr. Khan's increasingly confrontational stance
against drone strikes.

In an appearance on a television talk show on Wednesday evening, Mr. Khan said
he had named the station chief essentially to punish the C.I.A. for a deadly
drone strike this month in the province his Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party
controls, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa. Now, he said, it was up to the government of Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif to take the next step against the American spy agency.

He has vowed to block NATO supply lines into Afghanistan in retaliation for the
Nov. 1 drone strike that killed the leader of the Pakistani Taliban, Hakimullah
Mehsud. On Saturday, his supporters moved to deliver on that promise by
searching trucks and roughing up drivers as they passed through
Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa on the way to Afghanistan.

In her letter on Wednesday, Ms. Mazari claimed that the station chief did not
enjoy diplomatic immunity, and suggested that if interrogated by the police he
might divulge the names of the pilots who fly the drones.

The high-profile attempt to obstruct C.I.A. operations in Pakistan was said to
be a response to the Nov. 21 drone strike that struck a seminary linked to the
Haqqani network, a Taliban-affiliated militant group at the center of American
security concerns in Afghanistan. The strike, which killed the Haqqanis'
spiritual leader and five others, occurred in the Hangu district of
Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, in a rare drone strike outside Pakistan's tribal areas.

Mr. Khan has been a leading advocate of ceasing military action against the
Pakistani Taliban, even though Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa has been the region hardest
hit by Islamist violence this year, with hundreds killed in attacks. The Taliban
also broke out many prisoners in an embarrassing and well-organized jailbreak in
July.

Mr. Khan has used the drone issue to leverage his popularity against Mr. Sharif,
who is his main electoral competitor in Punjab Province, and indeed has largely
succeeded in framing the political debate on drones in recent years.

Some Sharif supporters criticized Mr. Khan for trying to score political points
by outing the station chief. ''This a thoughtless move,'' said Siddiqul Farooq,
a central leader of the governing Pakistan Muslim League party. ''It is selfish
and compromises the national interest.''

Since the escalation of the C.I.A.'s drone war in Pakistan in 2008, the
Islamabad station has grown to become one of the spy agency's largest outposts
in the world. The agency's expansion in Pakistan has been an irritant to
America's relations with Pakistan.

The influence of the C.I.A.'s Islamabad station chief has sometimes eclipsed
even that of the American ambassador in Pakistan. A previous station chief
clashed repeatedly in 2011 with Cameron Munter, the ambassador at the time, over
the intensity of the drone campaign. The Obama administration ended up siding
with the C.I.A., and Mr. Munter's tenure was cut short.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/28/world/asia/pakistani-party-identifies-man-it-s
ays-is-cia-station-chief.html

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


