                             1391 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 26, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

French Soldiers Reach Air Algérie Crash Site

BYLINE: By NICOLA CLARK; Adam Nossiter contributed reporting from Dakar,
Senegal.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 860 words


PARIS -- As a detachment of French soldiers reached the crash site of an Air
Algérie jetliner in Mali, officials in Paris said on Friday that the accident
was most likely weather-related and that the distribution of the wreckage over a
limited area suggested that the plane probably hit the ground intact.

''We rule out -- and have from the start -- any ground strike,'' Frédéric
Cuvillier, the French junior minister for transport, told France 2 television on
Friday. President François Hollande of France said that the ''black box'' data
recorder had been found at the crash site and confirmed that there were no
survivors.

Speaking to reporters on Friday, Mr. Hollande said that the number of people who
died in the crash was 118, two more than the government and airline officials
said on Thursday.

Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister, said that verification of the
passenger manifest overnight had confirmed that there had been 112 passengers
and six crew members on board. The number of French victims was also revised, to
54 from 51, including several dual nationals, Mr. Fabius said.

Mr. Hollande said he spoke by telephone on Friday with Mali's president, Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, and offered France's full cooperation with the investigation as
well as the repatriation of the victims' bodies.

Following international rules, Mali will lead the investigation into the cause
of the accident. But Mr. Fabius said that experts from the French Bureau of
Investigation and Analysis were expected to arrive in Mali on Saturday and would
assume a significant role in the inquiry.

The wreckage of Flight 5017 was found by an international search team just
before nightfall on Thursday in an isolated area, about 60 miles south of the
town of Gao in eastern Mali. Soldiers from Burkina Faso, who were the first to
arrive on the scene, said they had found several bodies among the burned-out
hull of the plane, a Boeing MD-83.

''We think the aircraft crashed for reasons linked to the weather conditions,''
Bernard Cazeneuve, the French interior minister, said in an interview on the
French radio station RTL.

Gen. Gilbert Diendéré, chief of the Burkina Faso general staff, said on local
television that troops had discovered the remains of the plane ''totally burned
out and scattered on the ground.'' Video taken at the crash site by soldiers
from Burkina Faso, and broadcast on French television Friday morning, showed the
plane's charred, fragmentary remains scattered over a broad area of muddy
terrain.

A French Defense Ministry spokesman said the wreckage had been found by a Reaper
surveillance drone operated by the French military based on information provided
by the authorities in Burkina Faso.

Roughly 100 French troops and 30 vehicles left Gao for the crash site early on
Friday, said the French defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian.

French officials noted that the site was extremely remote, about a three-hour
drive from Gao.

''It must be recognized that the physical conditions on the ground complicate
the search,'' Mr. Fabius, the foreign minister, said. ''Our intention is to
bring the bodies to Gao as quickly as possible.'' He said initial identification
of the victims would have to take place on site before the remains could be
repatriated.

Mr. Fabius said that ''there were powerful storms active in the region'' at the
time the plane lost radio contact with air traffic controllers.

The plane took off early Thursday from Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso,
on a flight to Algiers. The Burkina Faso government said that the aircraft's
last contact with ground control came a few minutes after it had passed
northward out of the country's air space. It said the crew later contacted air
traffic controllers in Niamey, Niger, to say that the plane had encountered
storms. Swiftair, the Spanish company that owned the plane, confirmed that all
six crew members were Spanish citizens. Government sources said the passengers
came from 14 countries, with France having the highest number of citizens
aboard. Burkina Faso said 28 of its nationals were on board.

Details about some of the French victims began to emerge in local news media
reports. One family in eastern France appeared to have 10 members aboard Flight
5017, said a spokesman for the prefecture of the Rhône-Alpes department, Agence
France-Presse reported.

The crash comes at a time when the aviation industry is already reeling from the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine last week, the crash
of TransAsia Airways Flight 222 in Taiwan on Wednesday and the suspension of
flights to and from Tel Aviv this week because of rocket fire from Gaza.

France, which was once a colonial power in the region, led an international
effort last year to expel Islamist militants from towns in northern Mali that
were overrun by Al Qaeda's North African affiliate in 2012. The militants left
behind stacks of manuals explaining how to use SA-7a and SA-7b shoulder-fired
antiaircraft missiles, which can shoot down an airliner flying low for takeoff
or landing. But those militants are not known to possess heavier weapons that
could strike an aircraft at cruising altitude.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/26/world/africa/air-algerie-crash.html

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: French soldiers surveyed the crash site of Flight 5017 on Friday
in Mali. Six crew members and 112 passengers were killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) MAP: The wreckage was found Thursday in remote
eastern Mali.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


