                             1343 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Redrawn Lines Seen as No Cure in Iraq Conflict

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1490 words


ISTANBUL -- Over the past two weeks, the specter that has haunted Iraq since its
founding 93 years ago appears to have become a reality: the de facto partition
of the country into Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish cantons.

With jihadists continuing to entrench their positions across the north and west,
and the national army seemingly incapable of mounting a challenge, Americans and
even some Iraqis have begun to ask how much blood and treasure it is worth to
patch the country back together.

It is a question that echoes not only in Syria -- also effectively divided into
mutually hostile statelets -- but also across the entire Middle East, where
centrifugal forces unleashed by the Arab uprisings of 2011 continue to erode
political structures and borders that have prevailed since the collapse of the
Ottoman Empire a century ago.

Yet Iraq and Syria's potential fragmentation along sectarian or ethnic lines is
not likely to offer any solution to the region's dysfunction, analysts say, and
may well generate new conflicts driven by ideology, oil, and other resources.

''At least a third of the country is beyond Baghdad's control, not counting
Kurdistan,'' said Zaid al Ali, an Iraqi analyst and the author of ''The Struggle
for Iraq's Future.'' ''But any effort to make that official would likely lead to
an even greater disaster -- not least because of the many mixed areas of the
country, including Baghdad, where blood baths would surely ensue as different
groups tried to establish facts on the ground.''

The Obama administration has urged Iraqi politicians of different sects to come
together, repeating admonitions that were so often heard in the years after the
2003 invasion. But the Pentagon -- reluctant to commit more manpower to a
complex and profoundly uncertain conflict -- has quietly hinted it could live
with Iraq's current division, despite the dangers posed by a potential new
terrorist sanctuary in the deserts linking Syria and Iraq.

The context this time is different from a decade ago: Sectarian hatred has begun
to alter the region's political DNA in ways that make the old borders more
vulnerable. Many ordinary Sunnis describe the seizing of Mosul and other cities
as a popular revolution against a Shiite-led government, not a terrorist
onslaught. With Iran, their historic enemy, now lining up drones and other
military supplies to help the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki
retake the north -- and protect the south -- many Sunnis may become further
alienated from the state.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, which supplied the shock troops of
the assault on Mosul, has made vigorous efforts to inculcate a new identity for
those living within its growing transnational sphere, setting up Shariah courts
and publicizing videos in which its fighters burn their passports. Last week,
the group issued an eight-page report denouncing the Middle Eastern border
system as a colonialist imposition, and included photographs of its fighters
destroying what it called ''crusader partitions'' between Iraq and Syria.

At the same time, the ISIS onslaught has made the formal secession of Iraqi
Kurdistan far more plausible. The crisis led Iraqi soldiers to flee from Kirkuk,
the contested oil-rich northern city that was among the last major obstacles to
Kurdish independence. Across the border in Syria, a Kurdish region in the
country's north is also effectively independent of Damascus, with its own
military and provisional government. And Turkey, which in the past strongly
opposed an independent Kurdish state on its border, now sees the Kurds as a
stable buffer between itself and the extremists of ISIS.

The division of Iraq into three parts has been proposed in the past as a
solution to the country's problems. In 2006, Joseph R. Biden Jr., then a
senator, promoted the idea, invoking a comparison with the breakup of the former
Yugoslavia and the Dayton Accords in the mid-1990s. But much has changed over
the past eight years: Division is now largely a fait accompli. Reversing it
would take enormous resources, even if the United States and Iran were to find
ways to cooperate toward that goal -- a convergence that would itself enrage and
perhaps radicalize many of the region's Sunni Arabs.

For the most part, Iraqis (with the exception of the Kurds) reject the idea of
partition, according to recent interviews and opinion polls taken several years
ago. In that sense, Iraq forms a striking contrast with the former Yugoslavia,
where militias worked consciously from the start to carve out new and ethnically
exclusive national enclaves. The sectarian strain may have led to Iraq's current
impasse, but it coexists with other sources of regional and ideological
solidarity, some deeply rooted in history.

Partly for that reason, many analysts say, the current division of Iraq -- while
it may prove irreversible in the end -- does not represent a return to a more
authentic or harmonious dispensation, nor is it likely to better address the
Middle East's sources of political and social failure.

''You could split these countries into two or three or four, and you'd have the
same practice of power in each of those units,'' said Peter Harling, a senior
analyst at the International Crisis Group who spent 15 years living in Iraq and
Syria. ''The problem is the divisive and autocratic and corrupt way power is
practiced, not the borders.''

For all the jihadis' boasts about founding a new caliphate -- or Islamic state
-- the prospects of building any sort of cohesive or sustainable new Sunni
entity in the region are slim. Already, there have been reports of factional
battles among the gunmen who captured Mosul two weeks ago. The jihadists' main
partner in the north is a network of Iraqi Baathist former military officers
with links to Sufism, an Islamic sect the jihadists view as heretical.

There are also renewed signs of division among the Shiites, including the
refusal of Moktada al-Sadr, who commands the powerful militia known as the Mahdi
Army, to fight under the banner of the Iraqi Army. Similar divisions among
Shiite factions have often led to violence in the past, including the 2008
battle in Basra between Mr. Maliki's forces and the Mahdi Army.

The logistical obstacles may be larger than the ideological ones. In Syria, it
is often assumed that President Bashar al-Assad could lead a retreat to the
Alawite heartland along the Mediterranean coast, an area that briefly enjoyed
statehood under the French protectorate after World War I. But his government
views that territory as far too vulnerable because it is cut off from Syria's
main water sources and because it would lack the major cities that are at the
core of the economy, said Joshua Landis, a Syria expert at the University of
Oklahoma.

Similar problems would afflict any effort to forge a new Sunni state in Iraq and
Syria. For such a state to become sustainable it would need a real economy, and
for that, it would require a major city -- Aleppo is the only option -- and
probably a port on the Mediterranean, Mr. Landis said. Negotiating a land
corridor that would achieve those goals without endangering the Alawite state
would be nearly impossible, he added.

In Iraq, it has long been assumed that the Shiite heartland of southern Iraq,
where the major oil fields are, would give the Shiites a tremendous advantage,
leaving the Sunnis with only the vast landlocked deserts to the north and west.
But northern Iraq also controls both of the country's major rivers, the Tigris
and Euphrates, which flow southward toward Basra. That could provide one more
reason for Mr. Maliki, or his successors, to fight hard for the recapture of the
north and west.

The prospect of a more formal partition in Iraq or Syria, however unlikely that
may seem right now, could also lead to mass migrations and further turmoil,
judging by some recent examples of state partition, like the division of Sudan
in 2011, or that of India and Pakistan in 1947. Those breakups were the result
of long struggles and led to terrible violence.

In light of all this, many analysts say it is far more likely that the current
Arab borders will persist, and greater power will ultimately be devolved to
provinces and cities -- a process that has already been underway since the Arab
uprisings. In Yemen, another country where insurgency has effectively divided
the country, there has been extensive discussion of a plan to designate six new
federal regions, each with substantial autonomy.

Iraq's Constitution already allows such federal devolution to be worked out. But
in their current polarized state, Iraq's leaders scarcely seem capable of
agreeing on anything.

''Fundamentally, we have to answer the question: Do we Iraqis want to live in
the same country?'' said Feisal al-Istrabadi, an Iraqi diplomat who teaches law
at Indiana University. ''If we don't, then we need to find a better way to
separate than what we're doing right now.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/world/middleeast/redrawn-lines-seen-as-no-cure
-in-iraq-conflict.html

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Clerics in support of the Mahdi Army marched last week in a show
of force against ISIS in Najaf, Iraq. Shiites are taking up arms across the
country and calling on civilians to join the fight. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY
ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8) MAPS: Ethnic, Religious and Political
Divisions Across Mesopotamia: Ottoman Empire: Before WWI, the Middle East was
divided into several administrative provinces under the Ottoman Empire. Modern
Iraq is roughly made up of the Ottoman provinces of Mosul, Baghdad, and Basra.
Sykes-Picot Agreement: In 1916, Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot, British
and French diplomats, secretly drew the first map to divide up the Ottoman
Empire, beginning a series of border negotiations that led to the establishment
of British and French mandates in 1920.
Religious and Ethnic Regions Today: Iraq's current boundaries bring together
different, often adversarial, groups under one mixed national identity that has
been strained by conflict. Still, if Iraq were to split, partition would not be
so simple as drawing new borders along religious or ethnic lines. (Sources:
Rand, McNally & Co. World Atlas (1911 Ottoman Empire map)
United Kingdom National Archives (Sykes-Picot)
 Dr. M. Izady, Columbia University's Gulf 2000 project (religious and ethnic
map)) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


