                             1383 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 19, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan's Struggle Against Polio

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 327 words


The campaign in Pakistan to contain an uncontrolled outbreak of polio hit an
alarming point this week when the nation's tally of new cases exceeded last
year's total of 93, with months to go in the emergency effort to vaccinate
children over fierce opposition from the Taliban.

Fifty-five of the 94 cases reported thus far have occurred in North Waziristan,
a Taliban stronghold along the Afghanistan border where hundreds of thousands of
people have become refugees since the Pakistani government began a crackdown
last month to root out militants.

Reports suggest that the refugees are compounding the problem by avoiding
special government camps where vaccination is offered, preferring sanctuary with
scattered relatives. For the past two years, parents and health workers have
been intimidated by Taliban leaders who banned vaccination under threat of death
in retaliation for America's drone strikes against militant leaders.

Dozens of vaccination workers have been murdered by Taliban gunmen. Wary parents
are repeatedly reminded that American intelligence faked a vaccination program
in the search for Osama bin Laden, a practice the White House has promised will
never be used again. The worsening refugee crisis is turning the polio threat
into a global health emergency, the World Health Organization says. Experts warn
that neighboring India, which succeeded in shedding its label as a polio-endemic
nation three years ago, could face serious cross-border infection.

Sensibly, Pakistan is requiring travelers, young and old, to be vaccinated at
hundreds of emergency transit stations when leaving the country. But medical
teams are clearly unable to make thorough rounds on trains, according to a
recent report in The Guardian. Meanwhile, many parents remain susceptible to
propaganda demonizing vaccination as a Western plot to undermine the nation. Far
more attention is required from the international community if this health
threat is to be contained.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/19/opinion/Pakistans-Struggle-Against-Polio.html

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


