                             1300 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                                    National

Rebutting Critics, Obama Seeks Higher Bar for Military Action

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER; Michael D. Shear contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1156 words


WASHINGTON -- As President Obama listens to assessments of his foreign policy
these days, he grows deeply frustrated. Syria? Ukraine? Afghanistan? What more
do his critics want him to do? Get into another war? Keep fighting one that has
already become America's longest?

After more than five years in office, Mr. Obama has become increasingly
convinced that while the United States must play a vital role beyond its
borders, it should avoid getting dragged into the quicksand of international
crises that have trapped some of his predecessors. It is time for an end to what
he called ''a long season of war.''

To his critics, mainly on the right but also some on the left, this is a
prescription for passivity, an abrogation of decades of bipartisan leadership on
the world stage. Stung and irritated, Mr. Obama used his commencement address to
West Point cadets on Wednesday to mount a sustained rebuttal and to define an
approach to foreign policy that he believes is suited to a new era and that he
hopes will outlast his presidency.

''This is an attempt to come up with an Obama doctrine that looks at how do we
think about the world now that the war against the Taliban and its allies is
won,'' said Peter L. Bergen, a national security scholar at the New America
Foundation and one of several foreign policy specialists invited to lunch with
Mr. Obama this week. ''A policy of judicious restraint is not very stirring and
doesn't lend itself to strong rhetoric, but it may be the most sensible approach
and is certainly where the American public is.''

Mr. Obama framed the debate on his own terms at West Point, presenting himself
as the steward of a reasonable balance between isolationism and unilateralism.
He tried, as he often does, to capture a middle ground of sorts. He even played
to both sides with his language, using the phrases ''indispensable nation,'' a
favorite of Democrats during the Clinton administration, and ''American
exceptionalism,'' a favorite of Republicans ever since.

But the commander in chief who in his first term waged a relentless drone
campaign against terrorists and dispatched the Navy Seals who killed Osama bin
Laden seemed more intent on setting the bar higher for future use of force.

By pulling troops out of Afghanistan by the end of 2016, much as he already has
done in Iraq, he noted that he will have ended America's involvement in two
wars. By training and equipping regional allies, he is increasingly turning the
war with terrorists over to them.

In the future, when the United States is not directly threatened, ''the
threshold for military action must be higher,'' Mr. Obama said. He presented the
choice in binary terms, suggesting that his critics want to use force to solve
many of the world's troubles.

In some ways, that was a straw-man argument, since even his fiercest opponents
do not advocate American ground forces to counter Russian intervention in
Ukraine or to stop the civil war in Syria. But some critics say Mr. Obama seems
to have grown more allergic to American power since his own intervention in
Libya yielded a messy outcome.

At West Point, Mr. Obama noted that four cadets who were in the audience for his
first address there in December 2009 when he announced a troop buildup in
Afghanistan were subsequently killed in the war, and others were injured. ''I
believe America's security demanded those deployments,'' he said. ''But I am
haunted by those deaths. I am haunted by those wounds.''

''I would betray my duty to you, and to the country we love,'' he added, ''if I
ever sent you into harm's way simply because I saw a problem somewhere in the
world that needed to be fixed or because I was worried about critics who think
military intervention is the only way for America to avoid looking weak.''

He did not convince his critics. Peter D. Feaver, a former aide to President
George W. Bush and a professor of political science at Duke University, said the
speech seemed ''highly partisan and defensive in tone.''

Richard N. Haass, who also worked in the Bush administration only to break with
it over the Iraq war, said the speech tried to ''split the difference'' between
those who think America is doing too much and those who think it is doing too
little. ''But it didn't articulate a rationale for what we should be doing,''
said Mr. Haass, now president of the Council on Foreign Relations.

R. Nicholas Burns, who was under secretary of state for Mr. Bush, was more
impressed, calling the speech ''sincere and well said.'' He added: ''He's right
to say it's now time to return to normalcy and he set the bar for military
action appropriately at a very high level.''

The speech has been in the works for weeks and allowed the president to express
the vexation he has been feeling lately. During an Asia trip last month, he
lashed out at critics and described a restrained approach with a baseball
analogy, saying he focused on hitting singles and doubles, rather than home
runs. He used a private lunch with foreign policy scholars on Tuesday to push
back against critics further and defended the metaphor.

At times during his Wednesday speech, Mr. Obama seemed to be responding directly
to one critic, Robert Kagan, whose long article in The New Republic, promoted on
the cover with the headline ''Superpowers Don't Get to Retire,'' argued against
a retreat from America's post-World War II leadership.

Mr. Obama said interventionists on the left and right argue ''that America's
willingness to apply force around the world is the ultimate safeguard against
chaos and America's failure to act in the face of Syrian brutality or Russian
provocations not only violates our conscience, but invites escalating aggression
in the future.''

But he added, ''Since World War II, some of our most costly mistakes came not
from our restraint, but from our willingness to rush into military adventures
without thinking through the consequences.''

The response was interesting in part because Mr. Obama in the past has embraced
some of what Mr. Kagan has written. Although Mr. Kagan was a prominent supporter
of the Iraq war, Mr. Obama appreciated his writings dispelling what he called
the myth of American decline. Mr. Kagan's wife, Victoria J. Nuland, works for
Mr. Obama as an assistant secretary of state.

Reached by telephone on Wednesday, Mr. Kagan said Mr. Obama's ''ultimate
safeguard'' line was ''a pretty darn fair and accurate representation of what my
essay is saying.'' And he said the president's articulation of his own view was
''about the clearest statement of this position that Obama's ever made.''

Mr. Kagan said this was ''a more narrow definition of our national interest than
the post-World War II tradition'' and added that he thought Mr. Obama had come
to the conclusion that it fits the public mood. ''He's been in a kind of
dialogue with the American people,'' Mr. Kagan said, ''and I think he's
concluded that they would be happy if he never used force.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/us/politics/rebutting-critics-obama-seeks-high
er-bar-for-military-action.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: At West Point, President Obama talked about being ''haunted'' by
the deaths of four cadets. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GABRIELLA DEMCZUK/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


