                             1317 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Self-Portrait of a Tested Policy Wonk

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1096 words


HARD CHOICESBy Hillary Rodham Clinton

635 pages. Simon & Schuster. $35.00.

The rollout of Hillary Rodham Clinton's new book, ''Hard Choices,'' as a prelude
to a possible 2016 run for the White House, has had all the subtlety of a
military operation ramping up to full speed: the leak of the Benghazi chapter to
Politico late last month (presumably to get talk about that hot-button topic out
of the way early), the cover story in the latest issue of People magazine, the
wall-to-wall lineup of television interviews this week, a grueling cross-country
book tour.

The book itself, however, turns out to be a subtle, finely calibrated work that
provides a portrait of the former secretary of state and former first lady as a
heavy-duty policy wonk. Compared with her 2003 memoir, ''Living History'' --
which tended to lapse into glib, stump-speechlike pronouncements and reactive
efforts to blame assorted enemies for her and her husband's travails -- ''Hard
Choices'' is a statesmanlike document intended to attest to Mrs. Clinton's
wide-ranging experience on national security and on foreign policy. There is
little news in the book. And unlike former Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates's
rawly candid memoir ''Duty,'' this volume is very much the work of someone who
is keeping all her political options open -- and who would like to be known not
only for mastering the art of diplomacy, but also for having the policy chops to
become chooser-in-chief.

''Hard Choices,'' like Mrs. Clinton's tenure at the State Department, does not
evince a grand, overarching foreign policy vision, as Henry A. Kissinger's 1994
book ''Diplomacy'' did. Rather, Mrs. Clinton displays a pragmatic, case-by-case
modus operandi. Some critics have argued that she played it safe as secretary of
state, that she had no marquee achievements like a Middle East peace accord. And
her new book (written with an assist from what she calls her ''book team'')
suggests that Mrs. Clinton's main legacy lies in reorienting American foreign
policy in a globalized, tech-savvy 21st century, and in helping restore the
country's image abroad in the wake of the Iraq war and the unilateralism of
President George W. Bush's administration.

One of the few things this book shares with ''Living History'' is its emphasis
on Mrs. Clinton as someone capable of growth and change: an individual who says
she learns from past mistakes like her 2002 vote to authorize military action in
Iraq. (She ''got it wrong,'' she writes of that vote. ''Plain and simple.'')
''Hard Choices'' seems meant to serve several purposes at once: to document Mrs.
Clinton's tenure as secretary of state; to put her dysfunctional 2008
presidential campaign in the rearview mirror; to supplant memories of her
tumultuous days as first lady (Whitewater, Monica Lewinsky) with images of her
negotiating with leaders on the world stage; and to lift her above the partisan
mudslinging of Washington.

The only chapter in which Mrs. Clinton sounds defensive or defiant is the one on
the 2012 attack that killed four Americans in Benghazi, Libya -- the subject of
continuing investigations by House Republicans, bent on asserting that President
Obama and Mrs. Clinton covered up what they knew about the causes of the attack.
''I will not be a part of a political slugfest on the backs of dead Americans,''
she writes.

Mrs. Clinton has always been a conscientious A-student, and ''Hard Choices'' is
methodically organized by country (China, Russia, Iran, etc.), region (the
Middle East, Asia, Latin America) and topic (the Arab Spring, climate change,
human rights). Though she does not possess the genial explanatory gifts of her
husband (showcased in his 2011 book about the economy, ''Back to Work''), she
provides the lay reader -- and potential voter -- with succinct and often shrewd
appraisals of the complex web of political, economic and historical forces in
play around the world, and the difficulties American leaders face in balancing
strategic concerns with ''core values.'' The tone is calm and measured, with
occasional humorous asides, like describing an offer by Vladimir V. Putin, the
Russian leader, to take Bill Clinton along on a polar-bear tagging expedition.

More positive developments like the diplomatic and economic isolation of Iran
are described in considerable detail, while more controversial subjects like
drone warfare and the data collection programs of the National Security Agency
get only cursory, talking-points treatment. Beltway readers will not learn much
new here about matters like the Obama administration's handling of the war in
Afghanistan or its counterterrorism policies.

For readers who are less policy-oriented, there are personal tidbits strewn
lightly throughout, like small chocolate Easter eggs. Mrs. Clinton tells us that
she would fight jet lag by sometimes digging ''the fingernails of one hand into
the palm of the other''; that she kept the raid on Osama bin Laden's hide-out
secret from her husband (''They told me not to tell anyone, so I didn't tell
anyone''); that President Obama once called her aside before an international
meeting for what she thought was a sensitive consultation, only to hear him
whisper in her ear, ''You've got something in your teeth.''

Mrs. Clinton's views are perceived as often more hawkish than Mr. Obama's, and
in these pages, she walks a delicate line between being his loyal lieutenant and
articulating her own beliefs. She takes a hard line on Mr. Putin, writing that
''hard men present hard choices'' and ''strength and resolve were the only
language'' that the Russian leader understood. Of her unsuccessful argument
within the administration for arming and training moderate Syrian rebels, she
writes: ''No one likes to lose a debate, including me. But this was the
President's call and I respected his deliberations and decision.''

Addressing much-chronicled tensions between the State Department and White House
advisers, Mrs. Clinton enumerates some of her differences with them in the book
-- including her counsel of caution to Mr. Obama in pressing President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt to step aside in the face of mounting street protests in Cairo.
She also writes that it was painful to see her old friend Richard Holbrooke, the
veteran diplomat she had chosen to handle the Afghanistan-Pakistan portfolio,
''marginalized and undercut'' by younger White House aides who disliked his
flamboyant, old-school style.

Of her own plans -- to run or not to run for president -- Mrs. Clinton writes
that she has not decided yet. It's ''another hard choice'' coming up.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/08/books/hillary-clintons-book-hard-choices-portr
ays-a-tested-policy-wonk.html

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


