                             1306 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Songs, Jokes and Twirls? Just Don't Tell Ayn Rand

BYLINE: By ANDY WEBSTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; THEATER
REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 421 words


It would be folly to adapt Ayn Rand's pedantic novella ''Anthem'' as a straight
stage drama, though some have recently tried. Far better to give that belabored
paean to individualism a goofy, spoofy spin, as ''The Anthem,'' an exuberant
musical adaptation at the Culture Project, does. The source material may be
hopelessly schematic, but the show pours on dazzling trimmings, including a
critical element absent in Rand's didactic prose: humor.

In a future dystopia called the Grid -- where people dress in monochromatic
tones; pay fealty to Pandora (Jenna Leigh Green), their ''First Citizen''; and
intone the mantra ''We are one'' -- Prometheus (Jason Gotay) is assigned to be a
legal functionary though he aspires to be a scientist. Worse, he canoodles with
Hera (Remy Zaken) in the Forbidden Library instead of the sanctioned Palace of
Mating. Such impertinence prompts his mentor, Tiberius (Randy Jones, Cowboy from
the Village People), to chastise him, and he is banished to the Uncharted
Forest, where he is tempted by Athena (Ashley Kate Adams), the leader of the
Golden Ones, rebels who wage war with the Grid.

So much for plot. What makes this show pop is the bracing vision of its
director, Rachel Klein, who also contributed the lively choreography and vibrant
costumes. The Grid's women sport military caps and gleam in flared,
''Jetsons''-like metallic skirts; Athena, attired in earth tones, is an Amazon
with wings. Acrobats suspend and twirl from on high, as from trees; rebels swing
on vines.

Jonnie Rockwell's synthesizer-textured tunes (with lyrics by Erik Ransom, to a
book by Gary Morgenstein) dovetail with the fluorescence and neon in Kryssy
Wright's lights and the chrome-like sheen in Robert Andrew Kovach's set.

The supporting cast eclipses the leads, including the cardboard Mr. Jones. (That
said, the small Ms. Zaken packs a big voice.) Katie Lee Hill, as an obsequious
Grid drone, provides tickling insouciance and executes a nice split. Em
Grosland, as both a knife-wielding Golden One and a bespectacled emissary to
Pandora, is a delightfully animated pixie.

At one point, an ''A'' inside a circle -- the punk graffiti emblem of anarchy --
is hoisted high like a victory banner in an exaltation of enlightened
self-interest. And yet it's hard to believe that Athena's raucous, merry band
would be ideologues. They're far too much fun.

''The Anthem'' runs through July 6 at the Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture
Project, 45 Bleecker Street, at Lafayette Street, East Village; 866-811-4111,
ovationtix.com.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/theater/a-spoofy-spin-on-ayn-rands-anthem.html

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Anthem: Dancing and acrobatics are part of this musical
adaptation of the familiar novella, at Lynn Redgrave Theater at Culture Project.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL BLASE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


