                             1326 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Pushes Iraqis to Mend Sectarian Rifts

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and MICHAEL R. GORDON; Mark Landler reported from Rancho
Mirage, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington. Thomas Erdbrink contributed
reporting from Tehran.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1293 words


RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. -- As President Obama weighs airstrikes against marauding
militants in Iraq, he has concluded that any American military action must be
conditioned on a political plan to try to heal Iraq's sectarian rifts, a senior
administration official said on Sunday.

While Mr. Obama has ordered unmanned surveillance flights over Iraq to gather
intelligence for possible strikes on militant positions, the official said, the
White House's emphasis, when Mr. Obama returns to Washington on Monday from a
weekend in Southern California, will be on prodding Iraq's leaders to form a new
national unity government.

The United States, this official said, has asked Iraq's prime minister, Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki, a Shiite, to work with the Kurds, to seek to persuade the
disaffected Sunni minority that the next government will be an ''ally not an
adversary'' and to overhaul Iraq's routed army. All three groups must be
adequately represented in Baghdad, he said.

The president's two-track response, the official said, stems from his belief
that military strikes on radical Sunni militants, absent parallel measures to
reform Iraq's government, will simply hand the country over to competing Shiite,
Kurdish and Sunni fighters, and a future of unending sectarian strife.

The White House believes it has a brief window to pursue diplomacy, this
official said, because after a week of surprising advances across Iraq's
Sunni-dominated north and west, the militant group, the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, now faces more motivated Iraqi troops and fiercely motivated Shiite
militias, defending the gates of Baghdad.

But it is unclear how far the Iraqis would need to go in establishing a
multi-sectarian government that would satisfy Mr. Obama. Deep sectarian
divisions have persisted since Saddam Hussein was ousted in 2003. As recently as
2010, for example, Mr. Obama personally pursued an initiative asking Mr. Maliki
to share power with the leader of a bloc representing many Sunnis; the plan
failed.

In addition to such power-sharing measures, the United States has long urged the
Iraqis to take other steps, such as integrating Sunni tribes in western Iraq
into the nation's security structure and making their fighters eligible for the
same death benefits as Iraqi troops.

On Sunday, reflecting American concerns over the militant advance, the State
Department said it plans to evacuate some of its personnel from the heavily
fortified American Embassy in Baghdad to Jordan and consulates in more secure
cities in Iraq. Most of the staff will remain in Baghdad.

Mr. Obama's push for political reconciliation has put him in a potential
alignment with Iran, a Shiite backer of the Maliki government. On Sunday,
Iranian officials seemed to echo Mr. Obama's admonition to Mr. Maliki that he
needed to be more inclusive of the Sunnis to quell the insurgency.

''Iraqi politicians should make tough decisions in order to keep unity in their
country,'' Hamid Aboutalebi, a top deputy to President Hassan Rouhani, wrote on
Twitter. In another tweet, he said, ''Iran and the U.S. are the only countries
who can manage the Iraq crisis.''

The messages came a day after Mr. Rouhani said that Iran would not rule out
working with the United States to battle Sunni fighters. On Friday, American
officials said that Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the shadowy commander of Iran's
paramilitary Quds Force, had flown to Iraq with dozens of his officers to advise
Iraq's beleaguered commanders.

While the United States and Iran have both backed Mr. Maliki -- and American
officials said they were still standing by him now, while not endorsing a third
term for him as prime minister -- they have had sharply different goals: The
United States has urged him to lead a cross-sectarian government; Iran has
wanted him at the head of a Shiite-dominated government.

The deepening crisis in Iraq shadowed a getaway weekend for Mr. Obama, his wife,
Michelle, and their daughter Malia in the desert near Palm Springs, Calif.
Before teeing off Sunday morning at a golf course owned by the technology
billionaire Larry Ellison, Mr. Obama was briefed by his national security
adviser, Susan E. Rice, on Iraq and on the evacuation of embassy personnel in
Baghdad, the White House said.

The president remains open to the use of airstrikes, either by drones or by
fighter jets, an official said, and the Pentagon has moved the aircraft carrier
George H. W. Bush and two other warships carrying long-range missiles into the
Persian Gulf to be in position for a potential military operation.

Among the options under consideration, the official said, are hitting the
militants on their front lines north of Baghdad to try to roll them back,
striking border crossings with Syria to close off access to Iraq from Syria, or
hitting their staging areas in the border region.

But identifying the proper targets is difficult and time-consuming, the official
said, particularly since the militants have become more interspersed with other
militias and ordinary people as they have advanced across Iraq. The United
States is using aerial surveillance.

The complex calculations facing Mr. Obama are evident in the advice he is
getting from his critics. Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina,
said on the CBS program ''Face the Nation'' that the United States should
conduct airstrikes against the militants, if necessary, working with Iran, given
the common interest in saving Baghdad.

The White House has been considering whether, and how, to initiate discussions
with Iran on Iraq's security. Josh Earnest, the deputy spokesman, said Friday no
such talks had occurred but did not rule out the possibility they could in the
future.

As Mr. Obama pursues a political solution, officials said Vice President Joseph
R. Biden Jr. and Secretary of State John Kerry would both play higher-profile
roles. Mr. Biden, who held the Iraq portfolio during the administration's first
term, called Mr. Maliki last week. The president has not yet spoken to the Iraqi
prime minister during this crisis.

On Saturday, Mr. Kerry called Iraq's foreign minister, Hoshyar Zebari, to urge
the government to ratify the results of its recent parliamentary election
''without delay,'' and stick to ''its constitutionally mandated time frame for
forming a new government,'' the State Department said.

Mr. Kerry also said Iraq must respect ''the rights of all citizens -- Sunni,
Kurd and Shia -- as it fights against terrorism.'' On Sunday, he made a round of
calls to officials in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates
to discuss the crisis.

The last time Iraq teetered on the brink of wholesale civil war, prompting
George W. Bush's deployment of additional American troops, a breakthrough came
when the United States enlisted Sunni tribal leaders to form militias that
supported the Maliki government. In the intervening years, however, Mr. Maliki
alienated Sunni tribal leaders, cutting off funding to their forces and driving
some key Sunnis out of government posts.

The United States, a senior Iraqi official said, is ''conditioning its actions
on genuine reconciliation and cooperation among Iraqi leaders, leading to a new
representative government.''

Whether those leaders are prepared to take those kinds of steps, especially
during a raging insurgency, is far from clear. Lukman Faily, Iraq's ambassador
to Washington, noted that the Strategic Framework Agreement between Iraq and the
United States ''talks about the importance of maintaining the territorial
integrity of Iraq.''

''The urgency on the ground should be enough reason to act,'' Mr. Faily said in
an interview. ''We think that addressing the immediate threat to Iraq's
sovereignty should take priority over discussions regarding political reform.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/16/world/middleeast/republicans-press-obama-to-mo
ve-swiftly-to-halt-extremists-advances-in-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama last week. He returns to Washington on Monday,
and plans to urge Iraqi leaders to form a unity government. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


