                             1388 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Darkness Falls on Gaza

BYLINE: By MOHAMMED OMER.

Mohammed Omer is a reporter for The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs and
other publications.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 888 words


GAZA CITY

RAMADAN, when night descends, is usually a joyous time. Friends and family
gather to break their fast at the iftar meal. Not this year.

Nights are the worst. That is when the bombing escalates. Nowhere is safe. Not a
mosque. Not a church. Not a school, or even a hospital. All are potential
targets.

On Monday, the Israeli military fired artillery rounds at Al Aqsa hospital in
Deir al-Balah, central Gaza, claiming to target a cache of anti-tank missiles.
Dr. Khalil Khattab, a surgeon, was operating on a patient when the first shell
struck. He ran to the floors below to discover at least four dead and dozens of
colleagues -- doctors, nurses, orderlies and administrators -- injured. The
medical staff had become patients.

The Gaza Strip -- a little less than half the size of New York City -- is home
to 1.8 million people, mainly Muslims, with a small Christian minority. Its
population is cut off from the world, living under the blockade imposed by Egypt
and Israel in 2007. For anyone over the age of 7, this is the third time they've
lived through a sustained attack.

In two weeks of bombing and shelling, more than 600 Palestinians have been
reported killed. Since the Israeli ground invasion began, 28 Israeli soldiers
have died; the conflict has also claimed the lives of two Israeli civilians.

Here in Gaza City, the electricity was gone; it was dark everywhere. The water
supply was foul, food was rancid, and fear permeated the summer night.

On Eighth Street, I visited the al-Baba family. For this family of 15, a
corrugated tin roof was all that stood between them and the bombs. Hani al-Baba,
23, heard the hum of a drone. Some are for surveillance, some are weaponized.
Which is which, one never knows. The sound was enough to send the children
scurrying into corners, trembling and praying. Nervously, Hani scanned the night
sky.

Israeli strikes have taken out entire families. In a town near Khan Younis on
Sunday, more than 20 members of the Abu Jameh family died when their home was
hit. For safety, Hani's father split the family into different rooms -- a scene
played out in nearly every home in Gaza, a grim shell game of family members.

Suddenly, a bomb exploded in the field behind the al-Babas' house: a boom
followed by a flash of light. Everyone screamed. The ground shook, the air
seemed to implode, sucking the breath from lungs.

Then it was dark again. Why this area was being bombed was unclear. There were
no ''terrorists,'' no rockets. It was a neighborhood of families, scared and
cowering in the dark.

The long siege has bled the Gaza Strip dry. There is no money for public
services; the majority of the population lives in abject poverty. And now at
least 120,000 Gazans have been displaced by the fighting, thousands taking
temporary shelter in United Nations schools. Many will return to homes damaged
or destroyed, with little or no means to rebuild. Cement is especially severely
rationed because Israel suspects it is diverted by Hamas to build tunnels for
fighters.

In Shifa Hospital, what struck me were the resilience and dignity of the
families. Forced to evacuate under gunfire, they had become refugees in their
own land. I watched a grandmother who'd fled the east of the city comforting her
four grandchildren and two daughters. The family broke their fast with slices of
bread, two yogurts, cucumber and tomatoes. This was their iftar.

A cease-fire agreement is possible, but all parties need to be at the table;
Hamas was not consulted over the one proposed by Egypt last week. Even peace
might be possible -- if the international community has the courage to engage in
dialogue with Hamas. The terms outlined by Hamas for a cease-fire are the same
as those the United Nations has called for repeatedly: open the border
crossings; let people work, study and build the economy. A population capable of
taking care of its own would enhance Israel's security. One that cannot leads to
desperation.

In January 2008, barriers along the Gaza-Egypt border were knocked down.
Thousands of Gazans poured into Egypt to acquire much needed supplies. I
remember the relief within the Palestinian community. This transient glimpse of
freedom was a treat.

A neighbor of mine was simply delighted to drink a Coca-Cola. The freedom to
move, fresh food and clean water, and the simple pleasure of sipping a soda,
this is what Gazans need: the normal life everyone else takes for granted.
During the first days the border was open, Hamas suspended rocket attacks from
Gaza. Israeli politicians should take note.

Whatever its official statements, Israel has no interest in destroying Hamas; it
seeks merely to weaken and isolate it. Hamas gives Israel an out, a convenient
villain, someone to blame. Yet the siege of Gaza serves no purpose other than to
radicalize the next generation.

Families like the al-Babas shouldn't have to move their children around the
house in the hope that some may survive. Nor should families in Ashdod, over the
border in Israel, have to hide in bomb shelters from the militants' rockets.

Without a process that includes all parties at the negotiating table, though, I
fear this cycle of violence, punitive and disproportionate as it is, can lead
only to an Islamic State in Iraq and Syria-type extremism among the
Palestinians. Only the darkest cynic would wish for that.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/23/opinion/gaza-under-israels-onslaught.html

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY FEDERICO YANKELEVICH)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


