                             1304 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Jihadis Fighting in Syria Pose Risk in West

BYLINE: By KIMIKO DE FREYTAS-TAMURA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1404 words


LONDON -- Two years ago, a young man who now calls himself Abu Muhajir slipped
into Syria with a few friends and $80,000, forsaking what he said was a job as a
high school science teacher in North America to wage jihad.

In a conversation conducted by text message in recent weeks, he said he was
raised in a religious family, studied at a madrasa on Sundays and had no
non-Muslim friends growing up. And he suggested that Western governments could
indeed have cause to be worried that the foreign jihadis in Syria might someday
return home to carry out attacks.

''Attacks occurring on the soil of Middle Eastern countries,'' he said. ''We can
only expect a response. Americans are still in Afghanistan.''

More than 70 Americans are thought by intelligence and counterterrorism
officials to have traveled to Syria to fight the government of President Bashar
al-Assad. One of them, still publicly unidentified, carried out a suicide
bombing there on Sunday, making him the first United States citizen believed to
have been involved in such an attack.

As many as 3,000 Westerners are believed to have gone to Syria to fight,
prompting increasingly aggressive efforts by their home governments to keep them
from leaving and to detain them on their return. In Britain, the Home Office has
stripped at least 20 jihadis of their citizenship, and the police said that the
number of ''Syria-related arrests'' totaled 40 from January to March of this
year, compared with 25 for the whole of last year.

Just last week, Mashudur Choudhury, 31, of Portsmouth, was convicted of engaging
in conduct in preparation of terrorist acts after he returned to Britain from
Syria in late October. He is the first Briton to be convicted of fighting
alongside Islamists in Syria.

The stories told by Abu Muhajir, 26, and other Westerners fighting in Syria
provide some insight into their motivations and outlook as extremist groups with
ties to Al Qaeda try to identify, recruit and train men from the United States
and Europe to carry out attacks when they return home, according to senior
United States intelligence and counterterrorism officials.

Abu Muhajir has identified himself on social media as American. He said his
grandparents emigrated from Pakistan to North America, where he was raised. He
would not directly say that he is an American citizen, but said that he is not
Canadian and that he had gone back and forth to Syria several times without
being stopped.

Abu Sumayyah, a British jihadi now fighting in Syria, says that growing up in
Britain, he was a ''bad Muslim.'' He smoked, went clubbing, dated a string of
women, took and sold drugs, went on binges for days and worried his mother.

He would fast only on special occasions, like the holy month of Ramadan, but he
shunned Friday Prayer at the mosque. ''I was only a Muslim by name,'' he said in
a Skype interview from Syria, using, like Abu Muhajir, his kunya, or Islamic
nickname. ''I was living like a non-Muslim; I was like a disbeliever.''

But by the time the war in Syria broke out three years ago, he said, he was a
deeply devout man, a self-taught student of Islamic history. Now in his early
30s, he said he had been fighting in northern Syria for nearly a year. He left
Britain quietly without telling his parents, taking just a few clothes and some
cash; as a precaution, and as a break with the past, he threw away his British
cellphone.

Experts and academics who track Western jihadis in Syria at the International
Center for the Study of Radicalization and Political Violence, a research
institution partnered with King's College, London, have independently identified
both men as fighters in Syria, as has Pieter Van Ostaeyen, a Brussels-based
researcher who blogs about Western jihadis, with whom he is in regular contact.

Abu Sumayyah was initially reached through Twitter and agreed to be interviewed
on the condition that his real name not be published. Abu Muhajir was
interviewed on Kik, an instant messaging platform for smartphones popular among
fighters. He would not divulge his real name. Although he identified himself on
Ask.fm, a social media site, as ''American 'Jihadi' or wtever they are calling
it,'' he said he sometimes says he is Canadian rather than American, to mislead
people. He refused to be more specific. The researchers said they believed he is
either American or Canadian.

Abu Sumayyah said he had no intention of bringing jihad back home. He plans to
die in Syria, he said, and hopes for a rewarding afterlife. ''It's not something
you can really think about, you know, by looking at it in a worldly view,'' he
said. ''I'm looking at the hereafter because the reward is a lot.''

Abu Muhajir offered a darker view, suggesting that jihadis could do more to
carry their fight to Western nations.

''I knew this war will be long,'' he said. ''Requires steadfastness.''

Both men said they were appalled by the West's failure to halt the killing in
Syria. They are also united in a wider goal, they said, to establish a caliphate
ruled by Shariah law, even if that ideology is not shared by a majority of
Muslims in Syria.

A total of 11,000 foreign fighters are estimated to be in Syria, including those
from other Muslim nations as well as those from the West, said researchers at
the Center for the Study of Radicalization and Political Violence.

The British and the French are thought to make up the largest contingent of
Westerners -- 400 and 700 -- among the fighters, according to government
estimates. Several hundred Belgians, Dutch and Scandinavians are also thought to
be fighting, according to official figures. A minority of fighters are from
Eastern Europe, including Albania, Bosnia and Serbia, and also from Australia
and Canada, according to the center. The estimate of 70 from the United States
is up from about a dozen last July.

Most Westerners who go to Syria go to wage jihad, but even those who go for
purely humanitarian reasons end up being radicalized, Mr. Van Ostaeyen said.

One of the most popular -- and extreme -- of the fighting groups among
Westerners in Syria calls itself the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS.
Part of its appeal comes from its extensive public outreach, experts say. The
group is the most prolific on social media compared with other groups -- it has
several official Twitter accounts and its own media channels. Its fighters
habitually post on Twitter about their activities in English and other Western
languages, and even argue for days with other Twitter users who oppose the
group's ideology.

Many fighters share the belief that Islam is under attack by non-Muslims -- a
view they say is expressed in the Quran and popularized by the Qaeda leader
Osama bin Laden.

On Sept. 11, 2001, Abu Sumayyah and Abu Muhajir were teenagers interested in
video games, sports and the start of college. But both men said they were deeply
affected by the subsequent invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq and the American
drone strikes in Pakistan and Yemen. They came to question the Western world
they lived in, and their role in it.

''I saw our brothers in Afghanistan, and I realized that there is something very
wrong that is happening in society,'' Abu Sumayyah said. ''I saw this taking
place in front of my eyes, so I had to do something about it, otherwise I would
feel sinful.''

Both men said they were in rebel-controlled northern Syria.

Abu Muhajir trained as a sniper and guards the city of Shaykh Najjar, north of
Aleppo. He usually holds the front line for three days, followed by three days
of rest. He was fearless in the beginning, he said, but soon got a taste of war.
''To be honest I didn't used to get scared, only after I got an injury,'' he
wrote. ''Shrapnel in the arm.''

He is an avid user of social media, to pass the time. People ask him for advice
on going to Syria: how to get there, the cost of a gun, where to buy camouflage
gear. He said he responded cautiously.

He has also received marriage proposals, which he declines. One woman asked
whether electricity was working in Syria so she could bring a hair curler.
''Advice to people who want to come is, Don't bring your hair curlers,'' he
said.

Abu Sumayyah is a gunman who works shifts every two weeks, based in Raqqa, a
stronghold of ISIS. On his days off, he studies military tactics and trains with
other weapons.

Syria changed him, he said. ''In Britain and in Europe we are living in a
bubble, living in dreamland, that everything is O.K.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/world/middleeast/foreign-jihadis-fighting-in-s
yria-pose-risk-in-west.html

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


