                             1370 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Challenges Perry to Rally G.O.P. Around Border Plan

BYLINE: By JACKIE CALMES and ASHLEY PARKER; Jackie Calmes reported from Dallas,
and Ashley Parker from Washington. Michael D. Shear, Jeremy W. Peters and
Jonathan Weisman contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1238 words


DALLAS -- President Obama on Wednesday directly challenged Gov. Rick Perry of
Texas to rally Republicans in support of a $3.7 billion emergency measure aimed
at solving the humanitarian crisis caused as thousands of Central American
children have crossed the Mexican border.

The president described a frank exchange with Mr. Perry, who has been one of his
most vocal critics, after their private meeting aboard the presidential
helicopter and then at Dallas Love Field.

The meeting was hastily negotiated as the border crisis came to shadow Mr.
Obama's previously planned trip to Texas and Colorado to raise campaign money
and talk about an improving economy.

The president said the emergency aid would address Republicans' calls for
increased border security while also providing care for the thousands of
unaccompanied children who have been detained in the Rio Grande Valley. Mr.
Obama suggested that election-year political maneuvering was blocking the
package because Republicans see the crisis as a way to damage him and his party.

''The problem here is not major disagreement around the actions that could be
helpful,'' Mr. Obama said he told Mr. Perry. ''The challenge is, is Congress
prepared to act to put the resources in place to get this done?''

''Another way of putting it -- and I said this directly to the governor -- is,
are folks more interested in politics, or are they more interested in solving
the problem?'' Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Perry, in a statement after his meeting with the president, reiterated that
the crisis was the result of ''bad public policy,'' though he did not specify --
as he has in the past -- that Mr. Obama's policies were to blame. He also again
asked Mr. Obama to visit the border, about 500 miles south of Dallas, a call
that Mr. Obama rejected on Wednesday.

''This isn't theater; this is a problem,'' he said. ''I'm not interested in
photo-ops. I'm interested in solving a problem.''

Mr. Obama promised to ''do the right thing by these children.'' But he also
urged parents in Central America to stop sending their children into the United
States, a trip he called especially dangerous.

''It is unlikely that their children will be able to stay,'' Mr. Obama said.
More than 52,000 children have flooded into the United States in the last eight
months.

Mr. Obama's arrival in Texas, the state with the longest border with Mexico,
focused attention on the emerging spike in migration from Central America as
well as the political stalemate between the president and his Republican
adversaries on a broader immigration overhaul.

The president and Mr. Perry met before a round-table discussion on the border
issue with local officials and religious leaders.

The governor, who had initially refused to stand for an Air Force One photo
opportunity with the president, ultimately did greet Mr. Obama on the tarmac at
Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport. The pair shook hands amiably if not
warmly, and they chatted as they walked to the Marine One helicopter for a brief
ride to the Love Field site of the round-table discussion, with Mr. Obama at one
point putting his hand on the governor's back.

Mr. Obama said his Homeland Security secretary, Jeh Johnson, would soon make his
sixth trip to the border to coordinate the federal response with that of the
Perry administration. Jim Cole, the deputy attorney general, was in the border
town of McAllen, Tex., on Wednesday to tour the Customs and Border Protection
facility there and to discuss shifting resources to the region.

Mr. Perry's handling of the crisis is being closely watched by Republicans,
given that his 2012 bid for the party's presidential nomination failed partly
because of a sense among the party's hard-liners that he was too soft on
immigration, supporting policies like tuition benefits for Latinos brought into
Texas as children.

Signaling a tougher stance, he has called on Mr. Obama to deploy 1,000 more
National Guard troops to the border and use additional surveillance drones to
stop the flow of illegal immigrants. Mr. Obama indicated that he had not ruled
out such measures, but that they ultimately were not the answer.

''We're happy to consider how we could deploy National Guard down there, but
that's a temporary solution,'' he said. The long-term answer, Mr. Obama said,
would be to pass a year-old bipartisan Senate bill overhauling the immigration
system and providing more border security and a path to citizenship for millions
who have lived and worked in the country illegally for years.

In Washington, congressional Republicans expressed both frustration and
skepticism about Mr. Obama's aid request, and members of Mr. Obama's
administration told Congress that they were straining under what one called the
''difficult and distressing'' surge of unaccompanied minors across the border.

Testifying before the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Committee, W. Craig Fugate, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, said that ''the children continue to come across the border'' despite
the government's best efforts.

Congressional Republicans are left with a dilemma. Their goals are to increase
the federal presence on the border and address what they agree is a humanitarian
crisis, but they do not want to accomplish them by giving Mr. Obama $3.7 billion
that would help get him out of a situation that they believe is of his own
making.

''What I do think this shows is another area where lack of leadership from this
administration is coming back to haunt us,'' said Representative Mario
Diaz-Balart, Republican of Florida.

At the root of the crisis is a 2008 law intended to curb human trafficking
abuses. It requires officials to provide extra legal protections for migrants
coming from countries that do not share a border with the United States. The
unintended consequence has been to allow children from El Salvador, Guatemala
and Honduras to overwhelm the immigration system. Some Republicans have said
that before they would vote in favor of Mr. Obama's request, they would need to
see the 2008 law amended or repealed to expedite the children's return to their
home countries. Some also said they wanted the relief spending to be matched by
cuts in other areas.

Representative Henry Cuellar, Democrat of Texas, said he was working with the
state's senior senator, John Cornyn, to introduce legislation on Thursday that
would amend the 2008 law to treat illegal immigrants from such countries by the
same rules that currently apply to Mexico and Canada. The change, he said, would
speed up deportations.

On the Democratic side, Senators Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the chamber's
No. 2 Democrat, and Dianne Feinstein of California, have expressed deep
reservations about sending the children back to potentially dangerous
situations. ''I think we'd better think twice,'' Mr. Durbin said. Ms. Feinstein
likened the situation to the ''boatloads of Jewish immigrants trying to come to
this country during Nazi Germany and getting turned back.''

''That's not what this country is all about,'' she said. ''This, in my view, has
to be handled in a way which is compassionate.''

The American Civil Liberties Union and the American Immigration Council also
stepped in on Wednesday, filing a class-action lawsuit in Seattle on behalf of
the children. The suit argues that the federal government is failing to provide
them with adequate legal representation during the deportation process.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/10/us/politics/immigration.html

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama on Wednesday in Dallas with Gov. Rick Perry, who
has been one of the president's most vocal critics. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG
MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


