                             1386 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Perry Bolsters a Border, and His National Profile

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ and MICHAEL D. SHEAR; Manny Fernandez reported from
Austin, and Michael D. Shear from Washington. Julia Preston contributed
reporting from New York, and Ashley Parker from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1195 words


AUSTIN, Tex. -- Gov. Rick Perry of Texas on Monday ordered 1,000 National Guard
troops to the border with Mexico, seizing on a get-tough immigration message
that foreshadows the approach to the current crisis by his party in Congress and
that could position him in another bid for the Republican presidential
nomination.

Mr. Perry announced the move at the Texas Capitol, but many of the intended
recipients were far away from here: members of Congress in Washington, including
those who are fighting with President Obama; potential migrants in Central
America who are contemplating a dangerous journey to the United States; and
presidential caucus voters in Iowa, where Mr. Perry visited again over the
weekend.

Tens of thousands of Central Americans fleeing violence in Guatemala, El
Salvador and Honduras have tried to cross Texas' 1,200-mile border with Mexico
in recent months. The influx of immigrants entering the country illegally, many
of them unaccompanied children and teenagers, has left federal officials
scrambling to find emergency shelters to house them and to manage what President
Obama has called a humanitarian crisis.

Mr. Perry and other state officials said Monday that the National Guard would
begin mobilizing throughout the next 30 days, conduct ground and air operations
once at the border, and partner with local and state law enforcement officials,
acting as a so-called force multiplier.

He said criminal organizations were benefiting from the diversion of resources
to deal with the wave of Central American immigration, and so more security was
needed. The cost of deploying the National Guard was estimated at $12 million a
month, a bill that he and other Texas Republicans vowed to send to the federal
government.

''Drug cartels, human traffickers and individual criminals are exploiting this
tragedy for their own criminal opportunities,'' Mr. Perry said, adding, ''I will
not stand idly by while our citizens are under assault, and little children from
Central America are detained in squalor.''

His action reflected a debate on Capitol Hill, where lawmakers are considering
the president's request for $3.7 billion to add resources along the border to
respond to the arrival of the Central American migrants. Republicans have argued
that the crisis was of Mr. Obama's own making. They have also floated the idea
that an increased National Guard presence at the border would be part of any
legislation they approved.

Speaker John A. Boehner has repeatedly urged Mr. Obama to deploy the National
Guard to the Texas-Mexico border. ''The National Guard is uniquely qualified to
respond to such humanitarian crises,'' he wrote in a letter to the president
last month.

Mr. Perry's response to the crisis is also intended for the audience in Texas,
where border issues have long been central to state politics.

Greg Abbott, the state attorney general and Republican candidate to replace Mr.
Perry next year, appeared with the governor and said his office was prepared to
fight the federal government in court to defend the governor's activation of the
National Guard.

Wendy Davis, the Democratic candidate for governor, on Monday repeated her call
for Mr. Perry to open an emergency session of the State Legislature to consider
sending additional sheriff's deputies to the border instead of National Guard
troops.

''If the federal government won't act, Texas must and will,'' Ms. Davis said in
a statement.

After 13 years as governor, Mr. Perry is contemplating another run for the
presidency in 2016, and he has sought to raise his national profile. His weekend
trip to Iowa, the site of the nation's first presidential contest, was his
fourth in eight months. And he used a meeting nearly two weeks ago with Mr.
Obama to demand more action from the federal government to confront the surge of
migrants.

By seeking more military resources at the border, Mr. Perry may also be trying
to repair his standing among some conservatives who had expressed doubts about
his willingness to be tough on immigration. During a Republican presidential
debate in 2012, the Texas governor defended in-state tuition for immigrants in
the country illegally and said of those who disagreed: ''I don't think you have
a heart.''

That comment earned Mr. Perry scorn among some Republican primary voters. But it
also represented what might have turned into a strength in a general election
contest for the White House: his ability to attract Hispanic voters. Many
analysts argue that if Republicans do not figure out how to attract more
Hispanic voters, the party will not recapture the Oval Office.

Nonetheless, a Republican House working group is expected to make a series of
recommendations to Congress next week and is likely to advise sending in
National Guard troops. ''What they would do would be augment what the Border
Patrol is doing right now,'' said Representative Matt Salmon, Republican of
Arizona, a member of the group. ''Basically it's boots on the ground.''

Obama administration officials initially resisted the idea of more National
Guard troops. At a July 10 Senate hearing, Homeland Security Secretary Jeh
Johnson said the National Guard was ''hugely expensive'' and should be used only
with ''a clear plan and a clear objective.'' He noted that most migrants in the
recent surge were coming across a 300-mile stretch of Texas border and many were
children and families who were turning themselves in, not seeking to evade
border agents.

When Mr. Obama met with Mr. Perry this month, he said the National Guard would
be only a ''temporary solution'' to the crisis. But he said the White House
would be ''happy to consider it'' as a condition of approving the request for
more resources.

Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said Monday it was clear Mr.
Perry wanted to send a message by doing something symbolic. But, Mr. Earnest
added, ''A much more powerful symbol would be the bipartisan passage of
legislation that would actually make a historic investment in border security
and send an additional 20,000 personnel to the border.''

Democrats in Washington have been unified on the need for an immigration
overhaul that provides a path to citizenship for 11 million immigrants in the
country illegally. But the party is divided about how to respond to the flood of
unaccompanied minors.

In contrast to Mr. Obama's call for more resources, some Democrats have urged
the government to be more welcoming to children fleeing rape and murder. In
remarks on the Senate floor on Monday, Senator Harry Reid, the majority leader,
dismissed calls for more border troops.

''Regardless of what the American people may hear from the Republican critics,
this isn't an issue of bigger walls or more barbed wire, or more drones, or more
helicopters, or even the Texas National Guard,'' he said.

In Texas, Democrats called Mr. Perry's plan an attempt to score political points
and to create an oppressive military atmosphere along the border. ''If we were
to use crime as a basis to deploy the National Guard, then we should be sending
the National Guard to other metropolitan areas in our state,'' said State
Senator Juan Hinojosa, who represents the Rio Grande Valley.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/22/us/perry-to-deploy-national-guard-troops-to-me
xico-border.html

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gov. Rick  Perry of Texas  on Monday announced  at a  news
conference  in Austin  that he was ordering  1,000  National  Guard troops  to
the border  with Mexico.  He said the  troops would  be mobilized  in the coming
weeks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIC GAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


