                             1339 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Releases Large Parts of Memo Approving Killing of American in Yemen

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1145 words


WASHINGTON -- Lifting a veil of official secrecy from President Obama's decision
to authorize the killing of an American citizen without a trial, a federal
appeals court on Monday publicly released large portions of a Justice Department
memo that deemed it lawful to target Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born Muslim
cleric accused of becoming a terrorist.

The Obama administration completed the memo in July 2010, more than a year
before the September 2011 drone strike in Yemen that killed Mr. Awlaki along
with another American near him, Samir Khan, who officials have said was not
specifically targeted. The memo was released in response to lawsuits filed by
The New York Times and the American Civil Liberties Union under the Freedom of
Information Act.

Mr. Obama's decision to authorize the military and the C.I.A. to hunt down and
kill Mr. Awlaki was an extraordinary step that created an important precedent
for executive power, civil liberties and the rule of law.

Intelligence officials had concluded that Mr. Awlaki was an operational
terrorist leader who had gone overseas, become part of Al Qaeda or an associated
force, and was ''engaged in continual planning and direction of attacks'' on
Americans. His capture was not feasible, the memo said. Working from that
premise, David Barron, then the acting head of the Justice Department's Office
of Legal Counsel, concluded that it would be lawful for the government to kill
Mr. Awlaki, notwithstanding federal statutes against murdering Americans
overseas and protections in the Constitution against unreasonable seizures and
depriving someone of life without due process of law.

''We do not believe al-Awlaki's citizenship provides a basis for concluding that
he is immune from a use of force abroad'' as otherwise congressionally
authorized to use against Al Qaeda, Mr. Barron wrote, addressing the memo to
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.

Mr. Barron, who signed the memo, was assisted by Martin Lederman, another
attorney in the office. Mr. Lederman has since returned to teaching law at
Georgetown University, and Mr. Barron was confirmed last month to a federal
appeals court in Boston.

The Obama administration, under pressure from senators who threatened to block
Mr. Barron's nomination, decided to release the redacted memo rather than appeal
a court ruling that said it must be made public. There was some delay, however,
as the administration successfully sought permission from the court to redact
additional details.

Senator Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado, who had opposed Mr. Barron's
confirmation but supported it after the administration promised to release the
document, called the release ''a victory for government transparency.'' He said
he would continue to press, however, for additional disclosures to related
questions, like ''how much evidence the government requires in order to make an
American a legitimate target.''

An 11-page section at the front of the memo was redacted. It compiled the
evidence to support the intelligence community's assertion that Mr. Awlaki was
not merely a propagandist but an operational terrorist.

But on Monday the appeals court issued a new public version of a ruling it made
in April that the memo must be made public, and it included passages that had
been redacted. Among those passages were instructions from the court to make
related Office of Legal Counsel memos available to a Federal District Court
judge for review and possible release.

The Justice Department's memo from July 2010 makes reference to an earlier memo,
also written by Mr. Barron, that focused largely on constitutional issues in
targeting Mr. Awlaki. The Times has reported that after the attempted bombing of
a Detroit-bound airliner on Dec. 25, 2009, to which Mr. Awlaki was linked, Mr.
Barron and Mr. Lederman swiftly wrote a short memo approving the targeting of
Mr. Awlaki if he was located.

Later, after seeing a post on an international law blog that raised the statute
banning the murder of Americans abroad, which their first memo did not address,
they went back and wrote the lengthier July 2010 memo.

The longer memo argues that the killing of a wartime enemy by the military would
qualify for a ''public authority'' exception to the foreign murder statute. A
section about the possibility that the C.I.A., a civilian agency, might carry
out the killing appears to invoke similar reasoning but is heavily redacted; one
portion also argues that it would not be a war crime for the agency to carry out
the killing.

Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer for the A.C.L.U., called the release of the memo ''an
overdue but nonetheless crucial step toward transparency.'' He added: ''There
are few questions more important than the question of when the government has
the authority to kill its own citizens. This memo's release will allow the
public to better understand the scope and implications of the authority the
government is claiming.''

In October 2011, a week after the strike, The Times reported on the contents and
bureaucratic history of the memo, classified at the time, and filed an
information act request for it. The newspaper and the A.C.L.U. filed separate
lawsuits seeking its public disclosure several months later.

The Obama administration fought the lawsuits, initially refusing to confirm or
deny the memo's existence. In January 2013, a district court judge ruled that it
could keep the memo secret. But in April, the Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit ruled that portions containing legal analysis -- but not those compiling
classified evidence against Mr. Awlaki -- must be made public.

Between those two rulings, the Obama administration had made public an
unclassified Justice Department ''white paper'' describing its legal analysis on
targeted killings of citizens. The paper had been derived from the Awlaki memo
for Congress to read and was leaked to NBC News, prompting its official release
to at least two reporters who had requested it under the information act.

''The substantial overlap in the legal analyses in the two documents fully
establishes that the government may no longer validly claim that the legal
analysis in the memorandum is a secret,'' Judge Jon O. Newman wrote, in another
previously redacted passage of the ruling.

The memo also addresses arguments by some scholars of international law that for
legal purposes there is no armed conflict in Yemen. It argues that wartime legal
authority to target enemies extends to Yemen given the circumstances of Al Qaeda
activities there.

Mr. Barron cited and expressed disagreement with the work of Mary Ellen
O'Connell, a University of Notre Dame law professor who has argued that Yemen
was not an armed conflict zone. On Monday, Ms. O'Connell criticized the brevity
with which Mr. Barron addressed her argument as ''astonishing'' given the
issue's importance as a ''linchpin'' of his legal rationale.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/24/us/justice-department-found-it-lawful-to-targe
t-anwar-al-awlaki.html

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


