                             1382 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 18, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Google's Quarterly Results Show Its Continuing Struggle With Mobile Advertising

BYLINE: By MIKE ISAAC

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 860 words


In the court of Internet advertising, sometimes it's hard to be the king.

Long the reigning champion of online search advertising, Google faces a
persistent headache: Consumers are increasingly moving from desktop computers to
smartphones and tablets, where the desktop advertising formats of old are not as
alluring because of the screen-size restrictions of mobile. And as mobile ads
increasingly become a larger part of its business, Google is less able to charge
the same premiums that it has for its lucrative desktop ad business.

Thursday's earnings release for the second quarter, which ended in June,
provided more evidence of this problem. The price that advertisers pay each time
someone clicks on an ad -- or ''cost per click,'' in Google talk -- dropped 6
percent from the year-ago quarter, largely because of the shift to increased
mobile advertising. That is in line with Google's two-year trend of declining ad
prices. Google does not, however, break out mobile ad revenue from desktop ad
revenue.

''The revenue opportunity is very, very high, but right now mobile does not
monetize as well as other forms,'' Nikesh Arora, Google's chief business
officer, said on a conference call with analysts.

It will no longer be the problem, however, of Mr. Arora, who is in charge of the
company's ad business. The company announced on Thursday that Mr. Arora planned
to depart his position of the past decade for a new job at SoftBank, the
Japanese telecommunications giant, as vice chairman.

Omid Kordestani, a longtime Google employee and senior adviser to Larry Page,
Google's chief executive, will fill Mr. Arora's old position for the time being,
according to a company statement.

''There is nothing Omid doesn't know about Google, our customers and partners,
and I know that under his leadership the team will excel,'' Mr. Page said in a
post on his personal Google Plus page.

Google's revenue for the quarter was $15.96 billion, an increase of 22 percent
over the year-ago quarter. Net revenue, which excludes payments to the company's
advertising partners, was $12.71 billion, up from $11.1 billion last year.
Analysts expected gross revenue of $15.6 billion.

Net income in the second quarter rose nearly 6 percent to $3.42 billion, or
$4.99 a share. Excluding the cost of stock options and the related tax benefits,
Google's profit was $6.08 a share. Analysts had expected $6.23 a share,
according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

Shares of Google's stock rose about 1 percent in after-hours trading to $589.25.

Despite Google's continuing mobile dilemma, its advertising competitors are
still small in its rearview mirror. Google accounted for nearly 32 percent of
online global ad spending in 2013, according to estimates from eMarketer.
Facebook is in second place, accounting for nearly 6 percent of 2013's $120.05
billion online global advertising market.

Mobile, however, is something that Facebook seems to have cracked. The social
media giant accounted for almost 16 percent of mobile advertising dollars spent
around the world last year, eMarketer estimates, up from 9 percent in 2012.
Google dropped to a 41.5 percent share of the mobile ad market last year, down
from 49.8 percent in 2012.

Google spent the first half of 2014 making one pie-in-the-sky acquisition after
another. The company is spending billions to move into new industries that are
unlikely to yield profits for decades.

In April, for instance, Google purchased Titan Aerospace, a drone-making
company; two months later, Google snapped up Skybox Imaging, a satellite
service, for half a billion dollars. In February, Google completed its
acquisition of Nest Labs for $3.2 billion.

It is a series of long-term bets that are also being made by competitors --
namely, Facebook -- but they still give shareholders and analysts pause.

''There's a little bit of concern in the markets that there's some drunken
spending going on,'' said Mark Mahaney, an Internet analyst with RBC Capital
Markets.

Google does not feel pressured to see immediate returns on some of its
investments -- especially when the company is sitting on $61.2 billion in cash
reserves.

''We set up our governance a bit like a V.C. model,'' said Patrick Pichette,
Google's chief financial officer, in a conference call with analysts on
Thursday. For projects like Google's self-driving cars, it could take
''half-decades, or sometimes longer'' until the company expects to see any
profitable returns on its investment, Mr. Pichette said.

Mr. Pichette also cited other areas in which Google, which reported $2.65
billion in capital expenditures over the second quarter, has reinvested its cash
hoard. This included expanding the data centers Google has built, owned and
operated, as well as buying additional real estate in the Asia-Pacific and
European markets.

The company also added about 2,200 employees to its ranks, bringing the overall
number to just above 52,000.

Some long-term investments, however, are starting to yield returns. Over the
last quarter, Google sold one million of its Chromebook laptops -- the low-cost,
cloud-based notebooks that run almost entirely on Google's suite of Web
applications -- to schools.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/18/technology/googles-earnings-show-its-struggle-
with-mobile-ads.html

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Google's campus in Mountain View, Calif. On Thursday, Google
reported higher revenue and profit for the second quarter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCIO
JOSE SANCHEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


