                             1332 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What to Do With the Twins?

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 873 words


There is much talk right now about America teaming up with Iran to push back the
coalition of Sunni militias that has taken over Mosul and other Sunni towns in
western Iraq and Syria. For now, I'd say stay out of this fight -- not because
it's the best option, but because it's the least bad.

After all, what is the context in which we'd be intervening? Iraq and Syria are
twins: multiethnic and multisectarian societies that have been governed, like
other Arab states, from the top-down. First, it was by soft-fisted Ottomans who
ruled through local notables in a decentralized fashion, then by iron-fisted
British and French colonial powers and later by iron-fisted nationalist kings
and dictators.

Today, the Ottomans are gone, the British and French are gone and now many of
the kings and dictators are gone. We removed Iraq's dictator; NATO and tribal
rebels removed Libya's; the people of Tunisia, Egypt and Yemen got rid of
theirs; and some people in Syria have tried to topple theirs. Each country is
now faced with the challenge of trying to govern itself horizontally by having
the different sects, parties and tribes agree on social contracts for how to
live together as equal citizens who rotate power.

Tunisia and Kurdistan have done the best at this transition. Egyptians tried and
found the insecurity so unbearable that they brought back the army's iron fist.
Libya has collapsed into intertribal conflict. Yemen struggles with a wobbly
tribal balance. In Syria, the Shiite/Alawite minority, plus the Christians and
some Sunnis, seem to prefer the tyranny of Bashar al-Assad to the anarchy of the
Islamist-dominated rebels; the Syrian Kurds have carved out their own enclave,
so the country is a now a checkerboard.

In Iraq, the Shiite prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki -- who had the best
chance, the most oil money and the most help from the U.S. in writing a social
contract for how to govern Iraq horizontally -- chose instead, from the moment
the Americans left, to empower Iraqi Shiites and disempower Iraqi Sunnis. It's
no surprise that Iraqi Sunnis decided to grab their own sectarian chunk of the
country.

So today, it seems, a unified Iraq and a unified Syria can no longer be governed
vertically or horizontally. The leaders no longer have the power to extend their
iron fists to every border, and the people no longer have the trust to extend
their hands to one another. It would appear that the only way they can remain
united is if an international force comes in, evicts the dictators, uproots the
extremists and builds consensual politics from the ground up -- a generational
project for which there are no volunteers.

What to do? It was not wrong to believe post-9/11 that unless this region
produced decent self-government it would continue to fail its own people and
deny them the ability to realize their full potential, which is why the Arab
Spring happened, and that its pathologies would also continue to spew out the
occasional maniac, like Osama bin Laden, who could threaten us.

But the necessary turned out to be impossible: We didn't know what we were
doing. The post-Saddam generation of Iraqi leaders turned out to be like abused
children who went on to be abusive parents. The Iranians constantly encouraged
Shiite supremacy and frustrated our efforts to build pluralism. Mosques and
charities in Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Kuwait and Qatar continued to fund preachers
and fighters who promoted the worst Sunni extremism. And thousands of Muslim men
marched to Syria and Iraq to fight for jihadism, but none marched there to fight
for pluralism.

I could say that before President Obama drops even an empty Coke can from a U.S.
fighter jet on the Sunni militias in Iraq we need to insist that Maliki resign
and a national unity cabinet be created that is made up of inclusive Shiite,
Sunni and Kurdish leaders. I could say that that is the necessary condition for
reunification of Iraq. And I could say that it is absolutely not in our interest
or the world's to see Iraq break apart and one segment be ruled by murderous
Sunni militias.

But I have to say this: It feels both too late and too early to stop the
disintegration -- too late because whatever trust there was between communities
is gone, and Maliki is not trying to rebuild it, and too early because it looks
as if Iraqis are going to have to live apart, and see how crazy and
impoverishing that is, before the different sects can coexist peacefully.

In the meantime, there is no denying that terrorism could be exported our way
from Iraq's new, radicalized ''Sunnistan.'' But we have a National Security
Agency, C.I.A. and drones to deal with that now ever-present threat.

Pluralism came to Europe only after many centuries of one side or another in
religious wars thinking it could have it all, and after much ethnic cleansing
created more homogeneous nations. Europe also went through the Enlightenment and
the Reformation. Arab Muslims need to go on the same journey. It will happen
when they want to or when they have exhausted all other options. Meanwhile,
let's strengthen the islands of decency -- Tunisia, Jordan, the United Arab
Emirates, Lebanon and Kurdistan -- and strengthen our own democracy to insulate
ourselves as best we can.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/opinion/thomas-friedman-the-conundrum-of-a-uni
fied-iraq-and-a-unified-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


