                             1368 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

N.S.A. Spied on 5 American Muslims, a Report Says

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE and MATT APUZZO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1211 words


WASHINGTON -- A new report based on documents provided by Edward J. Snowden has
identified five American Muslims, including the leader of a civil rights group,
as having been subjected to surveillance by the federal government.

The disclosure of what were described as specific domestic surveillance targets
by The Intercept online magazine was a rare glimpse into some of the most
closely held secrets of counterespionage and terrorism investigators. The
article raised questions about the basis for the domestic spying, even as it was
condemned by the government as irresponsible and damaging to national security.

The report was based on what The Intercept described as a spreadsheet of 7,485
email addresses said to have been monitored from 2002 to 2008, and one of its
writers was Glenn Greenwald, a primary recipient of the trove of documents
leaked by Mr. Snowden, a former National Security Agency contractor.

The document is titled ''FISA Recap,'' suggesting that the eavesdropping took
place under the process authorized by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.

Among the five identified by The Intercept as having been subjected to
surveillance were Hooshang Amirahmadi, a Rutgers University professor who is the
president of the American Iranian Council, a public policy group that works on
diplomatic issues regarding relations with Iran, and Nihad Awad, the executive
director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, a Muslim civil-rights
organization.

Also named were Asim Ghafoor, a defense lawyer who has handled terrorism-related
cases; Faisal Gill, a former Department of Homeland Security lawyer who later
did some legal work with Mr. Ghafoor on behalf of Sudan in a lawsuit brought by
victims of terrorist attacks; and Agha Saeed, the national chairman of the
American Muslim Alliance, which supports Muslim political candidates.

The documents did not say what the suspicions or the evidence were against the
men that prompted the apparent surveillance.

In interviews on Wednesday, several of the men denied wrongdoing, and Mr.
Ghafoor said he believed his Muslim faith was a factor in his being monitored.
''I try not to play the race card,'' he said. ''But there's really no other
explanation.''

Mr. Amirahmadi, a dual citizen of the United States and Iran, said he understood
why the American government might want to investigate him in an era of
heightened nerves; such surveillance is used not just to investigate people
suspected of being terrorists, but also those suspected of being foreign agents
trying to influence American policy.

Describing himself as a secular Muslim peace activist, he noted that he had
tried to run for president of Iran and has organized meetings between prominent
Americans and Iranian leaders. But he said he had always been open about his
views.

''I am not surprised; I'm not angry,'' he said, adding, ''I'm honored to say
that after years of looking closely at me, they have found nothing.''

The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court issues about 1,800 orders annually
for domestic surveillance. To obtain a court order to wiretap an American, the
government must convince a judge that there is probable cause to believe the
target is engaged in a crime on behalf of a foreign power; non-Americans need
only be suspected of being foreign agents.

None of the five have been charged with a crime in connection with the apparent
monitoring.

The government refused to confirm whether or why any of the five had been
monitored. Several dozen rights organizations sent a letter to President Obama
on Wednesday expressing concerns about the potential for ''discriminatory and
abusive surveillance,'' but also acknowledged that ''we do not know all of the
facts,'' and asked for ''the information necessary to meaningfully assess'' the
report.

Gadeir Abbas, a staff lawyer with the Council on American-Islamic Relations,
called the apparent surveillance of its executive director an outrage.

''It's but the latest indication that the N.S.A. is spying on Americans based on
the exercise of their constitutional rights,'' he said.

Generally, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, not the N.S.A., is the lead
agency for national-security surveillance aimed at Americans on domestic soil,
although the two agencies work closely together on technical matters.

In a joint statement, the Justice Department and the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence strongly denied such accusations, pointing to the court
oversight. It added, ''On the other hand, a person who the court finds is an
agent of a foreign power under this rigorous standard is not exempted just
because of his or her occupation.''

In 2007, the Justice Department named the Council on American-Islamic Relations
as an unindicted co-conspirator in its prosecution of a Muslim charity later
convicted of funneling money to Hamas. A redacted screen shot suggests that Mr.
Awad's email was monitored from Nov. 9, 2006, to Feb. 1, 2008.

James McJunkin, a former assistant director of the F.B.I.'s counterterrorism
division, declined to comment on any particular target. But in general, he said,
the FISA process allowed the government to follow up on allegations that an
organization might be involved in aiding a terrorist group.

''We've got to determine whether that is in fact true,'' he said. ''If you're
targeting an individual for FISA collection, you are doing so because you
believe he has specific intelligence that can either prove or disprove a linkage
to terror financing.''

Mr. Abbas, the Council on American-Islamic Relations lawyer, said, ''We have
been subject to intensive scrutiny for years, and that scrutiny has resulted in
nothing other than smears.''

The Intercept reported that the spreadsheet contained a column headed
''nationality'' and that 202 of the email addresses belonged to ''U.S.
persons,'' 1,782 belonged to ''non-U.S. persons,'' and 5,501 were listed as
unknown or left blank. It also identified email addresses for two other
Americans on the list whose ties to a terrorist organization are well known:
Anwar al-Awlaki and Samir Khan, both of whom were killed by an American drone
strike in Yemen in September 2011.

The Intercept report, which suggested that anti-Muslim prejudice contributed to
the surveillance, also published what it said was part of a 2005 training
document about how to format a memo seeking permission to wiretap someone. It
used the fake name ''Mohammed Raghead.''

The White House said it had ordered a review, and Vanee Vines, an N.S.A.
spokeswoman, said, ''N.S.A. has not and would not approve official training
documents that include insulting or inflammatory language.''

Mr. Gill, the former Homeland Security lawyer, said he had reviewed his old
emails, looking to see what the government had collected about him, but could
not find anything that explained it. He said his security clearance was never
suspended, and The Intercept said other lawyers who did legal work for Sudan
were not on the monitoring list.

Mr. Gill said he thought the government was unfairly suspicious of Muslim
lawyers who took such cases. As a government lawyer, he said, he had faith in
the legal process required before surveillance is approved, but now, knowing he
was monitored, ''It just calls the process into question.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/10/us/politics/nsa-snowden-records-glenn-greenwal
d-first-look.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Nihad Awad, above, executive director of the Council on
American- Islamic Relations, and Hooshang Amirahmadi, president of the American
Iranian Council, were among those subjected to surveillance, according to The
Intercept online magazine. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRIS KLEPONIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
-- GETTY IMAGES
 JULIO CORTEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


