                             1373 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 11, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Claims a Win, but Enemy Slips Away

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Miram Shah,
and Declan Walsh from London. Azam Ahmed contributed reporting from Kabul,
Afghanistan, and Kiran Nazish from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1273 words


MIRAM SHAH, Pakistan -- A solitary donkey wandered through the deserted streets
of this once-bustling tribal town of 100,000, but no other inhabitants were to
be found 10 days after Pakistani troops backed by tanks and helicopter gunships
seized control.

The front doors of houses had been left open and shops were only half-shuttered.
Some buildings had been destroyed by military airstrikes and artillery barrages;
others bore red paint marks to show soldiers had searched there. On Wednesday,
military officials guided a small group of journalists through their most
dangerous discoveries: a bomb factory, a school for suicide bombers, a private
prison and a network of underground tunnels.

But there was little sign of the fighters themselves.

''Yes, they did escape,'' said Maj. Gen. Zafarullah Khan, commander of the
three-week-old military drive into North Waziristan, the tribal district along
the Afghan border that has been Pakistan's most notorious jihadi hub. ''They had
smelled that the operation was about to be launched. Peace talks had failed, the
buildup for the operation had already begun. So the leadership abandoned this
place.''

General Khan dismissed suggestions by skeptical officials in Afghanistan and the
West that his forces had allowed favored militants to flee. ''We are
colorblind,'' he said. He added that in a difficult environment like North
Waziristan, ''it is not possible to create a watertight compartment where
individuals cannot escape.''

The one-day tour of Miram Shah -- a dusty, rugged town about 10 miles from the
Afghan border -- offered a rare ground-level perspective on a military operation
that has been largely hidden from view since it started on June 15. The assault,
precipitated by the collapse of peace talks and an embarrassing militant attack
on the Karachi airport, is the military's most determined effort yet to clear
out a tribal district that had become a thriving center of international
militancy.

Yet few doubt that the fight has barely begun. Militants evaded the military
bombardment in part by hiding among the flood of roughly 800,000 refugees that
fled the area into neighboring districts or Afghanistan, according to officials
and witness accounts. And the opaque nature of the operation -- the army has
tightly controlled information about the fighting and discouraged local
journalists from writing ''negative'' stories -- has stirred disquiet among
Pakistanis who worry about the offensive's chances of success.

''One really doesn't know what is happening,'' said Khalid Aziz, a former chief
secretary of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, which borders the tribal belt. ''Very
little real operational detail is coming out. The army says it has killed
hundreds of people, including Uzbeks. But who, exactly, are they?''

The United States joined in the action on Thursday morning, when a C.I.A. drone
fired several missiles at a house and a car in Datta Khel, about 20 miles west
of Miram Shah, just before dawn, a Pakistani security official said on the
condition of anonymity.

The strike occurred in territory controlled by Hafiz Gul Bahadur, a Pakistani
militant commander who has played a central role in mobilizing fighters to carry
out attacks inside Afghanistan. The American missiles killed three Uzbek
militants and three Afghans, the official said.

In Miram Shah, General Khan said that his troops had established control over 80
percent of the town with relatively modest casualties, with a few soldiers
killed by rocket fire or militant booby traps. In total, the military said, it
had lost just 24 soldiers so far, while more than 400 militants are said to have
been killed, mostly in airstrikes against militant compounds in the surrounding
mountains.

Few of the dead militants have been identified, however, and in contrast with a
previous antimilitant offensive in the Swat Valley in 2009, the Taliban
themselves have been largely quiet.

Now, General Khan said, Pakistani troops have begun an advance toward Datta
Khel, a village that has been a frequent target of C.I.A. airstrikes. They will
move simultaneously against militant havens in Mir Ali, the second biggest town
of North Waziristan, he said.

One question is where the army will go after that. With North Waziristan's main
towns located on the plains, military experts say that a more daunting challenge
may lie in the steep-backed valleys deep in the mountains, where tribal fighters
have a centuries-old record of defying conventional militaries.

For the United States, a key question is whether the Pakistani offensive will
dent the capabilities of the Haqqani network, a group that has deep roots in
North Waziristan and, equally, longstanding ties with Pakistani intelligence.
American officials have suggested that Pakistani fighters tipped off Haqqani
commanders in advance of the operation.

But the military spokesman, Maj. Gen. Asim Bajwa, insisted that Pakistani
soldiers had clear instructions to attack all militants, regardless of their
affiliation. ''All militants will have to be eliminated, whether they are local
or foreign, Haqqani network or Uzbeks,'' he said.

Pakistani officers guiding the tour of Miram Shah pointed out evidence that
suggested the town's role as a hub of both the insurgency in Afghanistan and of
the global jihadi movement.

At a training center for suicide bombers, paperwork headed ''the Islamic Emirate
of Afghanistan'' contained registration details for young recruits. One such
recruit, who identified himself as Sharifullah, a 20-year-old from Khost in
Afghanistan, signed an agreement for a two-month training period. During this
time, he agreed to not use his mobile phone or attempt to leave the facility,
and would have no contact with anyone except for his teachers and fellow suicide
bomber recruits.

Journalists were taken to a prison run by the Ittehad-e-Mujahedeen Khorasan, a
ruthless militant counterintelligence group that has tortured and executed
tribesmen accused of spying on behalf of the United States.

And General Khan said his soldiers had discovered a mile-long tunnel, which
militants used to evade detection, that stretched under Miram Shah. He said it
would take some time to clear the town entirely, given the large number of traps
and other explosive devices that it was believed to contain.

The operation has exacerbated tensions with Afghanistan. Some 66,000 Pakistani
refugees have fled across the border, in a humiliating turn for Pakistan, which
has hosted millions of Afghan refugees from violence since 1979.

Pakistani military leaders have called on the Afghan authorities to help capture
Maulana Fazlullah, the leader of the main Pakistani Taliban branch, who is
widely believed to be hiding in the Afghan provinces of Kunar and Nuristan.
Afghan officials have previously admitted supporting Mr. Fazlullah against
Pakistan.

''We have asked the Afghans and other forces to take appropriate measures to
interdict and capture him,'' General Bajwa, the military spokesman, said at a
briefing.

Afghan leaders, in turn, have accused the Pakistani military of stoking the
Afghan Taliban insurgency inside their own country, and of purposefully letting
Afghan-focused militants escape in the current offensive.

One striking aspect of the North Waziristan operation is how the United States
has been almost entirely absent from the public debate. In previous offensives,
conservative critics have loudly blamed American pressure for forcing the
military's hand.

''Now the U.S. isn't mentioned at all,'' said Mr. Aziz, the former chief
secretary. ''We Pakistanis have learned that this is our own internal problem. I
hope it's not too late to solve it.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/11/world/asia/pakistan-claims-a-win-but-enemy-sli
ps-away.html

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: EMPTY STREETS: Pakistani soldiers patrolling a bazaar in Miram
Shah. Many militants have evaded capture, blending with roughly 800,000 fleeing
refugees.
 DANGEROUS FINDS: Militants in Miram Shah used the training center at  left to
learn about bomb-making and combat. Pakistani soldiers  seized items like the
photographs of Taliban militants above from  many of the town's abandoned
buildings. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AAMIR QURESHI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


