                             1303 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Experimental Interludes

BYLINE: By VIVIEN SCHWEITZER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; MUSIC
REVIEW; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 413 words


In 12 concerts during a six-day residency at the Stone, the intimate East
Village space for experimental and avant-garde music, the Flux Quartet is
presenting a range of pieces, including electroacoustic works, scores by drone
pioneers and jazz. At the 10 p.m. show on Wednesday, Max Mandel, the Flux's
violist, was joined by the pianist Eric Huebner for a one-hour program featuring
five works that spanned an array of moods and textures.

The evening opened with an elegant interpretation of the sensual, beautiful
''North Shore'' (1993) by the British composer Gavin Bryars, whose eclectic
musical background includes stints as a jazz bassist and working with John Cage.
In ''North Shore,'' which Mr. Bryars arranged for a larger ensemble, a
melancholy viola melody unfolded slowly over solitary piano chords. The music
flowed naturally through an arc that expanded, briefly, to a heightened dramatic
intensity and receded to a Minimalist interlude.

Yotam Haber's alluring ''From the Book of Maintenance and Sustenance'' also
proved engaging. Mr. Haber used the soulful lower register of the viola to
expressive effect, and its higher register to create intriguing timbres.
Fluttering trills unfolded over lone piano notes; bell-like descending piano
chords were echoed by gently ascending viola motifs. The piece faded to an
enigmatic whisper at the end.

The two works seemed to complement the spare, stark gestures of Morton Feldman's
''The Viola in My Life'' No. 3, part of a series he began in 1970 for viola with
different instrumental combinations. These pieces, among the shorter works by
Feldman (known for gigantic creations like his six-hour string quartet), feature
his trademark aesthetic, in which fragmentary individual gestures and notes are
isolated and stretched over a slow-motion frame.

In contrast, Elizabeth Hoffman's ''Musical Boxes'' sounded frantically busy,
with a range of sound effects and timbres created by both instruments. There
were some interesting moments, but so many musical elements seemed to be
jostling for prevalence that the piece sounded disjointed.

The dialogue in Annie Gosfield's lively ''Tenacious Friction and Swerving
Conviction'' sounded more convincing. Mr. Huebner and Mr. Mandel gave an
energetic performance of the piece, with its hard-driving, rhythmically vigorous
pulse, colorful microtonal hues, and jazzy piano solo.

The residency continues through Sunday at the Stone, Avenue C at Second Street,
East Village; thestonenyc.com.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/arts/music/at-the-stone-the-flux-quartet-flexe
s-its-muscles.html

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Flux Quartet:  Max Mandel, on viola, and Eric Huebner, on piano,
at the Stone in the East Village, where the group is presenting 12 concerts.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY RUBY WASHINGTON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


