                             1337 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 20, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

I Was a Digital Best Seller!

BYLINE: By TONY HORWITZ.

Tony Horwitz is the author of ''Confederates in the Attic'' and ''Midnight
Rising: John Brown and the Raid That Sparked the Civil War.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1619 words


WEST TISBURY, Mass. -- FIVE months ago I published a short book called ''Boom.''
Commercially it was a bust. No news in that: Most books lose money and are
quickly forgotten by all but their wounded authors.

But this experience wasn't just a predictable blow to what's left of my
self-esteem. It's also a cautionary farce about the new media and technology
we're so often told is the bright shining future for writers and readers.

Last fall a new online publication called The Global Mail asked me to write
about the Keystone XL pipeline, which may carry oil to the United States from
the tar sands of Canada. The Global Mail promoted itself as a purveyor of
independent long-form journalism, lavishly funded by a philanthropic
entrepreneur in Australia. I was offered an initial fee of $15,000, plus $5,000
for expenses, to write at whatever length I felt the subject merited.

At the time I was researching a traditional print book, my seventh. But it was
getting harder for me to feel optimistic about dead-tree publishing. Here was a
chance to plant my flag in the online future and reach a younger and digitally
savvy audience. The Global Mail would also be bankrolling the sort of long
investigative journey I'd often taken as a reporter, before budgets and print
space shrank.

So I plotted an ambitious road trip, from the tar sands of subarctic Alberta
through Montana, the Dakotas and Nebraska, and returned a month later with a
blown-out travel budget and enough material to write 40,000 words. As I wrote
feverishly through the winter, The Global Mail negotiated to co-publish with
Byliner -- a classy digital outfit, based in San Francisco, known for
novella-length works like Jon Krakauer's ''Three Cups of Deceit.''

In giddy calls and emails from Sydney, editors said that the first installment I
had sent was ''a ripper'' and that Byliner thought we might sell up to 75,000
copies, with me getting a lofty cut of the profits.

I finished writing in late January, just as the State Department prepared to
issue a much anticipated report on the Keystone XL. If I were writing for a
traditional publisher, I'd have to wait months to see my work in print. This
time, I'd be read within days, right on top of the news!

Exhausted but exhilarated, I headed to the liquor store for a celebratory bottle
and returned to an urgent call from my editor in Sydney. ''Mate, we're
[bleeped],'' she said. The Global Mail's backer had had a bad financial setback
at his firm and evidently decided he could no longer afford a folly like quality
journalism. He'd abruptly pulled the plug just hours before I filed my copy,
making The Global Mail a dead letter.

Worse still, for me, Byliner hadn't yet inked its deal with the Aussies.
Suddenly I had no platform for a very long story on a subject that was about to
be all over the news. And I'd yet to be paid anything beyond my original travel
budget (which I'd overrun, in any case).

At this point I called my literary agent, whom I'd foolishly failed to involve
in the project. (Another fantasy of the digital world: Writers can do it
themselves and dispense with all those middlemen.) Late that Friday my agent
brokered a deal between Byliner and me. The advance was only $2,000, but my work
would be available by Monday, for $2.99, and I'd get about a third of the
proceeds once my advance was paid off.

I worked through the weekend with Byliner staffers as they crafted a snazzy
cover and a subtitle that included the words ''strippers'' and ''cowboys.'' In
no time ''Boom'' was live and I was in love. The e-format delivered the
timeliness and instant gratification of news reporting, yet with all the
trappings of a book, absent the paper. There was even an author's page with my
picture. All I needed now were readers.

Oh, those. I was familiar with the stately ways of old-school book publicity:
readings, dwindling print reviews, praying for a call from Terry Gross. Surely,
Byliner's tech-savvy team would move at light speed and deploy new tools like
guerrilla marketing.

Except there didn't seem to be a ''team,'' just an outside publicist who was
busy on other jobs. She circulated a hasty press release and wrote a glowing
review of ''Boom'' on Amazon, the main retailer of Byliner titles. Byliner urged
me to ''game the system'' by soliciting more such ''reviews'' from friends and
relatives, and issued a few tweets touting ''Boom.'' Then silence.

Physical books live on physical shelves at physical bookstores and can catch the
eye of browsing shoppers. ''Boom'' was floating in the digital ether with
millions of other works. How would anyone even know it was there? So I went to
work hawking it myself, like a pushcart peddler: calling radio producers,
sending ''Boom'' to big-mouthed friends, boring my tens of followers on social
media. I wrote online articles for major sites, for which I wasn't paid, since
it's generally understood in online journalism that we scribes are ''building
our brand'' rather than actually making a living.

My month of self-flackery seemed to work. In the sales rankings on Amazon for
Kindle Singles, ''Boom'' broke the top 25, and almost all the titles ahead of it
were fiction. In categories like ''Page-Turning Narratives,'' my work often
ranked No. 1. I was a nonfiction digital best seller!

Eager to know how many copies this represented, I asked Byliner for sales
figures. It took them a while to respond -- because, I imagined, they needed the
time to tally the dizzying numbers pouring in from Amazon, iTunes and other
retailers. In fact, the total was such that Byliner could offer only a
''guesstimate.'' In its first month ''Boom'' had sold ''somewhere between 700
and 800 copies,'' the email read, adding, ''these things can take time to build,
and this is the kind of story with a potentially very long tail.''

It was also the kind of story that could bankrupt a writer. I'd now devoted five
months to writing and peddling ''Boom'' and wasn't even halfway to earning out
my $2,000 advance (less than the overrun on my travel). The cruelest joke,
though, was that 700 to 800 copies made ''Boom'' a top-rated seller. What did
that mean for all the titles lower down the list? Were they selling at all?

Byliner couldn't be making money from ''Boom,'' yet made no discernible effort
to sell it. I was asked to speak at a conference whose organizers wanted to
pre-order 500 to 1,000 copies of ''Boom.'' I asked Byliner how to arrange this
bulk buy. They never got back to me.

I began to wonder if Byliner was a Potemkin publisher, acquiring content for
some reason other than making it available to readers. Maybe Amazon had a hand
in this, some scheme involving drones. Or perhaps Byliner, for all its media
applause, was just incompetent. I finally gave up, consoling myself with my
work's eternal if insignificant life in the e-sphere.

Then, even that was gone. On the first Monday in June I checked the Kindle
Single sales rankings, having last looked a month before, when ''Boom'' was
still hanging on at about No. 40. Now I couldn't find it in the top 100. Oh
well, I thought, can't be a best seller forever.

I then went to the Amazon page for ''Boom,'' to savor any new reviews. A message
appeared: ''We're sorry. The Web address you entered is not a functioning page
on our site.'' I checked my Amazon author page, and then iTunes and Barnes &
Noble. ''Boom'' had vanished. Poof. As if it had never existed.

The next day I received an email that began ''Dear Byliner author.'' My
publisher was ''undergoing some changes.'' As in death throes. ''Every new
venture requires a leap of faith, and we thank you for taking that leap with
us.''

Actually, I hadn't been given a chance to leap. I was going down with the ship.
Byliner owned the rights to ''Boom'' and had made it and other titles
unavailable, without warning, because of accounting and liability issues, I
heard. Whatever that meant. Probably that Byliner no longer had an accountant,
or much else, since several senior editors and the chief executive had left.

My laid-off Aussie editor, at least, did right by me in the end. As The Global
Mail unraveled and its owner shut off funds, my editor managed to salvage the
$15,000 I'd been promised long ago. A few days ago ''Boom'' also resurfaced on
Amazon, as mysteriously as it had disappeared; Byliner pledged its continuing
''commitment to long-form journalism''; and I learned that sales had inched into
four figures. In all, a disappointing rather than a ruinous seduction.

But now that I've escorted two e-partners to the edge of the grave, I'm wary of
this brave new world of digital publishers and readers. As recently as the 1980s
and '90s, writers like me could reasonably aspire to a career and a living wage.
I was dispatched to costly and difficult places like Iraq, to work for months on
a single story. Later, as a full-time book author, I received advances large
enough to fund years of research.

How many young writers can realistically dream of that now? Online journalism
pays little or nothing and demands round-the-clock feeds. Very few writers or
outlets can chase long investigative stories. I also question whether there's an
audience large enough to sustain long-form digital nonfiction, in a world where
we're drowning in bite-size content that's mostly free and easy to consume. One
reason ''Boom'' sank, I suspect, is that there aren't many people willing to pay
even $2.99 to read at length about a trek through the oil patch, no matter how
much I sexed it up with cowboys and strippers.

Meanwhile, I'm back to planning my next book. I don't yet know on what subject.
But I do know its form: in hard copy, between covers, a book I can put on the
shelf and look at forever, even if it doesn't sell.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/opinion/i-was-a-digital-best-seller.html

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANNA PARINI)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


