                             1367 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Warns Gaza Targets by Phone and Leaflet

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER and FARES AKRAM; Steven Erlanger reported from
Jerusalem, and Fares Akram from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 646 words


JERUSALEM -- The call came to the cellphone of his brother's wife, Salah Kaware
said Tuesday. Mr. Kaware lives in Khan Younis, in southeast Gaza, and the caller
said that everyone in the house must leave within five minutes, because it was
going to be bombed.

A further warning came as the occupants were leaving, he said in a telephone
interview, when an Israeli drone apparently fired a flare at the roof of the
three-story home. ''Our neighbors came in to form a human shield,'' he said,
with some even going to the roof to try to prevent a bombing. Others were in the
stairway when the house was bombed not long afterward.

Seven people died, Mr. Kaware said, a figure also stated by the Palestinian
Health Ministry in Gaza, which also said that 25 people were wounded. The
Israeli military said that targeted houses belonged to Hamas members involved in
launching rockets or other military activity, and that they had been used as
operations rooms.

But the events on Tuesday were another example of a contentious Israeli policy
in which occupants of a building about to be bombed or shelled are given a brief
warning in Arabic to evacuate. The Israelis have used such telephone calls and
leaflets for years now, in a stated effort to reduce civilian casualties and
avoid charges of indiscriminate killings or even of crimes against the rules of
war.

During Operation Cast Lead in Gaza in late 2008, the Israelis often used
telephone calls and leaflets to tell occupants to leave before striking. In some
cases, the Israelis fired missiles without explosive warheads onto the roof to
get Palestinians who had gathered there to leave. The Israelis called it ''the
knock on the roof.'' But often, as in the Khan Younis case on Tuesday, people
die in any case, because they ignore or defy the warnings, or try to leave after
it is too late.

And, of course, sometimes bombs and missiles do not hit the building at which
they are aimed.

The Israelis also regularly drop leaflets over Gaza urging citizens not to
cooperate with terrorism and to stay away from border zones, an injunction that
has been criticized by human rights advocates, like the Palestinian organization
Al-Haq, which argue that such leaflets do not protect Israel from allegations of
the indiscriminate killing of civilians.

Groups like Human Rights Watch have regularly said that Israel's efforts to warn
civilians with phone calls and leaflets do not absolve the armed forces, which
''still need to ensure that the warnings are effective and do not allow attacks
otherwise prohibited under international law,'' the group said in 2009, even as
it welcomed ''new procedures to improve its early warning to civilians during
armed conflict.''

Israel also uses leaflets in Arabic, some of them intended as warnings and
others as propaganda. On Tuesday, many were dropped over northern Gaza near
Israel. One said that ''the terrorist elements, tunnel owners and arms smugglers
know very well that the continuation of the terror operations, the smuggling of
arms and the digging of tunnels constitute a lasting target for the operations
of the Israel Defense Forces.''

''However,'' it said, ''they continue working from the areas you live in and
take you as cover.''

The leaflet urged residents not to allow their houses to be used as cover for
digging tunnels or smuggling weapons, and provided an email address and phone
number for people to report on such activities around them, saying, ''Don't
stand idle as the terrorist elements use you.''

Israel does not always give warnings, of course. Also on Tuesday, a missile hit
a car traveling along a central Gaza thoroughfare, killing the three occupants.
It was not immediately clear who the targets were, though one was reportedly a
senior Hamas military official, Muhammad Shaban, and it seemed unlikely that
anyone had called them to warn that a missile was on the way.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/09/world/middleeast/by-phone-and-leaflet-israeli-
attackers-warn-gazans.html

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


