                             1320 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

White House Outlines Steps to Protect Covert Identities

BYLINE: By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 368 words


The White House on Wednesday outlined the steps it would take to prevent the
disclosure of covert officials' identities when the president is traveling
abroad. The moves are in reaction to the accidental revelation last month of the
Central Intelligence Agency's top spy in Afghanistan.

The steps include informing those who participate in public meetings with the
president that their names will be distributed to reporters covering the events
and giving them a chance to object, said Josh Earnest, a White House spokesman.

Press officials will also clear the participants' names with the National
Security Council before their release.

In addition, staff members who handle scheduling and the news media for
international trips will receive extra training on how to handle such
disclosures.

The measures were recommended by the White House counsel, W. Neil Eggleston, who
was charged by President Obama's chief of staff, Denis R. McDonough, with
reviewing the Afghanistan episode.

Mr. Eggleston concluded that the disclosure was inadvertent, and on Tuesday
night, he briefed Mr. McDonough on his findings.

The name of the C.I.A. station chief in Afghanistan was accidentally disclosed
late last month when military officials sent a White House press aide a list of
16 people who were participating in a briefing with Mr. Obama. One of the
participants was identified as ''chief of station.'' That title refers to the
highest-ranking C.I.A. officer in a country.

The name was included in a pool report that is distributed by the White House to
about 6,000 reporters around the world. The New York Times did not name the
C.I.A. officer, at the request of the White House and C.I.A. officials.

The name and title of the station chief were removed in a later pool report that
urged reporters to ''please use this list'' of attendees at the president's
briefing instead of the previous one.

Such disclosures occur rarely, and the names often become public only when they
are released by mistake, or in leaks from people opposed to a United States
policy or presence in a country.

Last year, a political party opposed to American drone strikes in Pakistan
identified a man it described as the C.I.A.'s top spy in that country.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/12/world/white-house-outlines-steps-to-protect-co
vert-identities.html

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


