                             1351 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sky Isn't Falling After Scandal, N.S.A. Chief Says

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1285 words


FORT MEADE, Md. -- The newly installed director of the National Security Agency
says that while he has seen some terrorist groups alter their communications to
avoid surveillance techniques revealed by Edward J. Snowden, the damage done
over all by a year of revelations does not lead him to the conclusion that ''the
sky is falling.''

In an hourlong interview Friday in his office here at the heart of the country's
electronic eavesdropping and cyberoperations, Adm. Michael S. Rogers, who has
now run the beleaguered spy agency and the military's Cyber Command for just
short of three months, described the series of steps he was taking to ensure
that no one could download the trove of data that Mr. Snowden gathered -- more
than a million documents.

But he cautioned that there was no perfect protection against a dedicated
insider with access to the agency's networks.

''Am I ever going to sit here and say as the director that with 100 percent
certainty no one can compromise our systems from the inside?'' he asked. ''Nope.
Because I don't believe that in the long run.''

The crucial change, he said, is to ''ensure that the volume'' of data taken by
Mr. Snowden, a former agency contractor, ''can't be stolen again.'' But the
Defense Department, of which the security agency and Cyber Command are a part,
made the same vow in 2010 after an Army private, Chelsea Manning, downloaded
hundreds of thousands of secret State Department and Pentagon files and released
them to WikiLeaks.

Notable in his comments was an absence of alarm about the long-term effects of
the Snowden revelations. Like former Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates, who
urged colleagues in the Obama administration to calm down about the WikiLeaks
revelations in 2010, Admiral Rogers seemed to suggest that, as technology
progressed, the agency would find new ways to compensate for the damage done,
however regrettable the leaks.

He repeated past warnings that the agency had overheard terrorist groups
''specifically referencing data detailed'' by Mr. Snowden's revelations. ''I
have seen groups not only talk about making changes, I have seen them make
changes,'' he said.

But he then added: ''You have not heard me as the director say, 'Oh, my God, the
sky is falling.' I am trying to be very specific and very measured in my
characterizations.''

His tone was in contrast to that of some politicians and intelligence
professionals, including his immediate predecessor, Gen. Keith B. Alexander, who
described in stark terms the risks to American and allied national security from
the revelations, calling it ''the greatest damage to our combined nations'
intelligence systems that we have ever suffered.''

Admiral Rogers discussed his vision of how the United States might use
cyberweapons against adversaries -- a subject of debate inside the
administration that American officials rarely discuss in public -- saying he
could imagine a day when, under strict rules of armed conflict, they were used
selectively but as part of ordinary military operations, like cruise missiles
and drones.

He also acknowledged that the quiet working relationships between the security
agency and the nation's telecommunications and high technology firms had been
sharply changed by the Snowden disclosures -- and might never return to what
they once were in an era when the relationships were enveloped in secrecy.

Telecommunications businesses like AT&T and Verizon, and social media companies,
now insist that ''you are going to have to compel us,'' Admiral Rogers said, to
turn over data so that they can demonstrate to foreign customers that they do
not voluntarily cooperate. And some are far more reluctant to help when asked to
provide information about foreigners who are communicating on their networks
abroad. It is a gray area in the law in which American courts have no
jurisdiction; instead, the agency relied on the cooperation of American-based
companies.

Last week, Verizon lost a longstanding contract to run many of the
telecommunications services for the German government. Germany declared that the
revelations of ''ties revealed between foreign intelligence agencies and firms''
showed that it needed to rely on domestic providers.

Google has announced steps to seal gaps in its system that the security agency
exploited to gain access to the company's databases. Microsoft is challenging in
court the validity of warrants to turn over data that it stores outside the
United States.

''I understand why we are where we are,'' said Admiral Rogers, the first career
cryptologist to run the country's code-breaking and code-making agency, and a
former commander of the Navy's Fleet Cyber Command. ''I don't waste a lot of
time saying, 'Why wouldn't you want to work with us?' ''

Admiral Rogers said the majority of corporations that had long given the agency
its technological edge and global reach were still working with it, though they
had no interest in advertising the fact. He was unapologetic about the agency's
past activities, even as he said he recognized that unlike his predecessors for
the past six decades he was going to have to engage ''in a public dialogue''
about how the agency operated.

When asked about the changes the agency had made to prevent another insider
attack like the one Mr. Snowden executed without detection -- including a
''two-man rule'' that would require two systems operators to enter codes to gain
access to sensitive data, much as two officers must enter codes to launch
nuclear weapons -- he refused to say whether he had embraced one major
recommendation of a presidential commission on the agency's operations.

The commission, which issued a public report in December, said it was surprised
that the agency did not encrypt the vast databases of information it stores on
its computers and in the Internet cloud. Had it encrypted that information, the
files Mr. Snowden downloaded would have been unreadable, unless he also had the
cryptologic key.

In discussing the post-Snowden changes, Admiral Rogers said the security agency
had received instructions to cease its monitoring of a number of world leaders
beyond Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, whose cellphone was monitored in a
decade-long operation that President Obama halted.

''There are some specific targets where we've been instructed, 'Hey, don't
collect against them anymore,' '' he said. He declined to say how many beyond
noting, ''Probably more than half a dozen, but not in the hundreds by any
means.''

Admiral Rogers has taken command of the agency just as its power to collect and
retain ''telephone metadata'' -- the records of numbers dialed and the duration
of calls -- is being stripped from the agency. Mr. Obama defended the program
last summer, after the initial round of revelations. But he had a change of
heart, fueled by his commission's conclusion that it could not find a case in
which the program had definitively halted a potential terrorist attack.

Mr. Obama ultimately decided to cease the government collection of the data,
putting it into the hands of a third party and requiring an individual warrant
from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court to obtain the data.

Admiral Rogers indicated that system, so long resisted by the security agency,
was workable. ''I am not going to jump up and down and say, 'I have to have
access to that data in minutes and hours,' '' he said. ''The flip side is that I
don't want to take weeks and months to get to the data.''

The House passed a bill that would keep the data in the hands of
telecommunications businesses; the Senate has yet to act.

''Clearly the intention,'' he said, is to get the security agency ''out of the
data-retention business'' for domestic calling records.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/us/sky-isnt-falling-after-snowden-nsa-chief-sa
ys.html

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Adm. Michael S. Rogers, seen last month, says it is crucial to
''ensure that the volume'' of data stolen before ''can't be stolen again.''
(PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A13)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


