                             1376 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Iraqis Try to Fragment Extremist Group

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT and ALISSA J. RUBIN; Eric Schmitt reported from
Washington, and Alissa J. Rubin from Baghdad. Employees of The New York Times
contributed reporting from Salahuddin, Diyala and Anbar Provinces.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1672 words


WASHINGTON -- American and Iraqi officials are seeking ways to exploit emerging
fissures between the militant group known as the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, and Iraqi extremist groups that allied with it to seize much of northern
and western Iraq over the past month.

The groups, which follow the Sunni branch of Islam, made common cause with ISIS,
whose members are also Sunni militants, to fight Iraq's Shiite-dominated
government. The Shiites are the majority in Iraq, and there is deep distrust
between them and the Sunnis.

Recently in Mosul, ISIS has rounded up members of Saddam Hussein's banned Baath
Party, whom the group saw as potential rivals. Residents in Salahuddin Province
are chafing under harsh Islamic law that ISIS has already started putting in
place. Former Baathists are suspected in last week's assassination of the ISIS
emir in Diyala Province.

In short, the marriages of convenience formed among ISIS and Baathists, Sunni
nationalists, Sunni tribal groups and Sunni jihadists to fight a common enemy --
the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki -- are coming under
strain. Those fissures are being watched closely as the United States military's
Central Command is expected to deliver to the Pentagon this week a classified
report on whether Iraq's shattered security forces can rally to combat the
threat.

Exploiting any rifts among the Sunni militants is a top priority for American
and Iraqi officials and their regional allies.

The United States has weighed sending former American officials to meet with
Sunni tribal leaders. Ideally, the United States would try to re-create the
Sunni Awakening alliances formed in 2007 that had nearly 100,000 Sunni tribal
fighters to combat an earlier incarnation of ISIS. But these efforts are still
very much in their infancy, officials said. At the same time, Saudi Arabia has
reportedly urged Sunni tribes to turn against ISIS.

''It's a terrorist organization that needs to be eradicated,'' said one Middle
Eastern diplomat.

Iraqi officials caution that peeling Sunni groups away from ISIS will be far
harder than it was when American troops were in Iraq in force. After Americans
left Iraq in 2011, Mr. Maliki refused to pay members of local Sunni Awakening
councils, tribal militiamen armed by the Iraqi government to battle Qaeda
fighters in Iraq; only about 20,000 out of 100,000 ended up with jobs.

The Sunni insurgent groups are not widespread in each province and, by their
nature, are small -- whereas tribes are dispersed throughout provinces and even
across provincial borders. In many ways, the biggest opportunity to foment an
uprising is with the tribes since they have the sheer manpower that could be
harnessed to face down ISIS.

But there is a strong feeling among many tribal leaders that if they fight
against ISIS before the government commits to replacing Mr. Maliki and offering
a new deal to Sunnis, they will lose out and help the government but not get any
political compromise.

Further, unlike in 2007 and 2008, there are no American bases or smaller
outposts deep in hostile territory to serve as emissaries to the tribes, to
offer their leaders some protection when they come under attack or to serve as
sounding boards for discontent with the government. Now the outreach would have
to be done by the Shiite-affiliated if not Shiite-dominated Iraqi security
forces, which at least initially would lack credibility with tribal leaders.

As Pentagon officials prepare to receive the assessment of Iraqi security
forces, they are carefully watching the fraying ties of these groups to ISIS in
hopes of pinpointing potential vulnerabilities.

''If you can separate those groups, then the problem becomes manageable and
understandable,'' Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said during a Pentagon news conference on July 3.

General Dempsey said the goal would be to ''enable Iraq'' to defend itself --
not with a major influx of American military personnel, but by providing
''special skills, leadership and niche capabilities that we possess uniquely.''
Among those niche abilities could be surveillance drones to identify
concentrations of ISIS fighters and weapons.

The disagreements among the Sunni fighters show the challenges ISIS faces in
building an enduring militant force among groups that have been rivals or
enemies for years, are divided on religious and political grounds, and compete
for power in specific towns or districts. The Baathists, for instance, are more
secular and more nationalist, and have little interest in living under the
Islamic caliphate that ISIS has declared in Iraq and Syria.

Although its blitzkrieg has settled into an armed stalemate with Iraqi security
forces on the outskirts of Baghdad, ISIS has the weapons, personnel and momentum
to maintain for now its grip over wide stretches of territory, American and
Iraqi security and intelligence officials say.

''They are a diffused irregular army, not a terrorist group in the traditional
sense,'' said Derek Harvey, a former Army intelligence officer and specialist on
Iraq who now directs the University of South Florida's Global Initiative for
Civil Society and Conflict. ''They have leadership, resources, and control
territory, fighters and organization.''

The overall number of Sunni insurgents in Iraq is hard to pin down. American
intelligence officials say that ISIS has about 10,000 fighters -- about 7,000 in
Syria and 3,000 in Iraq. ISIS fighters were the shock force that swept into
Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, on June 10, counterterrorism officials said.
As the ISIS vanguard moved through northern Iraqi cities, thousands of other
Sunni militants followed to consolidate control of local governments and
neighborhoods.

In Salahuddin, Sunni groups have sworn allegiance to ISIS, and they have created
a mujahedeen council. In Diyala, where the terrain is thick with palm groves and
crisscrossed with canals making movement more difficult, some groups seem more
independent: While some are working with ISIS, some are not, and some appear to
have remained neutral. Anbar Province has a couple of towns, like Garma, with a
patchwork of different insurgent groups, but ISIS dominates.

American intelligence officials say that after ISIS, the largest group of
insurgents consists of former Baathist regime loyalists, including intelligence
officers and Republican Guard soldiers, who belong to the Men of the Army of the
Naqshbandia Order, a group often called J.R.T.N., the initials of its Arabic
name.

Other nationalist or tribal groups include the 1920 Revolution Brigades, while
more Islamist groups include the Islamic Army of Iraq and the Mujahedeen Army.
Ansar al-Islam, a radical Islamist organization often linked to Al Qaeda, has
its roots in the country's Kurdish region, and is a main rival of ISIS despite
sharing common ideologies, a Defense Department official said. They are mostly
based in the north and in the past were active in Nineveh, Kirkuk and Diyala
Provinces, though they have been seen operating in Fallujah as of March.

General Dempsey said that after ISIS's rapid advance, ''they're stretched right
now -- stretched to control what they've gained and stretched across their
logistics lines of communication.''

But with Iraqi forces shattered by the uprising, some American lawmakers are
calling on President Obama to order airstrikes against ISIS. Critics of this
strategy warn that without American forward air controllers on the ground,
airstrikes might accidentally kill tribal leaders who might be needed if there
is any hope of keeping Iraq together under a more inclusive government.

Interviews this past week with the local police, residents and tribal leaders
across northern Iraq revealed that ISIS has been exerting different levels of
control, region by region.

In Mosul, ISIS initially sought to avoid alienating Sunni residents, but now
appears to have started to impose its will more forcefully, even with erstwhile
allies. In the past week, Sunni militants who overran Mosul last month have
rounded up 25 to 60 senior ex-military officers and members of the Baath Party,
Reuters reported.

''They came in with strong leadership, handing out food during Ramadan, not
enforcing bans on smoking,'' said Michael Knights, an analyst at the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy who has embedded with Iraqi security forces.
''Now as occupiers, they're identifying potential rebels, getting them
registered, and then getting them to repent or kill them.''

In Diyala Province, northeast of Baghdad, where Sunni nationalists are strong,
the ISIS writ is less sweeping, and clashes with other Sunnis are more common.

Naqshbandia are fighting ISIS, most notably in Diyala, since they issued an
Islamic law ordering people to be loyal and forbidding any other flag to be
flown other than the ISIS black banner, according to police officers and tribal
leaders there. Naqshbandia fighters were suspected in last week's assassination
of the ISIS emir for Diyala by a roadside bomb, the authorities said.

ISIS has also skirmished with fighters from the Islamic Army of Iraq and Ansar
al-Sunna, another Islamist organization.

In Salahuddin Province, groups including the Islamic Army of Iraq and the
Mujahedeen Army are working in tandem with ISIS, according to American
intelligence officials and an Iraqi journalist living and working in the
province.

The groups sit together in a council that includes a representative of each
group. They hold meetings, debate decisions, have a court and a judge and are
applying Shariah, the journalist said.

''At first, everyone was happy that the army was gone and there were no more
random arrests, no one was going to barge into their home,'' said the
journalist, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for personal safety.

But in recent days, that has changed. ''If someone says anything negative, they
will be executed and their whole family,'' the journalist said. ''Now their
ultimate goal is to reach and enter Baghdad. Everybody knows this.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/13/world/middleeast/us-and-iraqis-try-to-fragment
-extremist-group-.html

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gen. Martin E. Dempsey said that the goal was to ''enable Iraq''
to defend itself from militants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LO SCALZO/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


