                             1329 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Helicopter of One's Own

BYLINE: By DANNY HAKIM

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1186 words


LIVERPOOL, England -- You know what would be cool?

If we had our own personal mini-helicopters that were almost as easy to fly as
cars are to drive, and we could take off from our backyards, soar over the
traffic and peer down at the earthbound masses, trudging along below.

That would be cool.

As it turns out, the European Union is making plans for that very thing. Six
research institutions across Europe are studying the feasibility of small
commuter helicopters, helped along by a $4.7 million grant from the European
government in a project dubbed ''MyCopter.''

The initial project is almost complete, and a second phase is being considered.
Scientists and engineers at the Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
in Tübingen, Germany, and here, at the University of Liverpool's engineering
school, are among those leading the research.

At a high-ceilinged laboratory at the university's Center for Engineering
Dynamics in downtown Liverpool, I recently strapped in for a test flight in an
orb-shaped flight simulator. The university has long expertise in flight
simulation, including a project that aims to develop flying buses that don't
need a runway.

For MyCopter, researchers here are trying to figure out how to make personal
helicopters easy to fly for ordinary people. They started by collaborating with
former military test pilots, and have moved on to testing their flight systems
with people who have no flying experience.

People like me, that is. As I took my seat, a large video screen wrapped around
past my peripheral vision on each side. The sky was blue, the grass was green.
There was a throttle between my legs that controlled my speed and turns, and a
lever to my left to control my altitude; these are similar to normal helicopter
controls, though a variety of control types are being studied.

I don't know how to fly and I'm not even a very enthusiastic driver, but I took
off easily enough from what looked like a field surrounded by six houses in the
English countryside. Then I followed a virtual aerial highway stretching out
before me by flying through a series of purple squares spread across the
simulated skyline.

For a nonpilot, the biggest challenge was remembering not to confuse the
throttle with the altitude lever. That was easy enough while we were cruising.

After a few minutes of chugging along the airway, I could see the Mersey River
was on my left, downtown Liverpool on the right, and its famous docks up ahead.

''Where is John Lennon's house?'' I asked Mark D. White, the flight simulation
laboratory manager, who was sitting next to me.

He pointed to the far right. ''By that green field over there,'' he told me.
''It's on that road.''

Over the piped-in roar of the helicopter engine, Dr. White added, ''We can do a
whole Beatles tour!'' That sounded good until I veered off the skyway while
rubbernecking for a glimpse of Penny Lane.

MyCopter was proposed in response to a 2007 European Union report called ''Out
of the Box: Ideas About the Future of Air Transport,'' which solicited ideas
from researchers on radical changes to Europe's existing transportation system,
including ideas for a ''personal air vehicle.''

''You have so many man-hours lost sitting in traffic jams, and you have a lot of
space above us,'' Dr. White said. ''Could you utilize that dimension to offload
the road usage that we've got? Can you travel from your home to your city-center
work location without getting stopped in traffic jams?''

MyCopter is not about designing such a vehicle, but figuring out how it might
work. Part of the challenge would be creating a way for masses of airborne cars
to fly under airplanes, not to crash into one another, and not to require
thousands of new air traffic controllers or physical infrastructure.

The project was the brainchild of Heinrich H. Bülthoff, director of perception,
cognition and action at the Max Planck Institute.

''There's a longstanding dream of flying cars, and there have been many
proposals and attempts over the years, but there are still a lot of problems to
solve before one can actually build such a flying car and get it to work,'' Dr.
Bülthoff said in a phone interview.

Right now, the six institutions are dividing the research tasks. In addition to
the University of Liverpool, researchers at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Zurich are working on ways to automate the operation of the
helicopters by conducting testing on drones.

At the Max Planck Institute, they are studying driver feedback technologies that
are already showing up in cars, like vibrating steering wheels and warnings when
you drift out of a lane that could be used to help pilots stay in their proper
flight path. They are also looking at how to display highways that armies of
airborne commuters could follow.

At the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, researchers are
studying how to avoid collisions. Among other things, they are looking at how
birds fly in dense flocks.

At the Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis in Karlsruhe,
Germany, the researchers are surveying Europeans about what they might think
about flying cars, to see how they would be accepted.

Surveys in Zurich, for example, found that ''people liked the idea of going to
work and avoiding the morning and evening traffic jams, but they didn't want
these flying cars all day,'' Dr. Bülthoff said. ''They wanted to be able to sit
on their balconies and enjoy the view and not have to see a swarm of cars.''

Finally, at the German Aerospace Center in Braunschweig, researchers will come
together and try out the technologies developed at the various institutions in a
real test helicopter.

Cutting to the chase here: When will cars fly?

The next phase of MyCopter, which officially ends this year, would be to
collaborate with private companies on potential designs, but funding has not yet
been approved.

Some small companies are already developing flying cars, like Pal-V of the
Netherlands, which aims to bring a small car that can turn into a helicopter
onto the market by 2016, priced at around $300,000.

Mike Stekelenburg, chief operating officer of Pal-V, said the biggest long-term
problem for mass-marketing such vehicles will not be piloting, but environmental
issues.

''Automatic pilots have already been out there for a long time, and they are
already experimenting with the electronics to let cars drive by themselves,'' he
said. ''The bigger challenge is getting away from the fossil fuels. You need
something renewable that will not increase carbon dioxide emissions.''

Dr. Bülthoff said he believed small, light helicopters could be competitive
because they would avoid sitting in traffic and travel more directly, though
environmental groups might take some convincing.

As for my own test flight, it went great. Landing isn't a big deal, is it?
Toward the end, I confused my hand on the throttle with the hand on the altitude
lever, and seemed to go into some kind of stall. Bells started ringing, and Dr.
White had to step in and momentarily take control. Suddenly, I felt 16 all over
again.

Next time, I'll take the one with autopilot.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/17/science/a-helicopter-of-ones-own.html

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mark D. White, the laboratory  manager, in the flight simulator
at the University of Liverpool.  Researchers are working on  making a personal
helicopter  easy to fly for ordinary people,  part of the MyCopter project
funded by the European Union. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW TESTA FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


