                             1344 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2014 Friday
                        The International New York Times

America and Iran Can Save Iraq

BYLINE: By MOHAMMAD ALI SHABANI

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg.

LENGTH: 976 words


To save Iraq from Sunni extremists, Iran is mobilizing its allies in Iraq and
promoting collaboration between Iraq's government and Syria. Washington,
meanwhile, has dispatched military advisers to Baghdad. On their own, these
efforts are valiant. But without coordination, they won't be fruitful.

Iraq was until recently a battleground between Iran and the United States. A
string of American military commanders battled Gen. Qassim Suleimani, head of
foreign operations for Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards, for influence. At
the height of the American occupation, Iran's handful of men in Iraq wielded
more power than the 150,000 American forces stationed there.

Despite their largely adversarial past, the two countries can now save Iraq if
they act together. History has shown that Iran and the United States are capable
of pulling Iraq away from the abyss. The civil war that plagued the country from
2006 to 2008 offers lessons in how to stop the current bloodshed.

Back then, Iran was the only country that could pressure Syria to block the
Sunni jihadist pipeline, while reining in the Shiite death squads that were bent
on ridding the Iraqi capital of Sunnis. And the United States, as an occupying
power, was able to approach and co-opt rebellious Sunni tribes. Without
coordination, these efforts would have failed.

The head of the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq at the time, Abdul Aziz
al-Hakim, and President Jalal Talabani struggled to get Washington and Tehran to
work together. Despite the collapse of the nuclear negotiations that were then
taking place between Iran and the European Union, the United States and Iran
managed to cooperate.

The first crucial step toward ending the violence was tacit American-Iranian
support for Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. After becoming prime minister, Mr. Maliki
returned the favor. Within a year of his inauguration, in the summer of 2007,
Iranian and American diplomats met in his office -- the first senior-level
meeting between the two adversaries in almost 30 years.

Mr. Hakim and Mr. Talabani are no longer on the political stage. But Mr. Maliki
is. Despite his authoritarian tendencies and his failure to integrate Sunnis
into the political process, he remains the least unpopular Iraqi politician
today. His success in the April 30 election is proof of that.

And Iran and America still agree on keeping Mr. Maliki in power -- largely for
lack of better options. Despite rumblings in Congress, Secretary of Defense
Chuck Hagel has stated that ''the question of whether Maliki should step down is
an internal Iraqi matter.'' And President Obama didn't hesitate to send military
personnel back into Iraq.

The outcome of the Sunni offensive is predictable. ISIS will fail in holding and
governing captured territory because Iraqi Sunnis are unwilling to conform to
the visions of state and society espoused by ISIS. America's earlier success in
turning some Iraqi Sunnis against militant extremists is proof, and Mr. Maliki
knows this. While Sunni political integration is crucial, violence should not be
rewarded with concessions. ISIS and its allies must be repelled from major urban
centers and border crossings before any talks with pragmatic militants can
occur.

Iraq's Sunnis must either accept the realities of the country's new political
order, which is dominated by Shiites and Kurds, or condemn themselves to the
perennial instability and violence brought on by the extremists in their ranks
and the foreign fighters who have joined them.

The Kurds also face difficult choices. For years they have lived in the twilight
between independence and federalism. The United States and Iran must impress
upon Kurdish leaders that using the current turmoil to gain concessions from
Baghdad on issues such as independent oil exports and the future of the disputed
city of Kirkuk will backfire. Washington is loath to take sides between Erbil
and Baghdad. And if it does, it is unlikely to act to antagonize Mr. Maliki.
Neither will Tehran.

Iran and America must also manage external spoilers. Saudi Arabia has long
seemed unwilling to accept the realities of the new Iraq. But the kingdom can be
flexible when intransigence seems self-defeating. Washington must impress upon
the Saudis that the fire of extremism will inevitably enter the heart of the
Arabian Peninsula unless action is taken to halt support for militancy. Indeed,
in a twist of calculations, America may actually now share Iran's interest in
seeing ISIS's other major foe, the Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad, go after
Sunni extremists. Mr. Assad's warplanes are now bombing militants on the Iraqi
border, which they were not doing last week.

Iran and the United States should also seek to divide ISIS. If the group is only
confronted in Iraq, it will withdraw to Syria to return another day. The United
States can't and shouldn't act as Iraq's air force. But American military and
technological prowess -- in the form of sales of drones, helicopters and fighter
jets -- should be combined with Iranian and Syrian intelligence to prevent the
movement of extremists.

Finally, Iran and the United States must boost the Iraqi Army's strength and
prevent the rise of militias. Mr. Maliki claims that thousands of volunteers who
have signed up to fight ISIS will be the core of the next Iraqi Army, but he
needs enough political, military and intelligence help from America and Iran so
that he won't have to rely on irregular forces. Any shift away from the army and
toward the militias would be profound and unpredictable.

Despite their differences, Tehran and Washington both need a stable Iraq. If not
for the good of Iraqis, they should cooperate for the sake of their own
interests.

Mohammad Ali Shabani is a doctoral candidate focusing on Iranian policy toward
post-Saddam Iraq at the University of London's School of Oriental and African
Studies.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/opinion/america-and-iran-can-save-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


