                             1331 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Seizes Suspect in Deadly Assault in Benghazi in '12

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER ERIC SCHMITT and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Charlie Savage
contributed reporting from Washington, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1557 words


WASHINGTON -- American commandos operating under the cover of night seized the
man suspected of leading the deadly attack on the United States Mission in
Benghazi, Libya, the government announced on Tuesday, ending a manhunt that had
dragged on for nearly two years and inflamed domestic and international
politics.

With drones hovering overhead, about two dozen Delta Force commandos and two or
three F.B.I. agents descended on the outskirts of Benghazi just after midnight
local time on Monday; grabbed the suspect, Ahmed Abu Khattala; stuffed him into
a vehicle and raced away, according to officials briefed on the operation. No
shots were fired, and the suspect was spirited out of Libya to a United States
Navy warship in the Mediterranean.

The capture was a breakthrough in finding the perpetrators of an episode that
has been politically divisive from the start. President Obama and the State
Department have been buffeted by multiple investigations and charges of
misleading the public about the circumstances of the attack, which cost the
lives of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans on Sept.
11, 2012. The president and administration officials have strongly rebutted the
allegations and accused Republicans of politicizing a national tragedy.

Through it all, Mr. Abu Khattala has remained free, at times almost taunting the
United States to catch him, eliciting more criticism of Mr. Obama for not doing
enough to bring him to justice. In recent months, Mr. Abu Khattala had gone
underground. But officials said new intelligence obtained last week indicated
that he was going to be in a place that was ''advantageous,'' as one put it,
because there would be few people around and less risk to American commandos.
Mr. Obama gave the order on Friday to capture him.

''It's important for us to send a message to the world that when Americans are
attacked, no matter how long it takes, we will find those responsible, and we
will bring them to justice,'' Mr. Obama said during an unrelated trip to
Pittsburgh on Tuesday. ''And that's a message I sent the day after it happened,
and regardless of how long it takes, we will find you.''

The capture provided a rare piece of good news for Mr. Obama at a time when
challenges have mushroomed in places like Iraq, Syria and Ukraine. Yet even a
casualty-free raid generated further debate, in this case about what should
happen to Mr. Abu Khattala.

Officials said he would be brought to the United States in the coming days to
face charges in a civilian court. A sealed indictment sworn out secretly last
July and made public on Tuesday outlined three counts against him in connection
with the deaths of Mr. Stevens, Glen A. Doherty, Sean Smith and Tyrone S. Woods.
But some Republicans argued that Mr. Abu Khattala was a terrorist who should be
sent to the American military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and held as an
enemy combatant.

Either way, the operation brought relief to relatives who had been eager for
some sort of action to find the organizers of the attack. ''It's about time,''
said Charles Woods, the father of Tyrone Woods, on Tuesday.

''We've been trying to be patient, and we're very happy that this does seem part
of the course of justice,'' said Greg Doherty, Glen Doherty's brother. ''They
assured us that this is not the end of their efforts, and they have a lot of
good people working hard, and they haven't forgotten us.''

Even as they hailed the capture, Obama administration officials were vague in
explaining why it took so long to go after Mr. Abu Khattala, who was linked to
the attack shortly after it happened and even gave an interview to a New York
Times reporter over a strawberry frappé on a hotel patio without apparent fear
of being found.

Some American officials, who, like others, declined to be identified discussing
sensitive operations, said there had been a proposal to capture Mr. Abu Khattala
for at least a year. But it was not clear that Mr. Obama had considered such a
plan. ''It is not true that the president has had the operation sitting on his
desk for a year,'' said another official familiar with the White House's point
of view.

Officials said they had been waiting for the right combination of factors that
would enable them to know where Mr. Abu Khattala would be at a specific time, in
a situation that would minimize the chances of casualties.

While Mr. Abu Khattala had kept a fairly high profile in Libya at first, he
changed his pattern after American commandos seized the terror suspect Nazih
Abdul-Hamed al-Ruqai in October in a daylight raid in Tripoli, according to a
law enforcement official. He became more difficult to track as he moved around
quietly to evade detection, the official said. Then, last week, the official
said, the United States obtained information about his whereabouts that enabled
an operation.

''We had finally worked out a scenario where we felt it was right operationally
to be able to pull it off,'' another official said. ''The circumstances were
right; the environment was right.''

Government agencies on Tuesday brushed off critics who asked why the authorities
had needed so long to grab a man who met openly with a reporter. ''Frankly, it's
not a surprise that an individual like this would show up for an interview,''
said Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman. ''We don't think they would
show up for a scheduled meeting with the Special Forces.''

Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, the Pentagon spokesman, scoffed at the idea that Mr.
Abu Khattala should have been captured earlier. ''The presumption in the
question is that, you know, he was going to McDonald's for milkshakes every
Friday night, and we could have just picked him up in a taxicab,'' he said. ''I
mean, these people deliberately tried to evade capture.''

By the time the president made the decision on Friday, officials said, his
national security team was unanimous in supporting both the operation and the
decision to bring Mr. Abu Khattala back to the United States for a civilian
trial.

Both the Pentagon and the State Department referred to the operation as a
''unilateral U.S. action.'' An administration official said the United States
had not told the Libyan government until after the operation, a choice that
guarded against possible leaks and enabled Libyan officials to deny any
involvement in case the capture led to popular protests.

The raid proceeded without complication, officials said. ''It was very clean, in
and out, with no one hurt,'' said one official briefed on the details. ''It was
textbook,'' said another.

The Washington Post first reported Mr. Abu Khattala's arrest. The Post said it
had learned of the operation on Monday but agreed to delay its story after a
request from the White House citing security concerns.

While the Delta Force soldiers provided the muscle, the raid was carried out
under law enforcement authority, not as a military operation under the
longstanding congressional authorization of force against Al Qaeda and its
associated forces, according to administration officials.

The extent of ties between Mr. Abu Khattala's militia in Libya, Ansar
al-Shariah, and Al Qaeda has been a matter of dispute. While the two groups
share similar ideologies, the United States government does not believe them to
be formally affiliated.

The F.B.I. agents who participated in the operation were told to preserve any
evidence and to ensure that the suspect was interrogated under criminal justice
procedures. ''This entire operation, from start to finish, was law
enforcement,'' one official said.

That does not mean that Mr. Abu Khattala was read a Miranda warning of his right
to remain silent and have legal counsel. The Obama administration has adopted a
policy of delaying that warning for extensive questioning of suspected
operational terrorists.

Mr. Abu Khattala faces charges of killing a person in the course of an armed
attack on a federal facility, providing material support to terrorists and using
a firearm in the commission of a violent crime. ''We retain the option of adding
additional charges in the coming days,'' Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.
said in a statement.

Among those relieved by the capture was former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton, who has been broadly criticized for her handling of the Benghazi
attack.

''It took, as you know, 10 years to bring Osama bin Laden to justice,'' she said
on CNN during an event to promote her new book. ''It's taken more than two years
to bring this perpetrator to justice.'' But, she added, ''Khattala has been very
much on the minds of our law enforcement, our military and our intelligence
professionals since that night in September of 2012.''

Still, others cautioned about celebrating too soon, noting that Mr. Abu Khattala
was just one person suspected in the mass attack on the diplomatic post in
Benghazi. ''I wouldn't say we've broken the back by any stretch of the
imagination,'' Representative Mike Rogers, a Michigan Republican and the
chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said on MSNBC.

''This was an important activity to happen, to take someone like Khattala off
the battlefield,'' Mr. Rogers said. ''It sends a very clear message in Libya
that we haven't gone away.'' But, he added, ''there's over a dozen individuals
of interest, I think, that the United States needs to gather up.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/world/middleeast/us-captures-benghazi-suspect.
html

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The United States Mission in Benghazi, Libya, in flames on
Sept. 11, 2012. Officials believe Ahmed Abu Khattala led the attack. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY ESAM OMRAN AL-FETORI/REUTERS)
 Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens was one of four Americans killed in the
attack, which has been highly politically divisive. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN DENTON
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


