                             1389 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 24, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Behind the Controls and Navigating the Skies

BYLINE: By KIT EATON

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Personal Tech; APP SMART; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 718 words


FLIGHT simulators are one of the most enduring types of computer games. For
years, they were primarily played on traditional PCs, but many smartphones and
tablets are now powerful enough to give simulator apps the realistic look and
feel of swooping and soaring through the sky.

Infinite Flight, which is $5 on iOS and Android, is easily the most impressive
flight simulator for mobile devices. The app has realistic graphics and
sophisticated controls that simulate many aspects of flying real aircraft. It
also comes with a number of aircraft, and locations to fly around.

To start, select an aircraft type, like a small Cessna or the powerful F-18
fighter. Next choose a location and some basic weather options.

Then you're immediately transported to the cockpit, with a beautiful view of the
sky and ground and a display of the important aircraft controls. Don't panic at
the sheer number of buttons and dials, though, as the app has some introductory
lessons for guidance.

Once you've learned how to control the speed, fly safely without stalling, and
navigate -- a trickier task than you may imagine, because you must tilt your
phone to maneuver the plane -- then take some time to enjoy the view. The ground
is shown in pretty persuasive detail, as are mountains and seas. With a few
taps, you can change the camera view to look at the aircraft from the outside.

The game has other options besides flying around and trying to land on different
runways. You can strive to accumulate achievements, and if you don't want to fly
the entire route to distant runways, there's even an autopilot mode.

More locations and aircraft cost $3 to $5. Also, be aware that the image quality
sometimes becomes a little jerky, and the engine sounds can occasionally be
annoying -- though they can be turned off.

X Plane 9, which is $5 on iPhone and free on Android, is a well-known brand of
flight simulator, and in many ways, it's comparable to Infinite Flight. The app
emphasizes realism and is packed with technical details for handling and
navigation. Users can even change the weather and time of day to alter the look
and feel of the flying environment.

X Plane is a little more daunting for beginners than Infinite Flight, and it has
less step-by-step instruction, but it is extraordinarily convincing in many ways
thanks to its complexity. It also lacks a feeling of gameplay, which may limit
its fun.

On iPhones and smaller Android devices, the small screen may be frustrating,
particularly when the planes' controls are on the display. However, a separate
$10 iPad version makes good use of the larger screen and has better graphics.

For a slightly more gamelike app, try Flight Unlimited Las Vegas, which is $3 on
iOS and Android. It offers staged missions for zipping around the Las Vegas
landscape. The game has some great-looking 3-D graphics of famous landmarks, and
you can choose different planes to fly, including a Learjet or A10 tank buster.
Alternative locations and planes are available for $1 to $2.

But this isn't a pure simulation game. The flight controls are simpler than X
Plane's and it won't take months to play through the content. Still, it is
definitely entertaining.

The silly-sounding 3-D Plane Flying Parking Simulator Game, free on iOS, takes
over a lot of the aircraft systems for you, but still offers a sense of
controlling a big airliner, bomber or even a drone. This app is all about its
gameplay: You have to fly through hoops in the sky above a slightly
cartoonish-looking terrain and land on improbably placed runways atop cliffs and
hidden in island valleys.

There's some sense of playing a flight simulator, but your control of the
aircraft is mainly limited to speed and pointing it in the right direction. The
real emphasis in this app is on problem-solving, with in-game purchases to add
puzzles: Each costs $5.

None of these games is going to let you get into the cockpit of a real aircraft
and fly it. But I've been at the controls of several planes, and I can say the
games do capture a tiny bit of the delight of flight.

Quick Call

Soundwave, a social listening and sharing app for music, has had a big makeover.
The new version now includes group chats and personalized recommendations for
other users to follow based on your listening tastes. Soundwave is free on iOS
and Android.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/24/technology/personaltech/circle-the-skies-from-
your-smartphone-or-tablet.html

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Left, Infinite Flight has realistic graphics
above, 3-D Plane Flying Parking Simulator emphasizes problemsolving
  below, X Plane lets users change the weather.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


