                             1381 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 17, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Through Lens, 4 Boys Dead by Gaza Shore

BYLINE: By TYLER HICKS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 457 words


GAZA CITY -- My day here began at 6 a.m. Photographing something as
unpredictable as war still has a routine.

It is important to be out the door at first light to document the destruction of
the last night's bombings. By midmorning, I check in at the hospital's morgue to
see if families have come to pick up the dead for burial.

When the routine is broken, it is because things can go horribly wrong in an
instant. That is how it happened in Libya in 2011, when three colleagues and I
were taken captive by government soldiers and our driver was killed.

On Wednesday, that sudden change of fortune came to four young Palestinian boys
playing on a beach in Gaza City.

I had returned to my small seaside hotel around 4 p.m. to file photos to New
York when I heard a loud explosion. My driver and I rushed to the window to see
what had happened. A small shack atop a sea wall at the fishing port had been
struck by an Israeli bomb or missile and was burning. A young boy emerged from
the smoke, running toward the adjacent beach.

I grabbed my cameras and was putting on body armor and a helmet when, about 30
seconds after the first blast, there was another. The boy I had seen running was
now dead, lying motionless in the sand, along with three other boys who had been
playing there.

By the time I reached the beach, I was winded from running with my heavy armor.
I paused; it was too risky to go onto the exposed sand. Imagine what my
silhouette, captured by an Israeli drone, might look like as a grainy image on a
laptop somewhere in Israel: wearing body armor and a helmet, carrying cameras
that could be mistaken for weapons. If children are being killed, what is there
to protect me, or anyone else?

I watched as a group of people ran to the children's aid. I joined them, running
with the feeling that I would find safety in numbers, though I understood that
feeling could be deceptive: Crowds can make things worse. We arrived at the
scene to find lifeless, mangled bodies. The boys were beyond help. They had been
killed instantly, and the people who had rushed to them were shocked and
distraught.

Earlier in the day, I had photographed the funeral for a man and a 12-year-old
boy. They had been killed when a bomb hit the car in which they were riding
south of Gaza City, severely injuring an older woman with them.

There is no safe place in Gaza right now. Bombs can land at any time, anywhere.

A small metal shack with no electricity or running water on a jetty in the
blazing seaside sun does not seem like the kind of place frequented by Hamas
militants, the Israel Defense Forces' intended targets. Children, maybe four
feet tall, dressed in summer clothes, running from an explosion, don't fit the
description of Hamas fighters, either.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/17/world/middleeast/through-lens-4-boys-dead-by-g
aza-shore.html

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


