                             1333 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Put Language Aside, Then Let the Music Take Time to Speak

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 549 words


Nina Garenetska makes an unlikely rapper. Along with the two other women in the
Ukrainian band DakhaBrakha, which performed on Monday night at Brookfield
Place's Winter Garden, she was wearing a white lace wedding dress, a tall black
lamb-fur hat and half a dozen beaded necklaces. Ms. Garenetska was also holding
her cello, painted with bright geometric designs.

And while Marko Halanevych played mournful accordion chords, Olena Tsibulska
tapped a slow beat on a tom-tom and Iryna Kovalenko switched between twanging a
jaw-harp and playing piano, Ms. Garenetska was bowing long tones on her cello
and rapping verse after verse. But the lyrics weren't urban: They were from a
traditional Carpathian mountain song about a prospective bride's
less-than-stellar suitors.

That mesh of ancient and contemporary is DakhaBrakha's mission. DakhaBrakha --
which means give-take in old Ukrainian -- has researched rural folk songs across
Ukraine, then reshaped them: first as the house band for a theater company in
Kiev, and now on the international circuit.

The songs are often from ritual occasions, like weddings and funerals.
DakhaBrakha revels in the potent, sometimes pungent chordal singing and
counterpoint that overlaps Eastern Europe and the Balkans; the three women's
voices, solo or merged, are at the core of the music. But the old songs are
recast and kicked into gear by nontraditional rhythms and strategies: an
extended Minimalist drone in one song, a beat from Senegal or Brazil or Jamaica
in others, and a pizzicato cello bass line hinting at American R&B in the
English-language song ''Specially for You,'' which had Mr. Halanevych singing in
soul-man falsetto.

There's playfulness, too. One song began and ended with long, quiet stretches of
simulated birdcalls, as if DakhaBrakha had happened onto the music in a forest.

Perhaps the theater affiliation taught DakhaBrakha how to pace its dramatic ups
and downs: By the end of the set, across the language barrier, listeners were
clapping and whooping along. The finale was a love song, ''Baby,'' in English
and Ukrainian. Before it, Mr. Halanevych unfurled a Ukrainian flag and dedicated
the song with ''love from free Ukraine.''

The concert was part of the Global Beat Festival presented by Arts Brookfield
and curated by the world-music presenters Live Sounds. Sharing the bill was Poor
Rich Boy, an indie-rock band from Lahore, Pakistan, that has been touring the
East Coast under the State Department's Center Stage cultural exchange program.
Its music looks West: Nearly all of the lyrics are in English, set to gently
building folk-pop and to the spiraling guitar lines and shifty meters of
psychedelia and progressive rock.

But the songs have their own distinct perspective. Poor Rich Boy's two
songwriters and lead singers, Shahzad Noor and Umer Khan, are both fervent and
oblique. Their lyrics glimpse tensions and longings, both personal and societal;
they touch on affection, sorrow, uncertainty and violence, offering more
conundrums than lessons. They sang a song, ''Kaghazi,'' in Urdu, whose lyrics,
about friends who had become enemies, offered ''We'll burn our hearts to light
the way for them.''

Poor Rich Boy will perform on Thursday in the free concert series at the
Rubenstein Atrium at Lincoln Center; lincolncenter.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/arts/music/dakhabrakha-plays-at-the-global-bea
t-festival.html

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Global Beat Festival: The Ukrainian band DakhaBrakha was
featured in this concert, presented at Brookfield Place's Winter Garden, on
Monday evening.
 Shahzad Noor, one of the lead singers of the Pakistani band  Poor Rich Boy.
Nearly all of the band's lyrics are in English. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRISTOPHER
GREGORY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


