                             1308 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama's Foreign Policy Book

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 891 words


SULAIMANIYA, Iraq -- When President Obama sits down to write his foreign policy
memoir he may be tempted to use as his book title the four words he reportedly
uses privately to summarize the Obama doctrine: ''Don't Do Stupid Stuff'' (with
''stuff'' sometimes defined more spicily).

Up to now, that approach has not served the country badly -- fight where you
must, fix what you can, work with allies wherever possible but never forget that
using force is not the sole criteria for seriousness, considering, as Obama
noted in a speech last week, that the wars that costs us the most were those we
leapt into without proper preparation or allies and ''without leveling with the
American people about the sacrifice required.''

So ''Don't Do Stupid Stuff'' would certainly work as a book title today. But
sitting here in Kurdistan -- a true island of decency near the epicenter of what
is now the biggest civil war on the planet, between Sunnis and Shiites,
stretching from Iran across Iraq and Syria into Lebanon -- I think Obama may
eventually opt for a different book title: ''Present at the Disintegration.''

Obama has been on duty when the world has come unstuck in more ways than any
recent president. George H.W. Bush dealt deftly with the collapse of the Soviet
Union. Bill Clinton was the first president who had to fire cruise missiles at a
person -- Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan -- in the first battle ever between a
superpower and a superempowered angry man. When that superempowered angry man
struck our homeland on 9/11, George W. Bush responded with two invasions.

Obama has had to confront the culmination of all these trends, and more: the
blowback from both invasions; a weak, humiliated but still dangerous Russia; a
drone war against many more superempowered angry men from Yemen to Pakistan; the
simultaneous disintegration of traditional Arab states and the nuclearization of
Iran; plus the decline of ''spheres of influence'' dictated by traditional
powers from above and the rise of ''people of influence'' emerging from the
squares and social networks below. These Square People have challenged
everything from Russia's sphere of influence in Ukraine to the right of the
pro-U.S. Egyptian military to keep ruling Egypt.

Dealing with all these at once has been a doctrinal and tactical challenge,
especially when combined with an exhausted U.S. public and an economic recession
sapping defense spending.

Obviously, Obama would much prefer that his foreign policy memoir be called
''Present at the Re-Integration'' -- at the forging of a new, stable pro-Western
order. But that is so much harder today than Obama critics allow. Hey, it was
relatively easy to be a hero on foreign policy when the main project was
deterrence of another superpower. Just be steadfast and outspend them on
defense. Where that is still necessary, with Russia and China, Obama has done
O.K.

But when so much foreign policy involves dealing with countries that are falling
apart or an entire region engulfed in civil war -- and the only real solutions
are not deterrence but transforming societies that are completely unlike our own
and lack the necessary building blocks and we already spent $2 trillion on such
projects in Iraq and Afghanistan with little to show for it -- the notion that
Obama might be a little wary about getting more deeply involved in Syria and is
not waxing eloquent about the opportunity does not strike me as crazy.

I never believed that with just a few more arms early on the Syrian
''democrats'' would have toppled President Bashar al-Assad and all would have
been fine. The Shiite/Alawites in Syria were never leaving quietly, and Iran,
Russia and Hezbollah would have made sure of it. And does anyone believe that
Saudi Arabia, our main ally in the Syrian fight, is trying to promote the same
thing we are there, a pluralistic democracy, which is precisely what the Saudis
do not allow in their own country?

Yes, being in Kurdistan, it is clear that the metastasizing of the Syrian
conflict has reached a stage where it is becoming a factory for thousands of
jihadists from Europe, Central Asia, Russia, the Arab world and even America,
who are learning, as one Syrian Kurdish leader told me, ''to chop people's heads
off and then go back home.'' The conflict is also, as an Iraqi Kurdish security
expert added, legitimizing Al Qaeda's shift ''from the caves of Afghanistan into
the mainstream of the Arab world'' as defenders of Sunni Islam. These are big
threats.

But when I ask Kurds what to do, the answer I get is that arming decent Syrians,
as Obama has vowed to do more of, might help bring Assad to the table, but
''there is no conventional military solution'' -- neither Shiites nor Sunnis
will decisively beat the other, remarked a former deputy prime minister of Iraq,
Barham Salih. ''But walking away is not possible anymore.'' Syria is spinning
off too much instability now.

The only solution, they say, is for the U.S. and Russia (how likely is that!) to
broker a power-sharing deal in Syria between Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran and
their proxies. Repeat after me: There is no military solution to Syria -- and
Iran and Russia have to be part of any diplomatic one. Those are the kind of
unpleasant, unromantic, totally long-shot foreign policy choices the real world
throws up these days. A little humility, please.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/opinion/sunday/friedman-obamas-foreign-policy-
book.html

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


