                             1330 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Balancing Act on Iraq

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 578 words


President Obama has, so far, struck the right note on Iraq, where Sunni
extremist militants are seizing territory and threatening the existence of the
state. He has been cautious -- emphasizing the need for political reform in Iraq
and reaching out to other countries that could have an impact on its fate.

His opening to Iran has been the most controversial and potentially the most
important move. Iran has the most leverage with the Shiite-led government in
Baghdad and its prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. The United States has been
negotiating with Iran for months over Iran's nuclear program, but the agenda had
not gone beyond that until Mr. Obama sent a senior State Department official to
discuss Iraq with an Iranian official in Vienna this week. The two countries
cooperated on Afghanistan in 2001 against the Taliban, and, in theory, they
should be able to find common interest in stabilizing Iraq.

Mr. Obama has called on Mr. Maliki to form a broadly representative government
of Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds as a condition of any military action by the United
States. The American ambassador in Iraq and a senior State Department official
have been pressing that issue in Baghdad. Even so, Mr. Maliki on Tuesday refused
to reach out to Sunnis. Maybe Iran can make him hear the message.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria -- the rebel group known as ISIS that is
sweeping across Iraq -- is also waging war in Syria, commingling those conflicts
and fueling Sunni-Shiite tensions throughout the Middle East. Mr. Obama and his
aides have been consulting regional leaders, whose interests would be severely
threatened by an Iraq in total collapse, whether they acknowledge it or not.
Turkey, for instance, should shut its border to militants and to materiel
flowing into Syria and Iraq. And Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other gulf states need
to stop financing (directly or indirectly) ISIS, which began as an Al Qaeda
affiliate, and other extremist groups.

President Obama has said Iraq needs support to ''break the momentum of extremist
groups'' and that he is considering his options, including military action. If
there is a case for military action, Mr. Obama still needs to make it.

Speculation in recent days has focused on airstrikes by drones or planes against
militant targets; if they are ordered, officials say they are likely to be
isolated and tactical, like American operations in Yemen, and Iraqi forces would
have to follow up on the ground.

If Mr. Obama decides to take military action, he must make it clear that it
would not be done to support Mr. Maliki's government, but to disrupt the
militants' momentum while the Iraqi Army regroups.

In the meantime, the administration has to develop better intelligence on the
militants' movements. It plans to provide more weapons to the Iraqi Army, even
though major units disintegrated as the militants swept through northern Iraq.
American officials say there are still capable Iraqi units to build on, but that
seems a risky bet.

Whatever action Mr. Obama takes, it must be grounded in a larger political
strategy that considers the full spectrum of sectarian dangers that are roiling
the region. On Monday night, militants reached Baquba, about 40 miles north of
Baghdad, before being turned back. In a horrific show of sectarian reprisal, 44
Sunni prisoners held in a Baquba police station, controlled by the Shiite-led
government, were killed by the police as the Sunni militants attacked the
station.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/opinion/a-balancing-act-on-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


