                             1353 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gunmen Fire on Nigerian Churchgoers

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 638 words


BAUCHI, Nigeria -- Gunmen fired at worshipers and burned four churches on Sunday
in a village just miles from the town where more than 200 schoolgirls were
kidnapped, witnesses said.

At least 30 bodies had been recovered, but more were turning up in the bushes,
where people tried to escape from the violence in the village of Kwada, said a
member of a vigilante group organized to repel such attacks.

''They killed dozens of people and burned houses after attacking worshipers,''
the vigilante, Mallam Yahi, said by telephone after he fled to the nearby town
of Chibok, in the northeastern state of Borno, where the girls were abducted in
April.

Mr. Yahi said the attackers, believed to be members of the extremist group Boko
Haram, went on to Kautikari, where they shot villagers and burned down homes. He
said that members of his group had not yet reached Kautikari, so they did not
know what the death toll was there.

A police spokesman, Gideon Jubrin, said he could not confirm the attacks because
poor communications had kept officials from reaching the nearest security post
at Chibok, but reporters were able to make cellphone calls to the town, which is
six miles from Kwada and four miles from Kautikari. Angry Chibok residents said
soldiers were slow to respond to news of the attack, and the vigilantes said
that once they reached Kwada, the soldiers refused to confront the gunmen
directly, only shooting at them from a distance outside the village. They spoke
on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals from the military.

Boko Haram extremists attacked a military camp in the neighboring local
government area of Damboa last week and killed at least 51 soldiers. Survivors
said the militants arrived in armored personnel carriers mounted with
antiaircraft guns and were armed with rocket launchers and submachine guns much
heavier than the soldiers' AK-47 assault rifles. The insurgents abducted many
soldiers who remain missing, they said.

Boko Haram extremists are demanding the release of detained fighters in return
for the kidnapped girls. President Goodluck Jonathan has been criticized for the
slow reaction to the abductions and the failure to swiftly rescue the girls. The
United States has drones flying to help locate them, and other nations have sent
experts to help, but negotiations appear to be stalled.

Nigeria's military has said it knows where the girls are, but fears any military
campaign could get them killed.

Mr. Jonathan on Sunday condemned other recent attacks -- Friday's bombing of a
hotel that local reports identified as a brothel in the state of Bauchi, also in
the northeast, and the killings of farmers, mainly Christians, by attackers
believed to be Fulani Muslim herders in the northern state of Kaduna.

''The president commiserates with all the families who lost loved ones in the
heinous attacks and extends his heartfelt sympathies to all those who suffered
injuries or lost their properties during the wanton assaults on Bauchi and
Kaduna States,'' said a statement. He promised the attackers would be brought to
justice.

Mr. Jonathan made no mention of the near-daily attacks Boko Haram extremists
have been mounting in the area around Chibok, an enclave of mainly Christian
people in the majority-Muslim northern part of the country. The states of Bauchi
and Kaduna are governed by Mr. Jonathan's governing party, while Borno is held
by an opposition governor.

A yearlong military state of emergency in three northeastern states, all held by
political opponents of Mr. Jonathan, has failed to curb the five-year-old
Islamic uprising that has killed thousands of people. The militants have
increased the tempo and deadliness of attacks this year, with more than 2,000
people estimated to have been killed so far this year compared with 3,600 in the
four previous years combined.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/world/africa/boko-haram-gunmen-fire-on-nigeria
n-churchgoers.html

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Boko Haram, a militant Islamist group, is suspected in attacks
on Nigerian churches as well as  other attacks, including one Friday in Bauchi
on this hotel, which local reports called a brothel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


