                             1334 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama and Lawmakers Meet to Discuss Iraq Action

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR and MARK LANDLER; Jeremy W. Peters contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 810 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama and congressional leaders on Wednesday privately
confronted the politically delicate question of whether Mr. Obama would be
required to ask Congress for permission to take military action against Sunni
fighters in Iraq, but emerged from an hourlong Oval Office meeting with
different views of what was said.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, told reporters
afterward that the president indicated that he would keep lawmakers posted on
his Iraq deliberations but did not intend to seek additional authorization if he
chooses to provide military assistance to the Iraqi government.

But White House officials and Democratic aides said Mr. Obama did not rule out
the possibility of coming to Congress for a vote to back his actions, depending
on what he decides to do. Mr. Obama, they said, told the lawmakers that
administration lawyers were looking at the legal implications of potential
actions, which officials have said could include targeted drone strikes but
would not involve combat troops.

''I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals about action the president might take
since, as we discussed earlier, he is still reviewing his options when it comes
to direct action,'' Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, said before the
meeting. ''So I think I would say we'll cross that bridge when we get there, if
we get there.''

The congressional debates to authorize the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq more
than a decade ago were among the most contentious in recent memory. And after
more than a decade of war, many lawmakers remain deeply wary of again taking up
the issue. Indeed, the prospect of a messy debate over war is something that
Democrats would like to avoid in the middle of an election year.

Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, has told Democrats that he
thinks the president has the authority to move without approval from Congress to
pursue any action short of using ground forces, and that he should do so. The
authorizations to use force in Afghanistan and Iraq remain in place. But White
House officials said the question of whether they would apply to new action in
Iraq would depend on exactly what military actions, if any, Mr. Obama decided to
take.

The meeting on Wednesday did little to make clear whether Mr. Obama had decided
on a course of action in Iraq, where Sunni militants have seized several cities
north of Baghdad. In separate statements, White House officials and lawmakers
only disclosed that the president had reviewed his options with congressional
leaders.

''I do not believe the president needs any further legislative authority to
pursue the particular options for increased security assistance discussed
today,'' Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, said
after the meeting.

In addition to Mr. McConnell and Ms. Pelosi, the meeting included Mr. Reid and
House Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio.

A statement by the White House said that Mr. Obama provided ''an update on the
administration's efforts to respond to the threat'' from a group that the White
House calls the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. ''He also reviewed our
efforts to strengthen the capacity of Iraq's security forces to confront the
threat from ISIL, including options for increased security assistance.'' (The
group is also known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS.)

The meeting recalled a similar session between the president and lawmakers at
the White House in September at which the president sought the backing of House
leaders for a threatened missile strike against Syria. Mr. Obama had put his
plans for such an attack on hold to seek a congressional mandate.

After that meeting, Mr. Boehner and the House majority leader, Representative
Eric Cantor of Virginia, both expressed support for military action, only to
find that an overwhelming majority of House members opposed any significant
engagement in the Syrian civil war.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, by a narrow margin, also approved giving
Mr. Obama limited authority for military action in Syria. But broader support in
the Senate never coalesced, and Mr. Obama ended up seizing a Russian proposal in
which Syria agreed to voluntarily relinquish its chemical weapons stockpiles.

White House officials noted that the Iraqi government was pleading for military
help, while strikes in Syria would have been waged against the government of
President Bashar al-Assad.

The Oval Office meeting took place amid intense debate about what Mr. Obama
should do in Iraq and who was to blame. In a Wall Street Journal op-ed article,
former Vice President Dick Cheney and Liz Cheney wrote that ''rarely has a U.S.
president been so wrong about so much at the expense of so many.''

Mr. Carney dismissed Mr. Cheney's criticism with a quip: ''Which president was
he talking about?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/19/world/middleeast/obama-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama addressed whether he would need approval for
military action in Iraq with,  clockwise from bottom right, Harry Reid, Nancy
Pelosi, Mitch McConnell and John A. Boehner. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


