                             1387 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Israelis on Edge of Battle, Rockets Put on a Show

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN; Rina Castelnuovo contributed reporting from Sderot,
Gabby Sobelman from Jerusalem, and Peter Baker from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 813 words


SDEROT, Israel -- The women and children trudge up the dusty hill between dusk
and sunset, some with dogs. The men stay long after dark, some with binoculars.
It is the closest thing to a front-row seat for the war between Israel and the
Gaza Strip, short of combat. Better than being stuck in a safe room somewhere
watching those talking heads on television.

Overhead, they can see Israeli drones and planes beaming light onto the darkened
battlefield. Below, across the road, Israeli tanks and troops are staging for
entry. Beyond, an orange glow -- could that be Shejaiya, the Gaza City
neighborhood where fighting has raged for three days? No, too far north:
Probably Beit Hanoun, the border town that has faced intense artillery shelling
since the invasion began.

Suddenly, shouts of ''Ooh, ooh!'' and everyone pointed up at two rockets soaring
from Gaza into Israel about 9 p.m. on Tuesday. ''Jerusalem,'' a veteran
hill-watcher said knowingly. They checked the Red Alert apps on their
cellphones: Turns out it was Gedera, a town closer to the coast. When the Iron
Dome system intercepted it, applause came from the crowd of perhaps 50.

''It's like we've been having a very bad toothache with a pain that's been
accumulating for years,'' said Shmuel Dahan, 51, a gardener who lives near the
hill. ''And we want to come and see the tooth being taken out.''

Mr. Dahan and other residents of Sderot, the town of 22,000 about a mile from
Gaza, have been coming to what they call Koby Hill -- named for Sderot's
security chief, Koby Harush -- since the first crude Qassam rockets were fired
in 2001. President Obama visited Sderot while a candidate in 2008, and Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu held a news conference atop the hill two years
later.

Israelis from around the country have flocked here, along with international
news crews, since July 9, when a Danish journalist posted to Twitter a photo
captioned ''Sderot Cinema,'' of spectators on the hill cheering the military
while munching popcorn. A CNN reporter was pulled from her post last week after
she used the word ''scum'' in a Twitter post to describe Israelis on the hill
who she said cheered airstrikes on Gaza and threatened to destroy her car.

The prime seats, on a white sofa, were saved for the so-called Sderot
Parliament, about a dozen middle-aged men who carved pieces of watermelon with a
paring knife and passed them around. Others brought beach chairs, or stood on
the beds of pickup trucks for a better view. Uzi Gahan, 42, a furniture painter
who lives in nearby Ashkelon, perched on a milk crate.

''In Ashkelon, everybody's hiding in their homes, above my head there's always
explosions,'' said Mr. Gahan, who sat next to his 67-year-old father, David, who
fought in Israel's 1967 and 1973 wars. ''Here, there's people. It's a good
atmosphere.''

Infamous as the bomb shelter capital of the world, Sderot has been the target of
2,322 rockets over the years, according to the Sderot Media Project. Residents
say they have long been begging the Israeli military for an intense assault like
that of the past two weeks. ''We are resilient and standing with you,'' read
banners around town, where many more cars are flying Israeli flags than, say, in
Jerusalem.

As the sun fell Tuesday, families took snacks and packs of underwear to a bus
full of reservists bunking in Sderot overnight before heading into Gaza. Some
had beards; a few, small beer bellies. Sagi Cohen, 31, an accountant, said he
got the call-up on Thursday night while on a movie date -- ''Transformers: Age
of Extinction'' -- and had spent the past four days training with his infantry
unit.

''We need to refresh,'' Mr. Cohen said. As for the date, he said: ''It was good.
I think she's worried now. I can't call.''

Up on Koby Hill, Sarai Yitzhaki said her boyfriend was in Gaza, along with two
young men she had known since they were in her mother's day care center. Ms.
Yitzhaki, 22, grew up in one of the Gaza settlements that Israel evacuated in
2005, so it is like watching a war on her own home.

''I'm not afraid from the loud noise, I'm used to it,'' she said. ''But I'm
afraid for my friends who are inside. All the explosions -- my heart stops
beating in the same second.''

Hanan Cohen, the unofficial spokesman of Koby Hill, said his wife thought he was
''meshuga'' -- crazy -- for coming. Two days ago, he and others said, two
rockets landed nearby. The exit from the tunnel through which Palestinian
militants infiltrated Israel on Monday morning, killing four Israeli soldiers,
is maybe 200 yards away. But when the local siren sounds, Mr. Cohen keeps his
seat on the white sofa.

Stores in Sderot have been closed for days, he explained, and he cannot stand
listening to any more chatter on the news. The hill, he said, offers ''nice
view, good air.''

''In the house you feel suffocated,'' he added. ''So people come here and they
relax.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/23/world/middleeast/on-the-edge-of-battle-rockets
-give-israelis-a-show.html

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Residents of Sderot, Israel, watching the war last week on Koby
Hill, a practice begun in 2001. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


