                             1394 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Facing Escalating Violence, U.S. Evacuates Staff From Its Embassy in Libya

BYLINE: By KAREEM FAHIM; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Paris, and
Osama Al-Fitory from Tripoli, Libya.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 793 words


CAIRO -- The United States closed its embassy in Libya on Saturday and evacuated
the embassy's staff under military guard, in what the State Department said was
a response to escalating violence in the Libyan capital, Tripoli.

Officials called the evacuation ''temporary'' and said they were looking for
ways to reopen the embassy, even as the State Department issued a new travel
warning on Saturday, advising United States citizens to leave Libya
''immediately.''

Weeks of heavy fighting between rival Libyan militias for control of Tripoli's
international airport had in recent days edged closer to the heavily fortified
embassy, which is on the main road to the airport. The clashes have all but
destroyed the airport, severely limiting air travel to Libya.

The embassy staff was evacuated over land, traveling in convoys to neighboring
Tunisia under the watch of United States military aircraft, according to a
Pentagon statement.

Speaking in Paris during a series of diplomatic meetings about Gaza, Secretary
of State John Kerry said that the embassy was evacuated because of
''freewheeling militia violence'' and that the embassy was only ''suspending''
activities.

The evacuation, which follows the withdrawal of other foreign diplomats,
deepened Libya's isolation at a moment when violence in the country appears to
be spiraling out of control. Libya's weak central government has been powerless
to halt weeks of broadening battles in Tripoli and in the eastern city of
Benghazi, the country's two largest cities, which have succumbed to a growing
lawlessness and bloodshed.

As the militiamen have fought with heavy weapons in residential neighborhoods,
with no central authority to stop them, armed groups have stepped up a campaign
of assassinations and kidnappings targeting political activists, journalists and
human rights workers.

The chaos has unnerved Libya's neighbors, including Egypt, which has expressed
alarm over militant groups operating on Libyan soil. Two weeks ago, the United
Nations withdrew its staff from Tripoli in response to the fighting there, and
on Friday, Turkey announced that it had suspended operations at its embassy in
Tripoli.

The United States last closed its embassy in February 2011, during the Libyan
revolt against the country's longtime dictator, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. The
Obama administration later opened a diplomatic post in eastern Libya, in
Benghazi, an area that was under the control of anti-Qaddafi forces.

In September 2012, militants attacked the Benghazi mission, as well as a nearby
annex used by the Central Intelligence Agency, killing the ambassador, J.
Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans. The embassy in Tripoli had
served as a base for investigators from the Department of Justice investigating
the Benghazi attack.

In the last few days, shells fell near the embassy as the militias clashed using
heavy weapons, residents said. The current United States ambassador, Deborah K.
Jones, wrote about the approaching violence on Twitter. ''A Libyan citizen
reports from Gasr bin Ghashir indiscriminate shelling from early evening,'' she
wrote on July 19, referring to a neighborhood abutting the airport.

The next day, she wrote about ''heavy shelling and other exchanges'' in the
embassy's neighborhood. On Wednesday, she tried to tamp down a rumor that United
States drones were operating over Libyan airspace. ''We are not engaged in this
fighting, just trying to stay safe under fire,'' she wrote.

During the evacuation early Saturday, residents in Tripoli reported hearing the
sounds of airplanes overhead. A resident who lives within sight of the embassy
said that militias who were fighting around the airport held their fire as the
airplanes circled. At 5 a.m., convoys of cars appeared on the airport road. A
Pentagon spokesman, Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, said the evacuation, which took
approximately five hours, was secured by United States Marines who had been
working at the embassy and military aircraft, including F-16s.

In a statement on Saturday, Marie Harf, a State Department spokeswoman, said the
decision to evacuate was not made lightly.

''Securing our facilities and ensuring the safety of our personnel are top
department priorities,'' she said, adding that the United States was ''exploring
options for a permanent return to Tripoli as soon as the security situation on
the ground improves.''

After the withdrawal on Saturday, the embassy compound sat empty and unguarded.
No one answered at the front gate. A man driving away from the compound and
clearly frustrated asked a reporter if he worked at the embassy.

''There was no one here,'' he said.

The Americans had been processing documents for him -- he did not specify what
kind -- but now, those documents were stuck inside.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/27/world/africa/libya.html

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


