                             1324 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marketing the Artist's Touch

BYLINE: By JULIE SATOW

SECTION: Section RE; Column 0; Real Estate Desk; BIG DEAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1306 words


With cities like New York and Miami in the midst of another luxury condominium
boom, developers seem to be tripping over one another in the scramble to
announce their latest projects, and to stand out from the pack, they are locked
in an escalating game of one-upmanship.

In a market where amenities like golf simulators and children's playrooms barely
raise a well-manicured eyebrow, the stakes are high. Add to this the fact that
developers are asking buyers to shell out upward of $10 million for apartments
that are, in many cases, still just a dirt pile on the ground, and they have no
choice but to bring the razzle-dazzle.

Increasingly, the trick they are most often pulling out of their collective hat
is art, with a capital A.

In Miami, for example, the developer of a beachfront condominium on Collins
Avenue has commissioned a sculptor, whose pieces have sold for more than
$500,000, to create original works for every buyer in the building. Another
Miami developer has hired the painter and Academy Award-nominated director
Julian Schnabel to design a sales center for its condominium, with rose-colored
stucco and sawtooth lamps. In Midtown Manhattan, a developer is making a pointed
effort to stand out by placing a permanent 40-story LED light installation on
the building's facade, while others have taken to hiring art consultants just as
they would architects and construction companies.

''There is a very strong art market right now, with a much more diverse and
large collector base than at any other time I can remember,'' said Yvonne Force
Villareal, a founder of the nonprofit Art Production Fund. She and a business
partner, Doreen Remen, recently started Culture Corps, a for-profit art
consulting business that advises real estate developers. The expanded art
collector base has resulted in more buyers of high-end condos wanting artwork to
be part of the experience of shopping for a new home.

''Those who invest in high-end luxury homes also tend to have a strong knowledge
of art,'' said Helidon Xhixha, an Albanian-born artist who has shown his work at
Art Basel Miami Beach, and who recently sold a piece titled ''The Wall'' to a
private art collector for more than $540,000. The developers Property Markets
Group and S2 Development hired Mr. Xhixha to create sculptures tailored to each
buyer at Muse, a 68-unit condominium in the Sunny Isles neighborhood of Miami.

While some may consider it selling out for artists to create pieces as part of a
condominium marketing effort, Mr. Xhixha said, ''I do not see this as
over-commercializing my art. On the contrary, I see a collaboration between
buyer and artist.'' Mr. Xhixha added that an apartment tower filled with his
pieces ''will be like having my very own private museum.''

For the Chetrit Group and Clipper Equity, the developers converting the former
Flatotel at 135 West 52nd Street into 109 condo units, ''we wanted to create
something that gave the building an identity, that gave us some notoriety,''
said Raphael De Niro, a broker at Douglas Elliman Development Marketing, who is
representing the building. ''People like to be able to talk about their building
and have others know it, for people to feel they live somewhere unique.'' The
developers hired Thierry Dreyfus, the lighting designer who lit up the Grand
Palais in Paris and the Château de Versailles, to create the 423-foot
installation that will be placed inside a casing attached to the front of the
building.

Farther downtown, Culture Corps is consulting on the sales center for 30 Park
Place, the condominium designed by Robert A.M. Stern Architects that will also
feature a Four Seasons hotel. Culture Corps has chosen 11 pieces of art for the
space, including works by established artists like Richard Serra and Sam Gordon,
as well as by newcomers like Field Kallop. The developer, Silverstein
Properties, bought a few of the works, while the others are on loan. ''It is not
the normal kind of art you would see in a model apartment,'' said Ms. Villareal,
who is married to the artist Leo Villareal. All abstract, the paintings ''are
very tasteful, but simultaneously they have an edge to them,'' she said.

The commingling of art and real estate has a long, established history,
beginning with the cathedrals of Europe, which commissioned religious art. The
Medici family in Italy hired artists to create works for their many estates,
while in modern times, art has played a role in places like the Seagram
Building, with its famed tapestry by Pablo Picasso. Perhaps it isn't so
surprising that in this era, which some have termed the new Gilded Age, the
worlds of art and real estate have once again begun to merge.

Mr. Schnabel, who created the interiors of the Gramercy Park Hotel and built
Palazzo Chupi, a pink condominium in the West Village, is no stranger to this
connection. ''The idea of living with art is a good thing, not necessarily a
scam,'' he told me recently. ''Obviously, when something is popular they can
turn that into something trendy, but it has a historical precedent.''

Mr. Schnabel is designing the sales center -- ''a terrible term, can't we say
building?'' -- for the Brickell Flatiron, a 710-foot triangular-shaped
skyscraper underway in Miami. The center -- the developers prefer the word
''gallery'' -- will have Mr. Schnabel's paintings and furniture, as well as a
fireplace. It will ''look like a living room,'' Mr. Schnabel said. ''It will be
very different than other sales offices, where they look like you are walking
into a bank, with cold marble, a lot of glass, very corporate.''

There are clear benefits to collaborating with artists, but the artists can also
be unpredictable. Mr. Schnabel, for instance, repeatedly declined to be
interviewed about the project, despite cajoling from the developers who are
paying his wages. And when he and I did finally connect, he was far less
interested in talking about the condominium than about his new exhibit opening
in October at the NSU Museum of Art Fort Lauderdale, ''Café Dolly: Picabia,
Schnabel, Willumsen.''

While art is playing a critical role in the marketing of ultraluxury real
estate, it is by no means the only strategy developers are employing. At One
Riverside Park, the developer, the Extell Development Company, has partnered
with the company Musion, which created the hologram of Tupac Shakur that
appeared onstage at the 2012 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. Musion
created a hologram of One Riverside Park, with images of the floor plans and the
surrounding neighborhood.

But some developers, like Francis Greenburger, the chairman of Time Equities, is
skeptical of marketing gimmicks. ''Like those mood movies -- why would you make
a movie that has nothing to do with the building?'' he said, referring to the $1
million film commissioned by the developer Harry Macklowe to market his
skyscraper 432 Park Avenue. ''Maybe it has worked, but for me, it is a
distraction. It isn't what selling an apartment is all about.''

Still, Mr. Greenburger has plenty of marketing strategies of his own. At the
sales office for 50 West Street, his new condominium in the financial district,
a curved projection wall features 180-degree images, taken by drones, of
different elevations from the building, allowing buyers to see their potential
views. And there is a piece of a curved glass curtain wall that will wrap around
the building.

While the efforts may be gimmicky, they may also work. At 135 West 52nd Street,
the building will not only be draped in an enormous light installation, but will
also have a sales office featuring purple mohair walls and a V.I.P. room for
prospective buyers of the penthouses. ''Once you step into the V.I.P. room, you
are entering a different strata,'' said Mr. De Niro, the son of the actor Robert
De Niro and himself no stranger to V.I.P. treatment.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/realestate/using-artists-to-sell-condos-in-mia
mi-and-new-york.html

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The lighting designer Thierry Dreyfus was hired by the
developers of a condo conversion at 135 West 52nd Street, rendering above, to
create a light installation on the facade of the building. In Miami, the sales
center for the Brickell Flatiron condo, rendering above right, is being designed
by the painter and director Julian Schnabel. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WILLIAMS NEW YORK
 IMAGERY NYC) (RE11)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


