                             1319 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Google Buy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL J. DE LA MERCED

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; DEALBOOK; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 420 words


Updated, 3:57 p.m. | Google agreed on Tuesday to buy Skybox Imaging, a provider
of high-quality satellite images, for $500 million, as the technology giant
continues to work on fulfilling its lofty ambitions for its Internet offerings.

Initially, Skybox will help improve Google's dominant mapping service. But over
time, the five-year-old start-up and its ability to launch relatively cheap
satellites could aid a bigger Google goal: expanding its Internet service
offerings.

The tech titan is already exploring using other novel methods -- including
balloons and drones -- to provide online access, especially to people in
sparsely populated locations.

''Their satellites will help keep our maps accurate with up-to-date imagery,'' a
representative for Google said in a statement. ''Over time, we also hope that
Skybox's team and technology will be able to help improve Internet access and
disaster relief -- areas Google has long been interested in.''

In a corporate blog post, Skybox wrote, ''The time is right to join a company
who can challenge us to think even bigger and bolder, and who can support us in
accelerating our ambitious vision.''

Founded in 2009 by four Stanford business school students, Skybox was created
with the idea that launching cheaper satellites could upend the space industry.
While traditional satellite makers like DigitalGlobe focus on high-end
offerings, the start-up uses off-the-shelf components and aims at launching more
satellites, more cheaply.

High-resolution imaging, the founders decided, was a useful first product.

Many prospective investors initially viewed the company skeptically, and it
struggled to find financing until it raised money from the likes of Khosla
Ventures and Bessemer Venture Partners. All told, it has raised about $91
million.

''No one expected this company to succeed,'' said David Cowan, a partner at
Bessemer. ''People in aerospace wrote it off as a Mickey Mouse attempt to do
something that was impossible.''

Those impressions changed when Skybox succeeded in launching its first
satellite, SkySat-1, last November, according to Mr. Cowan.

That cheaper-is-better approach likely inspired Google's interest, according to
Mr. Cowan.

''Google bought this because Sergey and Larry have ambitious designs on space,''
he said, referring to Google co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page. ''If
they're going to do something big in space, it's going to be through small,
cheap satellites.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/06/10/google-to-buy-skybox-imaging-for-500-mill
ion/

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


