                             1321 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Scrambles to Help Iraq Fight Off Militants

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1245 words


WASHINGTON -- The White House, confronted by an unexpected crisis on a
battlefield it thought it had left behind, scrambled Thursday to reassure Iraq
that it would help its beleaguered army fend off militants who have overrun much
of the country and now threaten Baghdad.

Recognizing what one official described as an ''urgent emergency situation,''
President Obama and his aides moved on multiple fronts. A senior official said
the president was actively considering American airstrikes against the militant
groups. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. telephoned Prime Minister Nuri Kamal
al-Maliki to express American support. And Pentagon officials briefed lawmakers
about what one senator later described as a ''grave situation.''

In his only public comments on Iraq, Mr. Obama said his national security staff
was meeting around the clock. But the frenzy of activity has yet to produce a
tangible American response -- attesting to how swiftly this crisis has erupted
and how it has left a stunned White House groping for a response.

The chaotic situation in Iraq showed no sign of letup on Thursday as emboldened
Sunni militants who seized two important Iraqi cities this week moved closed to
Baghdad while Kurdish forces poured into the strategic northern city of Kirkuk
after it was evacuated by government forces.

Airstrikes were only one of several options being weighed by the president,
according to the senior official, who cautioned that the president had made no
decision on military action. The airstrikes, the official said, could be
delivered either by unmanned drones or warplanes.

''I don't rule out anything,'' Mr. Obama said, speaking in the Oval Office after
meeting with Prime Minister Tony Abbott of Australia, ''because we do have a
stake in making sure that these jihadists are not getting a permanent foothold
in either Iraq or Syria, for that matter.'' He said he was watching the
fast-moving events with ''a lot of concern.''

For Mr. Obama, ordering airstrikes would be a symbolically momentous step,
returning the United States to a combat role in Iraq two and a half years after
he pulled out the last American soldier, ending the nation's involvement in a
war that left more than 4,400 Americans dead.

The possibility of coming to Iraq's rescue raises a host of thorny questions for
Mr. Obama, who has steadfastly resisted being drawn into sectarian strife in
Iraq or its neighbor, Syria. Republican lawmakers accused him of being caught
flat-footed by the crisis and of hastening this outcome by not leaving an
adequate American force behind after 2011.

Reports that Iran has sent its paramilitary Quds Force to help the struggling
Iraqi Army battle the militant group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria,
raised the awkward possibility that the United States could find itself allied
with Iran in shoring up an unpopular Shiite government in Baghdad. The White
House said it was aware of the reports, but did not confirm them.

Mr. Obama insisted he had been monitoring the threat from Sunni militant groups
for several months. The United States, he said, had supplied Iraq with military
equipment and intelligence.

Until now, though, the White House has rebuffed several requests from Mr. Maliki
for the United States to conduct airstrikes against the staging areas of the
militant groups, north and west of Baghdad, where extremists have flowed across
the border from Syria.

In the past two days, Mr. Obama acknowledged, it was clear that the United
States needed to go further. ''Iraq's going to need more help,'' he said. ''It's
going to need more help from us, and it's going to need more help from the
international community.''

''In our consultations with the Iraqis,'' he said, ''there will be some
short-term, immediate things that need to be done militarily. But this should be
also a wake-up call for the Iraqi government.''

The president said the crisis confirmed his decision -- articulated in a speech
at the United States Military Academy -- to reorient American counterterrorism
strategy from fighting Al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan to a more diffuse
set of terrorist groups, some linked with Al Qaeda, that stretch from the Middle
East to North Africa.

On Capitol Hill, however, the images of Baghdad under threat from Islamic
militants fanned a political firestorm. Speaker John A. Boehner warned that the
progress in Iraq was ''clearly in jeopardy,'' and said Mr. Obama had been caught
''taking a nap.''

Democrats said the strife was the result of former President George W. Bush's
misguided invasion of Iraq in 2003. ''One act of violence provokes another act
of violence,'' said the Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader.
''And here we are.''

Senators on the Armed Services Committee emerging from a two-hour, classified
briefing on Iraq appeared stunned by what they heard from a senior Pentagon
official, two senior Defense Intelligence Agency analysts and the three-star
general in charge of security cooperation at the American Embassy in Baghdad.

''Needless to say, it's a grave situation,'' said Senator Bill Nelson, a Florida
Democrat.

A State Department spokeswoman said American contractors working on foreign
military sales had been moved from their base north of Baghdad by their
companies. But diplomats and staff members at the embassy in Baghdad and
consulates elsewhere in Iraq had not been moved, according to the spokeswoman,
Jen Psaki.

Republicans and some Democrats sharply criticized the Obama administration for
not having a credible response to help the Iraqi government.

''There is no strategy,'' said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, in an
interview. ''The president said he would not rule out anything. Is that a
strategy? Is that a way to counter ISIS?'' he said, using the acronym for the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.

Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, demanded that the
administration provide Congress with both short-term and longer-term options.
''We need a proposal and recommendation from the administration, and so far it
has not been provided,'' he said.

Mr. Blumenthal also castigated Mr. Maliki for failing to include Sunnis as full
partners in his government, a failure other critics have said has pushed Sunnis
into the hands of Islamic militant groups like ISIS.

Most lawmakers expressed caution in committing to American airstrikes against
militant targets, as Mr. Maliki has requested. But some said it might be the
only way to give the Iraqi security services time to reorganize and blunt the
militants' offensive.

''It might be the only way we can give some support so they can regroup, so the
Iraqi Army can get itself together,'' said Senator Joe Manchin III, a West
Virginia Democrat.

While experts said leaving behind a residual force of several thousand American
troops would have helped the Iraqi Army tactically, some doubt it would have
prevented the sectarian forces that are threatening to tear the country into
Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish blocs.

''In the long run, I'm not sure it would have made a difference with the forces
pushing for the disintegration of Iraq,'' said Gen. Amos Yadlin, a retired head
of Israeli military intelligence who is now the executive director of Israel's
Institute of National Security Studies.

Andrew J. Tabler, an expert on Syria at the Washington Institute for Near East
Policy, said that American airstrikes would ''help them deal with the symptoms
of the disease, but the disease is rooted in Syria.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/world/obama-voices-concern-over-militant-advan
ce-in-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Iraqi men outside the main army recruiting center in Baghdad on
Thursday, volunteering for military service against insurgents. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
KARIM KADIM/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A1)
 ''I don't rule out anything,'' President Obama said of Iraq, speaking Thursday
in the Oval Office. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GABRIELLA DEMCZUK/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A13)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


