                             1315 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Can G.I. Be Tied to 6 Lost Lives? Facts Are Murky

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE and ANDREW W. LEHREN; Charlie Savage reported from
Washington, and Andrew W. Lehren from New York. Eric Schmitt contributed
reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1166 words


WASHINGTON -- Did the search for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl cost the lives of American
soldiers?

Since last weekend's prisoner exchange in which Afghan insurgents turned over
Sergeant Bergdahl after five years of captivity, a number of the men who served
with him have called him a deserter. Some have gone further, blaming him for the
deaths of six to eight soldiers.

That second claim is hardening into a news media narrative. CNN has reported as
fact that ''at least six soldiers died'' looking for Sergeant Bergdahl after
senior American military officials say he wandered off his base. The Daily Beast
published an essay by a former member of Sergeant Bergdahl's battalion, Nathan
Bradley Bethea, who linked the search to the deaths of eight soldiers whom he
named. ''He has finally returned,'' Mr. Bethea wrote. ''Those men will never
have the opportunity.''

But a review of casualty reports and contemporaneous military logs from the
Afghanistan war shows that the facts surrounding the eight deaths are far
murkier than definitive -- even as critics of Sergeant Bergdahl contend that
every American combat death in Paktika Province in the months after he
disappeared, from July to September 2009, was his fault.

All across Afghanistan, that period was a time of ferocious fighting. President
Obama had decided to send a surge of additional troops to improve security, but
they had not yet arrived. In Paktika, the eight deaths during that period were
up from five in the same three months the previous year. Across Afghanistan, 122
Americans died in that period, up from 58 in 2008.

In addition, a senior insurgent commander known as Mullah Sangeen, who was part
of the Taliban-linked Haqqani network, had been carrying out attacks in the area
for several years. A joint military statement by American and Afghan security
forces released a month before Sergeant Bergdahl vanished warned that the mullah
had brought in ''hundreds of foreign fighters.''

Two soldiers died during the most intense period of the search after Sergeant
Bergdahl's June 30 disappearance. Both were inside an outpost that came under
attack, not out patrolling and running checkpoints looking for him. The other
six soldiers died in late August and early September.

Facts are often obscured in the fog of the battlefield, witnesses have
incomplete vantage points and the events are five years in the past now. But an
archive of military reports logging significant activities in America's war in
Afghanistan offers a contemporaneous written record of events in Paktika that
summer. The archive was made public by Chelsea Manning, formerly known as Pvt.
Bradley Manning, who is serving a 35-year prison sentence for the leak.

The first two deaths the critics link to Sergeant Bergdahl involved a major
assault by insurgents on a combat outpost called Zerok on July 4, 2009. Their
view is that the Taliban knew the Americans were stretched thin by the search
mission and took advantage of that opportunity to try to overrun it.

Mr. Bethea, the soldier who wrote the essay in The Daily Beast, said the company
executive officer for the unit at Zerok believed that ''the attack would not
have happened had his company received its normal complement of intelligence
aircraft: drones, planes, and the like. Instead, every intelligence aircraft
available in theater had received new instructions: find Bergdahl. My friend
blames Bergdahl for his soldiers' deaths.''

Military officials, speaking in recent days, have countered that additional
surveillance aircraft had been brought in from other areas to help in the
search, so air traffic in the region was intensified, not diminished, by the
search.

Separately, context supplied by the leaked logs complicates claims that
insurgents attacked the outpost because of the hunt.

Insurgents had been shooting at the outpost with escalating intensity in the
preceding months. A June 24 log described a mortar attack inside its perimeter
and cited intelligence that insurgents were planning a ''complex ambush'' of the
outpost.

And a log recounting the July 4 attack said it confirmed ''recent reporting
regarding Mullah Sangeen's desire to conduct a spectacular attack'' against the
outpost. The log did not mention the hunt for Sergeant Bergdahl. Still, one
soldier from Sergeant Bergdahl's battalion said that response time after the
attack had been slow, and argued the issue was not if the outpost was going to
be attacked, but rather when insurgents chose to attack it.

The first and most intense phase of the search operation wound down after July
8. But former soldiers say and the logs show that the hunt continued
sporadically as patrols were sent out to chase rumors that Sergeant Bergdahl had
been spotted.

The other six American deaths in Paktika that summer occurred from Aug. 18 to
Sept. 5, which Sergeant Bergdahl's critics link to him as well.

''You see a lot of anger because we lost guys not only at Zerok, but a decent
amount of good guys looking'' for him, said a soldier from his unit who spoke on
condition of anonymity.

Where those events are identifiable in the logs, they do not mention any link to
Bergdahl search operations, although the logs are terse and contain few
contextual details.

Mr. Bethea wrote that of the six men killed in August and September, two died in
a roadside bombing while on a reconnaissance mission, a third was shot during a
search for a Taliban political leader and three others were killed while
conducting patrols -- two in an ambush and one who stepped on a mine.

He suggested some connection to Sergeant Bergdahl for several of the deaths,
saying the Taliban leader and a village that was in the area of one of the
patrols were ''thought affiliated with Bergdahl's captors.'' He also said a
village in the areas of the other patrol was ''near the area where Bergdahl
vanished.''

Still, those villages and insurgents were in the overall area of responsibility
for the soldiers, and the logs make clear that the region was an insurgent
hotbed. A log on May 21, 2009, for example, said it had historically been a
''safe haven'' for the Taliban.

A retired senior American military officer, who was briefed at the time on the
search for Sergeant Bergdahl, said that even though soldiers were instructed to
watch for signs of the missing American, they would have been conducting patrols
and performing risky operations anyway.

''Look, it's not like these soldiers would have been sitting around their
base,'' he said.

The soldier who spoke on condition of anonymity agreed that it was ''ludicrous''
to lay 100 percent of the blame for the deaths at Sergeant Bergdahl's feet, and
he acknowledged that patrols were going to get hit in Paktika during fighting
season anyway.

But, he said, the reason he and his colleagues are angry is that too often that
summer, the purpose of their patrols into dangerous areas was not ordinary
wartime work like reconnaissance, maintaining a security presence, or
humanitarian projects, but rather ''to go look for this guy.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/04/world/middleeast/can-gi-be-tied-to-6-lost-live
s-facts-are-murky.html

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl GRAPHICS: Where Bergdahl Disappeared: After
Pfc. Bowe Bergdahl was reported missing from his outpost, the Army began an
intensive search. Secret military dispatches sketch the first eight days of the
military's pursuit, and also include intercepted communications, presumed to be
among Taliban fighters, discussing the captured American. (Source: 2009 military
field reports from the Afghanistan War leaked by Chelsea Manning) (GRAPHICS BY
SARAH ALMUKHTAR
TIM WALLACE/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 CNES SPOT, VIA GOOGLE EARTH) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


