                             1354 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Awakening the 'Dutch Gene' of Water Survival

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER F. SCHUETZE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NOORDWIJK JOURNAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1008 words


NOORDWIJK, the Netherlands -- Along a rugged, wide North Sea beach here on a
recent day, children formed teams of eight to 10, taking their places beside
mounds of sand carefully cordoned by candy-cane striped tape. They had one hour
for their sand castle competition. Some built fishlike structures, complete with
scales. Others spent their time on elaborate ditch and dike labyrinths. Each
castle was adorned on top with a white flag.

Then they watched the sea invade and devour their work, seeing whose castle
could withstand the tide longest. The last standing flag won.

Theirs was no ordinary day at the beach, but a newly minted, state-sanctioned
competition for schoolchildren to raise awareness of the dangers of rising sea
levels in a country of precarious geography that has provided lessons for the
world about water management, but that fears that its next generation will grow
complacent.

Fifty-five percent of the Netherlands is either below sea level or heavily
flood-prone. Yet thanks to its renowned expertise and large water management
budget (about 1.25 percent of gross domestic product), the Netherlands has
averted catastrophe since a flooding disaster in 1953.

Experts here say that they now worry that the famed Dutch water management
system actually works too well and that citizens will begin to take for granted
the nation's success in staying dry. As global climate change threatens to raise
sea levels by as much as four feet by the end of the century, the authorities
here are working to make real to children the forecasts that may seem far-off,
but that will shape their lives in adulthood and old age.

''Everything works so smoothly that people don't realize anymore that they are
taking a risk in developing urban areas in low-lying areas,'' said Raimond
Hafkenscheid, the lead organizer of the competition and a water expert with the
Foreign Ministry.

Before the competition, the children, ages 6 to 11, were coached by experts in
dike building and water management. Volunteers stood by, many of them freshly
graduated civil engineers, giving last-minute advice on how best to battle the
rising water.

The event, sponsored by two regional water authorities, also featured
sophisticated Dutch technology, including an airborne drone that monitors
hard-to-reach water management infrastructure, and a jeep-mounted infrared
camera used to detect weaknesses in dikes, which showed thermal images of the
most promising sand castles resisting the seas.

''If children can do it themselves, they really learn it,'' said Harcko Pama, a
teacher at an elementary school in Heemstede.

''I know that they will remember this when they are older -- it has such great
impact,'' he said.

Mr. Pama's class of 11-year-olds competed in three separate teams to build the
most flood-resistant castle. Armed with shovels and using hands and feet to tamp
down the wet sand, the children improvised, some bringing seawater up to the
castles in their shoes, others using towels to move the sand. Plots measuring
about nine square yards were carefully lined along the shore. Organizers had
timed the exercise so that the children (and the judges) could watch their work
being destroyed by the incoming tide just after they had finished construction.
Some 250 children competed.

As if part of the greater lesson, the children, from four different elementary
schools in low-lying regions of the country, met on a stretch of beach less than
10 miles north of a major dike renovation project. The new dike protecting the
seaside resort town of Katwijk will feature a reinforced concrete core and an
underground parking garage. The project is to be finished early next year at a
cost of nearly $70 million.

A recently released report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development on water management in the Netherlands pointed to an ''awareness
gap'' among Dutch citizens. The finding did much to get the sand castle contest
off the ground.

But the awareness of the average citizen is only part of the problem. Many
experts involved in technical aspects of water management warn of the rising
average age of water professionals. Not only do fewer Dutch people worry about
the rising tides, fewer go into technical fields, said Jaap Feil, who runs the
National Water Traineeship program.

Onne Rosingh, a managing director at InTech, one of the many subcontractors that
monitor the country's vast dike systems, explained. ''People want a clean job,
and as civil engineer you have to stand with your boots in the mud,'' he said.

The idea that exposure to water management professionals and a little
competition would awaken what Mr. Hafkenscheid called the ''Dutch gene'' in the
students was obviously not far from the mind of one volunteer, who told a group
of 11-year-olds that there would be many jobs in water management in 20 years.

''You see all these kids and their enthusiasm -- that is our hope for the
future,'' said Gerard Doornbos, chairman of the Rijnland District Water Control
Board.

Mr. Doornbos's title, ''dijkgraaf,'' or earl of the dike, attests to the
13th-century origin and proud tradition of the water boards. He said that the
expertise and investment in water protection over the years is one of the
reasons that the Netherlands, with its new future-oriented plans, is relatively
prepared.

''If you start anticipating, as we are doing, it will be much easier,'' he said
of the rising seas.

For all the obvious enthusiasm that the building of the sand castles brought,
the subsequent dramatic destruction by the ocean's foot-high waves was the high
point of the day. Children ran through the water from one ruin to the next,
cheering as the castles tumbled one by one.

In the end it was Esther van Zuylen's class from Flambouw Elementary School in
the town of Nigtevecht whose white flag resisted the flood the longest, and her
class got a little glass trophy from the dijkgraaf as a prize.

''Making huge castles at low tides, trying to defend the castles as the tide
comes in -- that is who we are as Dutchmen,'' Mr. Hafkenscheid said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/world/europe/netherlands-water-management-syst
em-global-climate-change-sea-level-rise-dutch-gene.html

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: On a beach in Noordwijk, the Netherlands, students competed to
build a sand castle that could withstand the tide the longest.
 The seaside town Katwijk is getting a $70 million dike upgrade. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
ILVY NJIOKIKTJIEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


