                             1322 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Shiite Cleric Urges Followers to Fight Militants

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN, SUADAD AL-SALHY and RICK GLADSTONE; Alissa J. Rubin
and Suadad al-Salhy reported from Baghdad, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
Reporting was contributed by Alan Cowell from London; Rod Nordland from Baghdad;
Tim Arango from Erbil, Iraq; and Michael R. Gordon, Helene Cooper and Peter
Baker from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1300 words


BAGHDAD -- The specter of sectarian war and partition of Iraq grew on Friday as
the country's top Shiite cleric implored his followers to take up arms against
an insurgent army of marauding Sunni extremist militants who have captured broad
stretches of northern territory this week in a sweep toward Baghdad.

The exhortation by the cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, came as President
Obama told the Iraqis they need to resolve the crisis themselves and vowed not
to redeploy United States forces in Iraq, a country where nearly 4,500 American
soldiers lost their lives and the United States spent more than $1 trillion in
an eight-year war that Mr. Obama said was history when the last troops left in
2011.

While Mr. Obama said he would offer some help, it would not include troops, and
he asserted that ''we're not going to allow ourselves to be dragged back into a
situation in which, while we're there, we're keeping a lid on things.''

Heeding the call to arms by Ayatollah Sistani, Shiite volunteers rushed to the
front lines, reinforcing defenses of the holy city of Samarra 70 miles north of
Baghdad, and helping thwart attacks by Sunni fighters of the radical Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria in some smaller cities to the east. The confrontations
suggested that Shiites and Sunnis would once again engage in open conflict for
control of Iraq, as they did during the height of the American-led occupation
that ousted Saddam Hussein.

That struggle between the sects has also helped shape the civil war in
neighboring Syria and threatened to further destabilize the Middle East.

While it was unclear from Mr. Obama's remarks what he might be prepared to do
militarily to help the Maliki government, administration officials said the
options included airstrikes by warplanes or drones, improved intelligence
sharing and deployment of small numbers of Special Forces members.

The United States already has considerable military power deployed in the
region, with 35,000 troops, in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and neighboring Gulf
nations. In addition, the United States has an array of ships there, as well as
the aircraft carrier George H. W. Bush with an accompanying Navy cruiser in the
northern Arabian Sea. Two Navy destroyers from the Bush strike group have moved
into the Persian Gulf, a Defense Department official said.

The sharp deterioration in Iraq represents a significant security issue to both
the United States and Iran, adversaries in a range of disputes, including the
Syria conflict. Both were seeking ways to help avoid a collapse in the
government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, a Shiite whose
marginalization of Sunnis and other sects has been blamed by some critics for
the dysfunction that has steadily worsened in Iraq since the American departure.

For Iran's Shiite leaders, the Iraq crisis represents a direct Sunni militant
threat on their doorstep. The commander of Iran's Revolutionary Guards Quds
Force, Gen. Qassim Suleimani, an architect of military strategy who has helped
President Bashar al-Assad of Syria in his war against Sunni radicals, arrived in
Baghdad this week and has been reviewing how Iraq's Shiite militias are prepared
to defend Baghdad and other areas.

''The mobilization of the Shia militias, and Qassim Suleimani's presence, is a
very good indication of how seriously they're taking this,'' Hayder al-Khoei, an
associate fellow at the London-based Chatham House research group, said in an
interview with Iranwire, a website run by expatriate Iranian journalists. But
reports that Iran had sent hundreds of Quds fighters into Iraq were not
confirmed.

Even with their shared interests in a stable Iraq, there was no overt sign of
cooperation or communication between the United States and Iran on the crisis.
Marie Harf, a State Department spokeswoman, told reporters on Friday that ''we
are not talking to the Iranians about Iraq.''

Thousands of Iraqi Shiites responded to the call by Ayatollah Sistani, 83, a
respected figure among Iraq's rival sects, whose statements carry particular
weight among the Shiite majority. The statement, read by his representative
during Friday Prayer, said it was ''the legal and national responsibility of
whoever can hold a weapon to hold it to defend the country, the citizens and the
holy sites.''

The representative of Ayatollah Sistani, Sheikh Abdul Mehdi al-Karbalaie, spoke
in Karbala, a southern city regarded by Shiites as one of Iraq's holiest. The
sheikh said volunteers ''must fill the gaps within the security forces.''

The statement stopped short of calling for a general armed response to the
incursion led by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, which has emerged as one
of the most potent opposition forces in the Syrian civil war and which now
controls large areas of both Syria and northern Iraq.

The insurgents have pledged to march on Baghdad, but seizing and controlling the
sprawling Iraqi capital, with its large population of Shiites, is likely to
prove much more difficult than advancing across a Sunni heartland with little
sympathy for the central government. The sheikh emphasized that all Iraqis
should join the fight, pulling together, so the country does not slide into
all-out sectarian warfare. But in a time of mounting frictions and deepening
distrust between the sects, it appeared unlikely that many Sunnis would answer
the ayatollah's call. Many Sunnis feel little sympathy either for the government
or for the extremists of ISIS.

Volunteers began to appear at the southern gate to Baghdad, which leads to the
predominantly Shiite south of the country, within an hour after Sheikh Abdul
broadcast Ayatollah Sistani's call.

For the first time since the Sunni insurgents routed the government security
forces on Tuesday in Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, their southward advance
appeared to stall. The insurgents fanned out on Friday to the east of the Tigris
River, and at least temporarily seized two towns near the Iranian border,
Sadiyah and Jalawla. But security officials in Baghdad said government troops,
backed by Kurdish forces, counterattacked several hours later and forced the
insurgents to withdraw.

Shiite militia leaders reported they had also collaborated with security forces
to take back control of Dhuluiya, a town about 60 miles north of Baghdad -- the
southernmost point of the Sunni insurgent advance.

Iraqiya, the state television channel, reported Friday night that a son of Ezzat
al-Douri, one of the top leaders of the Hussein era who was never captured by
the Americans and is collaborating with the ISIS fighters, was killed in an
Iraqi Air Force strike on Tikrit. There was no immediate way to corroborate the
report.

In its language and tone, Ayatollah Sistani's statement portrayed it as a
religious and patriotic act to volunteer either for the Iraqi Army or for a
Shiite militia, two forces that are becoming difficult to distinguish.

When the ayatollah's representative, Sheikh Abdul, said, ''Whoever can hold a
weapon has to volunteer to join the security forces,'' the call was greeted with
cheers and shouts of ''It will be done!''

People in Ayatollah Sistani's office said the statement was a response to one
issued by the leadership of ISIS threatening to seize not just the predominantly
Sunni areas of northern Iraq, but also Baghdad and the cities of Karbala and
Najaf, which are sacred to Shiite Muslims.

''Iraq and the Iraqi people are facing great danger,'' Sheikh Abdul said. ''The
terrorists are not aiming to control just several provinces. They said clearly
they are targeting all other provinces, including Baghdad, Karbala and Najaf. So
the responsibility to face them and fight them is the responsibility of all, not
one sect or one party. The responsibility now is saving Iraq, saving our
country, saving the holy places of Iraq.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/14/world/middleeast/iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Shiite volunteers at a tribal meeting in northern Baghdad on
Friday. Many Shiites are forming militias to fight Sunni forces. (A1)
Shiite sheikhs with Kalashnikov rifles during a meeting Friday in Baghdad.
Tribal elders had gathered to organize support for the Shiite-led central
government. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AYMAN OGHANNA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Shiite volunteers chanted slogans during a recruitment drive for militias in a
Baghdad stadium. At right, an Iraqi security officer searched volunteers for the
Iraqi Army as they gathered in Baghdad. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY AYMAN OGHANNA FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES
 AHMED SAAD/REUTERS) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


