                             1432 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 26, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shiite Rebels Make New Demands to Yemen

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 382 words


SANA, Yemen -- Members of a Shiite rebel group on Monday presented Yemen's
government with new demands in order to stop their protests, hardening their
positions and prolonging a standoff in the capital.

The demonstrations by tens of thousands of members of the heavily armed Houthi
group have put security authorities on alert. Tanks and armored vehicles have
been deployed to Sana, the capital, to protect government buildings and
embassies.

The Houthis have set up tents in Sana, and some militants have taken over
rooftops and beefed up their defenses along the city's main airport road and
near three ministries, prompting fears of armed confrontations.

They previously demanded the establishment of a new government and a review of
all economic policies, first among them a recent decision to end fuel subsidies
that caused prices to nearly double.

On Monday, the Houthis made additional demands, including having more
representation in a national review agency that oversees the rewriting of the
Constitution and efforts to carry out a new federal system, said a member of a
Yemeni presidential delegation.

The official spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized
to speak to journalists.

The Houthis waged a six-year insurgency in the north against the former Yemeni
president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, that officially ended in 2010. After Mr. Saleh's
ouster, they have fought ultraconservative Islamists in several northern cities
and towns, accusing them of turning their strongholds into incubators of
extremism. Over the past several weeks, they have battled and defeated the
Muslim Brotherhood group and its political arm, the Islah party.

The tension over the government has been simmering for months after critics
accused Prime Minister Mohammed Salem Bassindwa of being too weak and too close
to the Islah party. Critics also blame Mr. Bassindwa for the deteriorating
security situation and the economic conditions.

Yemen's international allies have called on the Houthis to end the protests.

Yemen continues to battle other militants and the country's local branch of Al
Qaeda, considered by the United States to be the most dangerous offshoot of the
terrorist group.

American drones and Yemeni counterterrorism forces have conducted strikes
against the group within Yemen.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/26/world/middleeast/shiite-rebels-make-new-demand
s-to-yemen.html

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


