                             1424 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 21, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Mother of Malala Yousafzai Learns to Read and Write

BYLINE: By JODI KANTOR

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 375 words


Years after her own daughter became a global crusader for women's education, Tor
Pekai Yousafzai, the mother of Malala Yousafzai, has finally learned to read and
write, and to speak a bit of English.

''She wants to learn. She wants to get an education. She goes to school five
days a week. She does her homework,'' Ms. Yousafzai, the 17-year old campaigner
for girls' education who was shot by the Taliban, said of her mother in an
interview on Tuesday about the release of the young readers' edition of her
book, ''I Am Malala.''

Even as Ms. Yousafzai became an advocate for educating girls, her own mother
remained illiterate, though her father, Ziauddin Yousafzai, ran a girls' school
in Pakistan.

But recently, Mrs. Yousafzai has been learning to read and write -- and her
husband has been helping more with domestic tasks, a new step even for a family
that has devoted itself to expanding women's opportunities in Pakistan and
worldwide.

''My mother is now learning English, becoming independent, goes to see the
doctor on her own, goes to the shops and markets on her own,'' Ms. Yousafzai
said. ''On the other hand, my father is now going towards the kitchen. He makes
eggs. He cannot really do a lot of cooking, but he brings plates to the table,
brings cups, puts jam and butter in those things. So he is getting better.

''These things are very important for us, because in many countries, people
think the kitchen is just a woman's job,'' she added, ''and the man's job is to
go outside, earn money, and he's going to control the family. So our family
shows an example to the world of how things change with the help of awareness.''

Ms. Yousafzai invited her mother, who has generally shied from the spotlight
even as her daughter has become a global celebrity, to address the audience.
Mrs. Yousafzai rose, adjusted her veil to make sure it was covering her head,
described her new language skills and how they had changed her life, and said a
few words in English.

To see the full interview, with Ms. Yousafzai discussing topics from her high
school grades to her college ambitions to her dissatisfaction with the answer
that President Obama gave her when she complained to him about the United
States' use of drone warfare, visit timestalks.com.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/21/world/asia/mother-of-malala-yousafzai-learns-t
o-read-and-write.html

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


