                             1448 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Email, All the Time? Get Used to It, or Not

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 297 words


To the Editor:

Re ''End the Tyranny of 24/7 Email,'' by Clive Thompson (Op-Ed, Aug. 29):

The tyranny of email should be ended not only in off-hours but also in
''on-hours'' and everywhere else.

Our society is being held captive to the quick message, misspelled and
grammatically incorrect, poorly thought out and frequently impulsively directed,
much like an angry drone.

Sacrifice the use of email, and you curtail convenience, thus salvaging measured
commentary, verbal grace and humanity.

Unfortunately, I had to email this letter to you to ensure timely consideration.

VIRGINIA BYRNESHingham, Mass., Aug. 30, 2014

To the Editor:

Clive Thompson's eloquent plea to end the tyranny of 24/7 emails is sadly doomed
to fail in this age of globalism.

Nearly all white-collar workers function in a global system in which time zones
are irrelevant. The idea of tuning out of my email system at the end of my
workday is not feasible when the boss operates out of Tokyo or Bangalore or Tel
Aviv.

A client in Shanghai expects her London lawyer to be instantly responsive. A New
York-based designer whose factory is in Dhaka is going to function on Bangladesh
Standard Time. The State Department desk officer for Kenya is going to live by
Eastern Africa Time.

Realistically, professionals who want to succeed in today's world cannot avoid
24/7 emails, conference calls and other characteristics of the new globalism.

What we do need are effective new ways to organize our lives that meet the needs
of human biology and also satisfy both personal goals and professional
responsibilities, a difficult but necessary project for serious thinkers about
lifestyle issues.

MATTHEW NIMETZNew York, Sept. 2, 2014

The writer was under secretary of state for security, science and technology in
the Carter administration.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/06/opinion/all-email-all-the-time-get-used-to-it-
or-not.html

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ALEXANDER GLANDIEN)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


