                             1401 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 1, 2014 Friday
                                    National

King of the Hill: Making a Push to Be House Speaker

BYLINE: By ROSS RAMSEY.

rramsey@texastribune.org

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; TEXAS TRIBUNE; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 717 words


Ross Ramsey, the executive editor of The Texas Tribune, writes a column for The
Tribune.

The Republican lawmaker from North Texas who wants to be the next speaker of the
Texas House wanted -- just a few years ago -- to be the next congressman from
San Diego.

The lawmaker, Scott Turner, a former defensive back whose N.F.L. career included
a stint with the San Diego Chargers, started his political career in a special
election to succeed Randy Cunningham, a Republican who resigned from Congress
after pleading guilty to accepting millions in bribes.

Mr. Turner, who had done off-season work as a congressional aide to another
California lawmaker, Duncan Hunter, barely registered in that 2006 race,
finishing eighth among 14 Republican candidates after mustering 1.5 percent of
the votes. He moved back to the Dallas suburbs where he grew up, and when the
opening presented itself, he won a seat in the Texas House in 2012.

Although he is still in his first term, Mr. Turner has set his sights on the top
spot in the House and has raised -- in cash and in-kind donations -- nearly
$350,000 for that contest. That is a lot of money for a race that only requires
76 votes to win.

Challenges to speakers often find their beginnings in the complaints and
grumblings of shut-out politicians. Threats to those at the top of the pecking
order come either from outside -- in the form of elections or challenges from
other branches of government -- or from the bottom of the pecking order. It is a
game of king of the hill, conducted in business attire in historic buildings.

Most of the complaining goes nowhere, and the constant drone becomes part of the
background noise of government, so much so that real threats can seem to come
from nowhere.

The current speaker, Joe Straus, Republican of San Antonio, came into power
after only four years in the House by unseating Tom Craddick of Midland, a
Republican who is still in the House.

Mr. Craddick succeeded a Democrat, Pete Laney of Hale Center, who was undone by
an election that replaced the Democratic majority that elected him with a
Republican one that wanted one of its own.

Mr. Laney became speaker after his predecessor, Gib Lewis, Democrat of Fort
Worth, was charged with failing to report a gift from a law firm and agreed not
to seek another term in a plea-bargain deal.

The ways to become a speaker are described in that short history: Catch the
incumbent in an indiscretion, change the membership that elects a leader or
undermine the incumbent from within.

Mr. Turner, who did not respond to inquiries about his candidacy, has turned to
a combination of the second and third strategies, relying on conservatives
elected in Republican primaries to build the numbers he would need to overcome
Mr. Straus's majority.

By one account -- that of Tony Tinderholt of Arlington, a Republican candidate
for the House -- about three dozen Republicans are meeting regularly to talk
about issues of common concern, including their wish to replace Mr. Straus with
a speaker more in tune with the Tea Party and social conservatives.

''We're meeting every month to talk about the agendas -- and the important
conservative agenda -- to take care of you,'' he told supporters in July.
''We're going to elect the right speaker of the House, and we are going to make
change for you. It's going to happen. It's not a maybe. It's going to happen. I
promise you.''

The numbers, however, are daunting. Democrats make up a third of the House and
seem unlikely to vote for a more conservative Republican. Without Democrats in
his coalition -- and the presence of Democrats in the Straus coalition is a
crucial point of attack against the incumbent -- Mr. Turner would need all but
about two dozen of the Republicans in the House to conduct a successful revolt.

Mr. Turner lacks votes but he has resources. Since January, he has raised
$342,000 in cash and in-kind contributions of things like airplane travel. He
has contributed to other conservatives in a way that only speaker candidates
care to contribute, writing checks worth $7,500 to seven Republican hopefuls,
three of whom won their primaries.

Any challenge to Mr. Straus is a long shot right now. Mr. Turner's effort could
raise his profile even if he loses, and who knows where that might lead?

Maybe he could run for Congress.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/01/us/king-of-the-hill-making-a-push-to-be-house-
speaker.html

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


