                             144 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 2, 2014 Thursday 6:42 PM EST

Drone captures amazing lava video at Iceland volcano

BYLINE: Angela Fritz

LENGTH: 395 words


A team of videographers have captured an amazing, bird's eye view of the Iceland
volcano. Flying over the Holuhraun fissure site with a drone, they provide a
volcanic perspective that we rarely get to see.

The video is incredible.

As the drone approaches the fissure, with smoke rising high into the air, we are
given the perspective that we typically see in photos and video from
Bardarbunga: red lava peaks above the surrounding ridge of cooled molten rock
that has built up over the past month of eruption.

But as the drone gets closer, we are treated to a view that not many can say
they've experienced. The lava vent is huge and dynamic, with molten rock
shooting high into the air. A river of glowing molten rock flows away from the
fissure vent in a lava channel.

The second half of the video is the most impressive, as the drone hovers almost
directly over the vent. A lake of lava explodes high into the air. You wonder
how the drone is still operating.

It wasn't easy to get this footage. Drone operator and film director Eric Cheng
wound up hiking closer to the fissure site on foot to try and get a good signal
from the drone. Wired.com writes:

Every time he flew directly over the caldera, however, he lost video signal and
control. Cheng speculated that static electricity in the small amount of ash
from the eruption, or perhaps an electrical charge in the lava, were interfering
with the radio signals. During the last flight, Cheng's wireless video signal
went out completely. Worried, he triggered the drone's failsafe mode, and after
a few minutes, the whir of the drone's propellers could be heard as it flew into
range.

As it turns out, the drone actually had sustained some heat damage. "Apparently
it had been so hot that the camera had melted," said Cheng in the making-of
video (below). "Luckily the micro SD card survived - I was able to pull all of
the footage off of it."

Cheng goes on to describe how incredible it was to have the opportunity to get
such dramatic video. "The fact that you can take a one thousand dollar flying
camera and put it in the middle of an erupting volcano to capture wide angle
views of this giant bowl of molten lava which is exploding and throwing lava 150
meters or so into the air is pretty amazing."

If you can't get enough of the lava drone, Wired.com has written a great piece
on the video and the team that created it.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


