                             1417 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 15, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Braces for War Crimes Inquiries on Gaza

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1160 words


JERUSALEM -- The fighting is barely over in the latest Gaza war, with a five-day
cease-fire taking hold on Thursday, but attention has already shifted to the
legal battlefield as Israel gears up to defend itself against international
allegations of possible war crimes in the monthlong conflict.

Israel has excoriated the United Nations Human Rights Council over the
appointment of Prof. William Schabas, a Canadian expert in international law, to
head the council's commission of inquiry for Israel's military operations in the
Gaza Strip.

The broader struggle will be over what some experts describe as Israel's
''creative'' interpretation of international law for dealing with asymmetric
warfare in an urban environment. More than 1,900 Palestinians were killed in the
recent fighting, a majority of them believed to be civilians, while on the
Israeli side 64 soldiers and three civilians were killed.

Israeli leaders view the Human Rights Council as hopelessly biased against
Israel and say statements made in the past by Professor Schabas rule him out as
a fair adjudicator. In one prime example, Professor Schabas was filmed in New
York almost two years ago saying Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was his
''favorite'' to be in the dock at the International Criminal Court.

''The report of this committee has already been written,'' Mr. Netanyahu said
this week. ''They have nothing to look for here. They should visit Damascus,
Baghdad and Tripoli.''

Mr. Netanyahu has repeatedly accused Hamas of a ''double war crime'' for
targeting Israeli civilians with its rockets and, he says, using Gaza's
civilians as a human shield for its activities.

Yuval Steinitz, Israel's minister for strategic affairs, said that
paradoxically, the only way Professor Schabas could prove he was worthy of the
job would be by resigning from it.

Responding to the accusations by telephone from London, Professor Schabas said
Thursday: ''Everybody in the world has opinions about Israel and Palestine. I
certainly do.''

He added: ''I was recruited for my expertise. I leave my own personal views at
the door, as a judge does.''

Rejecting assertions that he is ''anti-Israeli,'' he said he had lectured in
Israel often and was on the board of the Israel Law Review. ''I don't think
everyone in Israel agrees,'' he said. ''I would fit in well there.''

A similar Human Rights Council inquiry into the 2008-9 war in Gaza led to the
Goldstone Report. Named for Richard Goldstone, the South African jurist who led
that inquiry, the report said it found evidence of potential war crimes
committed by both Israel and Hamas. It accused Israel of intentionally targeting
civilians in Gaza as a matter of policy, a blow that Mr. Netanyahu once
described as a strategic challenge.

Mr. Goldstone later retracted that central accusation, writing in The Washington
Post, after Israeli investigators presented counterevidence, ''If I had known
then what I know now, the Goldstone Report would have been a different
document.'' Other members of the Goldstone panel stood by the report.

In Israel's latest aerial and ground campaign, several episodes already stand
out as likely focuses of international attention, including several deadly
Israeli strikes at or near United Nations schools in Gaza where thousands of
civilians were taking refuge, actions that the secretary general of the United
Nations, Ban Ki-moon, has denounced as ''outrageous, unacceptable and
unjustifiable.''

Critics have also pointed to the Israeli military's policy of bombing family
homes it said were being used by Hamas operatives or other groups as ''command
and control centers'' or for weapons storage, causing heavy casualties among
civilians, including many minors and women, despite a system of issuing prior
warnings. B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights organization, asserted in a recent
report that the practice violated the international legal principles of
distinction and proportionality, calling into question the clear military nature
of the targets and whether the military gains were significant enough to justify
the deaths of civilians.

And questions have been raised about a particularly aggressive and deadly
Israeli assault on the southern Gaza Strip city of Rafah on Aug. 1 as Israeli
forces pursued a Hamas squad they believed had captured a soldier. Prof. Emanuel
Gross, an Israeli expert in military law and a former military judge, said in a
recent interview that the firepower used in Rafah to try to return one soldier
did not seem justified, morally or legally, and appeared to be
''disproportionate.'' (The soldier was later declared killed in action.)

In a move that some Israelis hope will take the wind out of the Human Rights
Council inquiry and other potential ones by outside groups, Israel's attorney
general and the military advocate general are setting up an independent
mechanism for investigating the events in Gaza, and the state comptroller also
plans an inquiry.

But the Israeli military is not waiting. Lt. Col. Eran Shamir-Borer, head of the
strategic affairs branch in the international law department at the Military
Advocate General's Corps, said in an interview that a recently established
military committee of fact-finding teams, independent of the chain of command
and made up largely of reservists, is already investigating certain cases and
could have some preliminary findings as early as Friday.

Speaking at military headquarters in Tel Aviv, Colonel Shamir-Borer said that
since Israel's 2006 war in Lebanon, the army's legal counselors have become more
involved in operational activity before and during military campaigns, as well
as in the aftermath, training commanders, reviewing planned targets and
deploying to the Gaza border to work with commanders at the division level
during the recent conflict.

''We know the law very well,'' Colonel Shamir-Borer said, ''but it is always
more complex than in the textbooks.''

''The modus operandi of our enemy,'' he said, referring to Hamas, ''is by
definition defying the laws of armed conflict.''

Colonel Shamir-Borer said that the planned bombing of homes was reviewed house
by house, based on intelligence and other considerations, and guidelines were
set for some of the attacks, for example, determining that they could be carried
out only at night, or with a drone to check that the residents had evacuated.

Individual cases where many family members were nevertheless killed, such as a
July 13 airstrike on a home that killed 18 members of the Batsh family and
severely wounded Tayseer al-Batsh, the Hamas police chief in Gaza, are now being
examined. In each case the teams will decide if a criminal investigation is
warranted. At this stage, the policy of targeting houses is not under review.

Colonel Shamir-Borer said his department had invited nongovernment organizations
to submit complaints and had also approached them.

''You know the international community is going to raise allegations,'' he said.
''You need answers.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/15/world/middleeast/israel-braces-for-war-crimes-
inquiries-on-gaza.html

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


