                             1447 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why #RussiaInvadedUkraine Matters

BYLINE: By CHRYSTIA FREELAND

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1125 words


Last week, Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, said he could take Kiev in two
weeks. This week, he disavowed a cease-fire, then proposed a peace plan. Now a
cease-fire is in effect. These zigzags did their job, leaving the West confused
about his intentions, just as the European Union and NATO were meeting to figure
out how to counter them.

In the information war, Ukrainians have been striking back. When Russian
soldiers openly engaged Ukrainian forces at the end of August, a new hashtag
began to trend on Twitter. Invented by a Belorussian and enthusiastically
promoted by Ukrainians, #RussiaInvadedUkraine was used nearly a half a million
times in the first few days. A week later, it was still being posted hundreds of
times an hour.

In this conflict, technologically driven activism has become characteristic.
Ukraine's Maidan revolution began with a post on Facebook, and a ''nerd unit,''
staffed by volunteers who are crowdsourcing the funding for their drones, is
operating in the contested east. What's new and important about
#RussiaInvadedUkraine is its clear language.

One of the features of Russia's war against Ukraine has been the reintroduction
of Newspeak into public discourse. The Kremlin has used misinformation,
propaganda and outright deceit to frame the debate. Ukraine's cyberactivists
insisted on #RussiaInvadedUkraine to remind Western leaders and journalists who
are loath to use such plain terms that our weak words are an unnecessary
concession to Mr. Putin.

It may seem precious, when the war has already claimed at least 3,000 lives, to
fuss over the proper use of language. It isn't. George Orwell, in his famous
1946 essay, ''Politics and the English Language,'' argued that the battle
against poor English wasn't frivolous because ''the slovenliness of our language
makes it easier for us to have foolish thoughts.''

There is a case for fudging. By calling Russia's latest aggression against
Ukraine an ''incursion,'' as President Obama did when Russian tanks first drove
in, we could be leaving Mr. Putin an easier way out. If he never ''invaded,''
the logic goes, he won't need to face the humiliation of retreat.

That might have been a reasonable theory this summer, after the destruction of
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. Russia had already invaded and annexed part of
Ukraine -- Crimea -- and Russian citizens and Russian weapons were spearheading
the insurgency in the Donbass region in the east. But it was just possible that
Mr. Putin would choose to end a conflict that had already cost Russia billions
of dollars.

He didn't. Instead, as the Ukrainian military was making gains in the Donbass,
Mr. Putin opted for further escalation by directly sending in Russian troops and
equipment.

Mr. Putin has already muzzled Russia's once boisterous free press, exiled and
imprisoned opposition leaders and assumed direct control of the mass media. If
he opts for a compromise over Ukraine -- and the best scenario on offer right
now seems to be an ugly and destabilizing ''frozen conflict'' in the Donbass --
he won't need the West to help him justify himself at home. He has a powerful
domestic propaganda machine to do that.

By adopting Mr. Putin's Newspeak we aren't offering him a useful diplomatic fig
leaf. We are convincing him of his strength and our weakness. When Russian
troops fighting in Ukraine are described on Russian state television as being
''on vacation,'' the Kremlin is asserting not only that it can send soldiers to
Ukraine, but that it can explain their presence with an aggressively transparent
excuse that amounts to thuggish mockery.

Mr. Putin is challenging us with a double bluff, one military and one
rhetorical. Reasonable people can differ on how much we should be supporting
Ukraine and on how strongly we should be sanctioning Russia. But it is no longer
possible to disagree about what is happening.

This is not a civil war, nor is it a fascist coup. Eastern Ukrainians are not
rising up against an oppressive regime in Kiev.

We don't know whether this week's talk of cease-fire is real or just a feint,
nor do we know if Ukraine will survive as a viable, independent country. But one
thing is already certain: Russia has invaded a sovereign, democratic state, and
through that use of force aims to shape its actions.

We may decide we lack the will to stop this or to more forcefully help
Ukrainians to stop it, but in making that decision we need to be clear about
what is going on. The distinction between lies and truth matters here because
this conflict started with the Ukrainian people's revolt against
authoritarianism and in favor of the liberal rights and responsibilities
Ukrainians call European values. This is partly a fight of freedom of speech
against censorship. In the Ukrainian-Russian conflict, moral clarity is
essential, but to get there we need linguistic clarity, too: Ukrainians decided
to build a democracy at home and to make a trade deal with Europe; Russia
invaded.

As the Lithuanian president, Dalia Grybauskaite, put it earlier this week (on
Twitter, of course), ''#Ukraine is attacked because of its European choice. It
is not only defending its territory, but also #Europe and its values.''

If the fighting in the Donbass was in fact a civil war, it would matter to
Ukrainians, Russians, Eastern Europeans and everyone who cares about the
thousands who have died. But the wider security implications would be limited.
Countries do break up -- the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, perhaps
even the United Kingdom.

What makes the Ukrainian conflict consequential is that it is not a civil war.
It is an annexation of territory, the invasion of one European country by
another. As Carl Bildt, the Swedish foreign minister, argued in a speech in
Berlin in June, Europe's entire security structure is built on the agreement
that this would never happen again.

''The principle of respecting existing borders was laid down as one of the key
foundations of peace in our Europe,'' Mr. Bildt said. ''And it has been adhered
to up until March of this year.''

In other words, Russia has broken Europe's geopolitical rules, and thereby
changed them.

Confronting Mr. Putin is a painful prospect, but so is living in a world
governed by these new rules. Mr. Putin and his propagandists understand this
very well, which is why they like to present us with the easier option of
obfuscation. That's the most dangerous choice of all. #RussiaInvadedUkraine.
Please retweet.

Update: This article has been updated to reflect news developments.

Chrystia Freeland is the author of ''Sale of the Century: Russia's Wild Ride
From Communism to Capitalism'' and a Liberal member of the Canadian Parliament.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/06/opinion/chrystia-freeland-why-russiainvadedukr
aine-matters.html

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


