                             1467 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 17, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. General Open to Ground Force as Option in Iraq

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and JEREMY W. PETERS; Helene Cooper contributed
reporting from Atlanta, and Eric Schmitt from Monterey, Calif.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1259 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama's top military adviser said Tuesday that he would
recommend deploying United States forces in ground operations against Islamic
extremists in Iraq if airstrikes proved insufficient, opening the door to a
riskier, more expansive American combat role than the president has publicly
outlined.

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the
Senate Armed Services Committee that while he was confident that an American-led
coalition would defeat the Islamic State, he would not foreclose the possibility
of asking Mr. Obama to send American troops to fight the militants on the ground
-- something Mr. Obama has ruled out.

''My view at this point is that this coalition is the appropriate way forward. I
believe that will prove true,'' General Dempsey said. ''But if it fails to be
true, and if there are threats to the United States, then I, of course, would go
back to the president and make a recommendation that may include the use of U.S.
military ground forces.''

General Dempsey acknowledged that this would run counter to the president's
policy, but he said, ''He has told me as well to come back to him on a
case-by-case basis.''

The general's statement lays bare the challenge the president will face in
selling an expanded military campaign to a war-weary American public. Mr. Obama,
seeking to allay fears of another Iraq war, has promised that American ground
troops will not be involved in fighting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or
ISIL. In a sign of the administration's mixed message, the president pointedly
did not call it a war, while his advisers later did.

But the realities of a prolonged campaign, General Dempsey said, could make such
a hands-off approach untenable, particularly if the battle against the militants
moves into densely populated cities where airstrikes are less effective and the
chances of civilian casualties are much higher. His candid testimony, hours
before a divided House of Representatives began debating whether to approve Mr.
Obama's request for authority to arm the Syrian rebels, drew expressions of
concern from antiwar groups and could further complicate the political dynamic
for the president.

The White House insisted on Tuesday that Mr. Obama was not shifting his policy
and that General Dempsey was not out of sync with his commander in chief.

''It's the responsibility of the president's military advisers to plan and
consider all the wide range of contingencies,'' the White House press secretary,
Josh Earnest, said to reporters. ''It's also the responsibility of the commander
in chief to set out a clear policy.''

On Wednesday, Mr. Obama is scheduled to get a briefing from his military
commanders at the Pentagon's Central Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla. The
rare visit is described by White House officials as part of his effort to
mobilize public support for the mission. But it is also calculated to soothe
tensions with the military over who is in charge of the operation after Mr.
Obama named retired Gen. John R. Allen to be his special envoy to the coalition
of countries fighting the Islamic State. General Allen will be based at the
State Department.

Already, Mr. Obama's policy has been tested by his commanders. General Dempsey
said Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, who oversees the Central Command, had recommended
putting Special Operations troops on the ground to direct airstrikes during a
recent campaign by Iraqi and Kurdish forces to retake the Mosul Dam from the
extremist militants.

Mr. Obama rejected that recommendation, and General Dempsey said the United
States used technology -- a drone known as a Rover -- to compensate for not
having its own advisers on the ground. The American advisers remained in the
Kurdish capital, Erbil.

The challenge will come, General Dempsey said, when Iraqi and Kurdish forces try
to drive the militants out of densely populated urban areas like Mosul. In those
cases, General Dempsey said, he might recommend deploying Special Operations
troops to provide what he called ''close combat advising,'' essentially working
alongside Iraqi commanders in the field and helping them direct their troops to
targets.

While the Americans would not fire weapons themselves, military experts said
there was little practical distinction between the role General Dempsey
described at the hearing and actual combat.

''We've already got ground forces introduced, and they are performing combat
missions,'' Paul D. Eaton, a retired Army general who helped train the Iraqi
security forces and is now a senior adviser to the National Security Network,
said on Tuesday. ''I applaud the general for his candor. That will help the
president and the debate greatly.''

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel testified along with General Dempsey, but their
appearance appeared to do little to dispel concerns on Capitol Hill. They said
the campaign would include the training and equipping of 5,000 Syrian fighters
and the involvement of more than 40 coalition nations, including 30 that have
pledged military support.

Members of the committee sounded far from convinced that the plan would succeed.
Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said he doubted that 5,000 Syrian
fighters, who could not be trained for months, would be able to fight off more
than 30,000 Islamic State combatants. ''To many of us that seems like an
inadequate response,'' he said.

Senator Angus King of Maine, an independent who votes with Democrats, said he
was concerned about what appeared to be a ''whack-a-mole'' approach to the
terrorism threat.

With a vote by the House on authorizing funding for training and arming the
Syrian opposition possible on Wednesday afternoon, Republican leaders were
carefully gauging support, a sign that the vote could be closer than they would
like. Lawmakers on the left and the right threatened to vote against the
authorization, for different reasons.

Many Republicans refuse to support a plan they say is too circumscribed and
halfhearted. Reluctant Democrats argue it is imprudent to arm a group of rebels
who have no clear allegiances to the United States.

''It's clearly not enough,'' said Representative Tom Rooney, a Florida
Republican who sits on the Intelligence Committee. ''If ISIS is truly a national
security threat that needs to be destroyed, then we need to destroy them. And
anybody you talk to who knows what they're talking about believes that arming
the rebels is insufficient.''

Mr. Hagel and General Dempsey stressed that this campaign would be nothing like
the 2003 invasion of Iraq. ''This won't look like a 'shock-and-awe campaign'
because that's not how ISIL is organized,'' General Dempsey said.

It is the administration's eagerness to distinguish the campaign from the Iraq
war that has led it into semantic knots. After administration officials first
denied it was a war, Mr. Earnest said the United States was at war ''in the same
way we are at war with Al Qaeda and its affiliates.''

That put Secretary of State John Kerry, who was in the Middle East lining up
coalition partners for the campaign, in an awkward position. He had said that
Americans should not think of it as a war or slip into ''war fever.'' Then he
was forced to backtrack.

''These terms mean things to the military, and have implications for resource
commitments,'' said Peter D. Feaver, a former national security aide to George
W. Bush and Bill Clinton. ''If you're using the term war, that implies a level
of presidential commitment. The acid question is whether it is higher than
Obama's own commitment.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/17/world/middleeast/isis-airstrikes-united-states
-coalition.html

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Fighters with Asaib Ahl al-Haq, a Shiite militia, and Kurdish
pesh merga forces on patrol earlier this month in Tikrit, Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
YOUSSEF BOUDLAL/REUTERS) (A1)
   Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, left, the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, and Defense
Secretary Chuck Hagel testified on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


