                              14 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 22, 2014 Monday 1:53 PM EST

An introduction to journo-drones

BYLINE: Michael Berry;Nabiha Syed (guest-blogging)

LENGTH: 974 words


Small unmanned aircraft systems, commonly known as drones, open up new
possibilities for many industries, including journalism. We begin our
exploration of the legal landscape of drones by looking at their uses for news
gathering.

Drones are looming on the horizon these days: lurking on the border, looking for
missing children and delivering beer. Public opinion on whether this is a good
or bad thing varies widely. The legal issues surrounding our drone future are
similarly unsettled. Thanks to the hospitality of the Volokh Conspiracy, we'll
be exploring the legal and policy dimensions of domestic drone use all week,
with a special focus on the use of drones for journalistic purposes - we are
media lawyers, after all!

Drones for journalistic use - journo-drones, as we'll call them - have been on
the scene since at least 2011, when the Daily, News Corp.'s now-defunct tablet
newspaper, flew camera-equipped drones to survey the devastation wrought by
tornadoes in Alabama.(The Federal Aviation Administration was not impressed.)

Since then, journo-drones have demonstrated their capabilities as one of the
newest tools of the journalist trade. For example, in 2012 a hobbyist flying his
drone over the Trinity River in Texas noticed a nearby creek with red rivulets,
which, upon closer inspection, were streams of pig blood flowing from a local
slaughterhouse. The footage prompted a lengthy investigation. Likewise, in 2013,
while Colorado was in the midst of horrific rains and flooding, a private
company used drones to map the floods in an effort to educate the public. And in
Australia, one media company used a drone to observe refugee encampments on
Christmas Island after being denied permission to view the area.

Journalists are eager to use drones in their reporting for many reasons. Here
are a few:

Vantage point. First, and most obviously, drones have the ability to capture
incredible images, offering vantage points that previously could only be
accessed at great expense. Unlike aerial footage from news helicopters, drones
offer viewpoints that previously were unimaginable. The Daily's footage of
tornado damage illustrates this advantage: Although on-the-ground reporting
might have given a close-up of the outside of destroyed buildings, and
helicopter imagery could have displayed the destroyed horizon, the Daily's news
drones were able to switch between those vantage points, offering people
perspectives that otherwise could never have been seen. Indeed, many of the
places the drone surveyed were not accessible to people, at least not safely. In
addition to their visual capabilities, drones can be equipped with an array of
sensors to gather data about weather, temperature and radiation, as well as
other environmental information.

Drones - better known in the technology industry and among regulators as small
unmanned aircraft systems (sUAS) - come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Some
look like model airplanes, while others look nothing like the manned aircraft we
have seen in the past, taking the form of futuristic mini-spaceships with
multiple rotors. From what we've seen, most journalists are interested in drones
that span less than a few feet in diameter and weigh only a few pounds. The
advantage of such drones over helicopters is clear: Their small size permits
accessibility to otherwise hard-to-reach areas, allowing versatility in vantage
points that range seamlessly from up above to up close, into tight spots and in
between obstacles.

Cost. Today, a small Parrot AR drone, which can fly a few hundred feet in the
air for about 15 minutes, costs only $300. The cost of a more sophisticated
drone can range from roughly $1,000 to $40,000, depending on its size, the
distance it can travel and the time it can stay in the air. By way of
comparison, operating a helicopter for news coverage costs approximately $1,000
per hour, including the cost of the personnel required to fly it.

Safety. Unmanned drones can eradicate the need for placing humans in harm's way
when reporting on natural disasters and other dangerous events, making
on-the-scene reporting possible as never before. For example, drones can easily
fly over forest fires, through the aftermath of a typhoon and even into erupting
volcanoes, all without risking human life.

As a result,the demand for drones is growing exponentially. The technology is
developing just as rapidly, building on drones' advantages and minimizing their
risks.

The law has not kept pace, lurching forward in fits and starts. Federal
regulators have not moved quickly enough to accommodate this nascent industry or
to safely integrate drones into American airspace. Though drone enthusiasts,
including the media, want the FAA to issue regulations to provide some clear and
comprehensive guidance, that has yet to happen.

We will spend the next week wading through a number of issues related to
domestic drone use. Given our backgrounds and interest in journo-drones, we will
focus primarily on private drone use, leaving for others the questions and
debates triggered by drones used by government agencies and law enforcement
officials. In our subsequent posts, we will:

(1) Outline some of the potential legal issues raised by drones;

(2) Take a look at the various approaches that policymakers might pursue in
regulating drones;

(3) Provide a broad overview of the regulatory history and current regulatory
landscape governing drones;

(4) Describe the laws some states have passed governing the private use of
drones;

(5) Discuss laws of general applicability that serve to regulate private drone
use; and

(6) Offer our thoughts on the laws states have passed thus far regulating
private drone use and where we should go from here.

Stay tuned! We look forward to sharing our insights and reading your comments
and questions.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


