                             1440 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putin Rushes in, Pretending Not to; Obama Stands Back

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN.

Serge Schmemann is a member of the editorial board of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; QUICK HISTORY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1107 words


When a state sends more than a thousand troops with mobile artillery and heavy
equipment into a neighboring state and takes control of territory, that's an
invasion, right?

Not according to NATO, which reported the Russian military movements in Ukraine
this past week but depicted them only as increased Russian ''interference.'' And
not according to President Obama, who saw Russia being only ''a little more
overt'' in its support of secessionists in southeastern Ukraine. And certainly
not according to President Vladimir V. Putin, whose lieutenants simply denied
everything and labeled the evidence a Western ''canard.''

Spin, of course, is an elemental political tool, and for the West to call the
invasion an invasion would require a response that neither Washington nor other
Western capitals nor NATO are prepared for. But an invasion it is, and the
fundamental challenge to the liberal world order that it poses will be high on
NATO's agenda when its leaders gather in Wales this week.

As for Mr. Putin, the lie is an honored Soviet propaganda tool he has used since
the start of the Russian campaign against Ukraine. The Russian leader is aware
that acknowledging an invasion would not only sharply elevate the level of
tension with the West, but would carry considerable domestic repercussions.
Polls show that only 5 percent of Russians would support sending their troops
into Ukraine.

When Russia acknowledged that Ukraine had captured some Russian soldiers --
Moscow said they accidentally wandered across the border -- mothers and
girlfriends of the prisoners immediately and loudly began demanding an
explanation.

The implausibly deniable invasion of Ukraine, to play on an old C.I.A. term, is
not the only unconventional war facing the United States and NATO. There is also
the question of what to do about ISIS, the brutal jihadist outfit marauding
through Iraq and Syria.

In brief comments on Ukraine and the Middle East on Thursday, President Obama
said the United States had not yet formulated a strategy for dealing with ISIS
inside Syria, but he confirmed he had asked Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel for
options. But however reluctant he and the American public were to get militarily
involved abroad, it was clear that neither the United States nor NATO could
ignore the two threats.

As NATO grapples with armed conflicts, international health authorities will be
fighting their own unconventional war against the Ebola virus, which spread to a
fifth West African country, Senegal, and, according to the World Health
Organization, could eventually infect 20,000 people.

In this struggle, too, finding a strategy was not always easy. Liberia's
misguided attempt to quarantine the squalid West Point neighborhood of the
capital of Monrovia, the African city hit hardest by Ebola, created a reaction
arguably as dangerous as the infection, with residents crowding together and
battling surrounding soldiers and the police.

The Convenient Lie

The crisis in Ukraine has been underway now for half a year, and the Russian
involvement, from the outright annexation of Crimea in March to the men, arms
and convoys repeatedly reported spotted in the fighting in the southeastern
industrial belt, has been obvious. But something seemed to change in the past
week, when Mr. Putin amiably shook hands with President Petro O. Poroshenko on
Tuesday, just two days before NATO reported that more than 1,000 Russian
soldiers with artillery and other heavy weaponry were on the march inside
Ukraine, and as rebels poised themselves for a new thrust along the Sea of Azov.

Until now, Europe, and to a lesser degree the United States, had publicly
sustained the myth that Russia was intent only on destabilizing Ukraine to deter
it from shifting westward politically, rather than to gain control over its
eastern provinces, and that Mr. Putin could be brought to the negotiating table
through sanctions and censure. But the Russia-backed rebel drive toward the port
of Mariupol could also open a land route from Russia to Crimea, underpinning
Russian control of a broad section of Ukrainian territory that Mr. Putin has
provocatively called by its old czarist name, ''Novorossiya,'' or ''New
Russia.''

The West has been reluctant to acknowledge that Mr. Putin may be seeking actual
control over the Donbass region, in part because breaking with Russia would
endanger a major European energy source and lucrative trade deals, including the
French sale of two Mistral-class assault ships to Moscow. More broadly, defining
Russia as an enemy would mean an end to the post-Cold War world order based on
the international rule of law -- an order in which a democratizing Russia was to
be a partner in integrating emerging economies, fighting terrorism and reining
in rogue states.

Mr. Putin has craftily assisted Europe in its illusions by consistently denying
any role in the Ukrainian fighting, regularly referring to the Europeans as
''our partners,'' pinning the blame for the crisis on American
''unilateralism,'' and posing as a mediator between Kiev and the pro-Russian
militias. His actions, however, reflect a primitive and aggressive brand of
geopolitics that was not supposed to have survived the Cold War.

In his comments on Thursday, Mr. Obama seemed intent first of all on restraining
expectations of what the United States might do about either Ukraine or ISIS.
Russia's actions, he said, were ''not really a shift,'' and he was vague about
tightening sanctions.

Yet the pressure for intervening more directly in Ukraine by supplying the
government in Kiev with weapons and intelligence is bound to grow, both within
the Obama administration and among Eastern European states.

The Islamic State

That challenge extends to Iraq and Syria, where the latest iteration of
fanatical Islam, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, has established a virtual
state straddling the two countries through military prowess and ruthless
cruelty.

While Washington has agreed to airstrikes against ISIS inside Iraq to protect
threatened minorities and to give the Baghdad government time to marshal its
badly battered and fractured forces, President Obama emphasized on Thursday that
no decision had been made yet on dealing with ISIS inside Syria.

But there was a growing awareness that ISIS could not be curbed so long as it
could flee to bases in Syria. Officials were said to be debating whether to use
drones or fighter jets, and whether to target ISIS forces or specific leaders.

Mr. Obama did not address the actual choices before him. His message was not the
action the United States or its allies might take, but rather the
inadmissibility of any mission creep.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/opinion/sunday/putin-rushes-in-pretending-not-
to-obama-stands-back.html

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A camouflaged pro-Russian tank seen in the town of Novoazovsk,
in eastern Ukraine, last Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEI GRITS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


