                             1436 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 28, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Ebola Crisis, Hope and Heroism

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1002 words


To the Editor:

Re ''New Thinking About Ebola Treatments'' (editorial, Aug. 25):

Traditional drug repurposing, although successful in treating some diseases,
still requires considerable time to identify candidate compounds and even more
time to test them in clinical trials. Ebola requires and deserves a much more
aggressive approach, while still balancing safety and efficacy concerns.

One way to considerably speed up the drug development process is to use
high-end, bioinformatics-oriented computing approaches. When applied to drug
repurposing, this approach can allow for a much faster identification of
candidate compounds. When applied to clinical trials, this approach may quickly
provide valuable animal and human information without the need for actual
subjects.

With bioinformatics, drug repurposing can be used quickly without resorting to
desperate measures that compromise safety. These bioinformatics approaches are
already under development for diseases that are prevalent in wealthy countries,
like cancer; Ebola provides an opportunity for this potentially game-changing
approach to be applied to a disease primarily affecting those in
resource-limited countries.

RAJESH GUPTA Stanford, Calif., Aug. 26, 2014

The writer, a doctor, is an adjunct associate with Stanford Health Policy
focusing on global health technologies.

To the Editor:

What's troubling in this catastrophic Ebola outbreak is not only the large
number of cases and the late recognition -- despite cries for help from Doctors
Without Borders going back to March -- but the constant news feed about the
importance of the medication ZMapp, which has been used to ''treat'' the
disease, initially in two Americans.

The news reporting is troubling for many reasons. First, it draws attention from
far more important issues like the shortage of health care personnel and
supplies, efficient case and contact tracing, education of the public and health
care providers on practical infection control steps, and proper use of isolation
and quarantine.

Drugs are important. But there are very limited supplies of ZMapp, and there are
perceived biases and outrage regarding who is fortunate enough to get it.
Furthermore, there hasn't been sufficient testing for us to know if the drug
works. If proper infrastructure and supplies were in place we could do
case-control studies to truly assess effectiveness; short of this the Food and
Drug Administration will require testing in two animal species.

We need to concentrate our news coverage on the things that really help.

PETER KATONA Los Angeles, Aug. 26, 2014

The writer is a clinical professor of medicine at the University of California,
Los Angeles, and a former member of the Food and Drug Administration's Advisory
Committee on Antimicrobials.

To the Editor:

Re ''Two New Cases of Ebola Stem From Indirect Contact'' (news article, Aug.
23):

News of the first British Ebola patient, a health care worker in Sierra Leone,
is testament to the fact that this outbreak is not only a crisis for the
affected countries and their neighbors, but also for the international community
as a whole. As the virus can be spread by international travel, it can show up
in any city that has an international airport.

This is bound to become a humanitarian crisis of international proportions if
actions are not taken immediately to stop the spread of the Ebola virus. To make
matters worse, many of the infected people are health care workers, upon whom
the fight to curtail the spread of the virus relies.

Regrettably, the response of the international community has been uncertain and
disjointed so far. Cold War anxieties related to the situation in Ukraine and
the entrenched fear from the threat of jihadists have overshadowed the need to
expel the most dangerous enemy right now: the Ebola virus. This extraordinary
crisis requires extraordinary measures.

As an American nurse once eloquently put it, describing a similar campaign to
eradicate malaria in the mid-1950s: ''What an exciting fight this could be, to
liberate an entire country from malaria....This would be our war, a
fight-to-finish war, a constructive war where enemy germs were killed. This was
the kind of war to which I could give myself wholeheartedly.''

MUNJED FARID AL QUTOB London, Aug. 25, 2014

The writer, a doctor, is a public health specialist.

To the Editor:

Thank you so much for the front-page article about Josephine Finda Sellu, a
nurse who is serving on the front lines of the Ebola crisis in Africa (''If They
Survive in Ebola Ward, They Work On,'' Aug. 24). She is not armed with grenades,
automatic rifles or drones. She and her fellow nurses are simply and powerfully
armed with immense courage, knowledge, kindness and compassion.

I commend The Times for telling the story of nurses and health care workers who
put the health, comfort and safety of others before their own. I was an
intensive-care unit nurse at the beginning of the AIDS crisis, when we did not
really understand the nature of the enemy we were facing or how to protect
ourselves. Like the nurses in Africa today, the nurses I worked with protected
one another and comforted our patients as best we could.

SHERILL MASON Chevy Chase, Md., Aug. 24, 2014

To the Editor:

During this Ebola epidemic, heroes like Josephine Finda Sellu emerge. With many
health care workers dying, Ms. Sellu and other brave men and women continue to
do the dangerous work of caring for the Ebola victims.

Fortunately, help in the form of quarantine protocols and needed materials may
be beginning to turn the tide. At the same time the health care systems in these
disease-ravaged countries are strengthened.

This fortifying of the health care systems is also happening with the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, which is working with developing
countries to create their own sustainable systems to vaccinate all children.
Let's hope that one day the alliance will be able to include an Ebola
vaccination in this important work.

WILLIE DICKERSON Snohomish, Wash., Aug. 25, 2014

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/28/opinion/in-ebola-crisis-hope-and-heroism.html

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JON HAN)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


