                             1449 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Soloists and Sirens, and Bach Revisited

BYLINE: By ZACHARY WOOLFE

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 8750 words


All details are subject to change. The complete listing is at nytimes.com/music.

SEPTEMBER

NONESUCH RECORDS AT BAM If you look around at the capacious, genre-blurring
landscape of contemporary music and you're delighted, there are few better
institutions to thank than Nonesuch Records, whose discography stretches from
Charles Wuorinen to the Buena Vista Social Club. Founded in 1964, the label
celebrates its 50th birthday with a festival that shows off its range. Some of
the acts -- including Stephin Merritt, Jeff Tweedy and Caetano Veloso -- are
firmly on the pop side of things, but the series opens with a rare onstage
reunion of Philip Glass, Steve Reich and their respective ensembles, and
continues with artists like Brad Mehldau, Chris Thile, Dawn Upshaw, Gilbert
Kalish and Alarm Will Sound. Sept. 9-28. Brooklyn Academy of Music.

'HERE BE SIRENS' It's rare to get the chance to revisit a new work right away,
but when it had its premiere in January, the composer and vocalist Kate Soper's
inventive, surreal fantasia on antiquity had an unusually strong response. Steve
Smith, writing in The New York Times, said it was ''brainy, baffling,
consistently astounding'' and Alex Ross, in The New Yorker, called it ''an
erudite, hilarious, furiously inventive meditation on the siren myth.'' Its
return engagement, once again as a coproduction of Dixon Place and Morningside
Opera , features the same cast -- Ms. Soper, Gelsey Bell and Brett Umlauf -- and
director, Rick Burkhardt. Sept. 12-13. Dixon Place, 161A Chrystie Street, Lower
East Side, 212-219-0736, dixonplace.org.

CHRISTIAN TETZLAFF The 92nd Street Y is going back to the well to open its
season with Bach's spectacular, daunting six solo violin sonatas and partitas:
Mr. Tetzlaff played the same program there in 2009. But if the Y is going to
repeat itself, it could do worse than this marriage of sublime music and a
searching, if cool, artist, who has said that he views the works as six sections
of a unified cycle, one that unsurprisingly reaches its peak with the monumental
Chaconne of the Partita No. 2 in D minor. Sept. 18. 92nd Street Y, 1395
Lexington Avenue, 212-415-5500, 92y.org.

VOCE AT PACE This series of recitals by rising singers, programmed by the
veteran impresario Matthew Epstein, has been a valuable addition to the vocal
scene, and the first concert features the potent combination of the soprano
Julia Bullock, a star at the Juilliard School, and the tenor Joseph Kaiser, a
Met stalwart. Sept. 21. Schimmel Center for the Arts, Pace University, 3 Spruce
Street between Park Row and Gold Street, Lower Manhattan, 212-346-1715,
schimmel.pace.edu.

'LE NOZZE DI FIGARO' After a summer of bitter contract disputes between the
Met's administration and its unions, it is only appropriate that the company's
season kicks off with Mozart's great opera about labor unrest. The director
Richard Eyre, a Met regular (''Carmen,'' ''Werther''), stepped in just last year
when plans to import Michael Grandage's recent production from England were
scrapped; Mr. Eyre has said he plans to keep the opera's Spanish setting while
updating the action to the 1920s. The bass-baritone Ildar Abdrazakov,
satisfyingly serious if not quite weighty enough of voice in the title role of
Borodin's ''Prince Igor'' in February, sings Figaro, the cunning valet. His
fiancée, Susanna, is played by the cool, compelling soprano Marlis Petersen, and
the perky young mezzo Isabel Leonard is the randy page Cherubino. Peter Mattei,
virile and charismatic, is perhaps the cast's surest bet as Count Almaviva,
while the most golden opportunity goes to the soprano Amanda Majeski, who was
scheduled to make her Met debut as the Countess later in the run but will step
in for Marina Poplavskaya (who withdrew, the Met said, for health reasons) for
an opening-night star turn. Matters should be secure in the pit: the Met's music
director, James Levine, returning for his first opening night since 2010, is a
consistently brilliant Mozartian. But why is the company making such a point of
touting the production's revolving set, when its previous staging of the opera
featured one, too? Opens Sept. 22. Metropolitan Opera House.

INON BARNATAN It is a busy season in New York for the talented Israeli-born
pianist, who plays a solo recital at SubCulture in September, a program with the
Jerusalem Quartet at the 92nd Street Y in October and concerts with the Chamber
Music Society of Lincoln Center and the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra, both in
November. He also begins a multiyear term as the New York Philharmonic's first
''artist in association,'' an intriguing position intended to give rising
artists extensive exposure to the orchestra's audiences. In December he plays a
chamber recital with Philharmonic musicians and his frequent collaborator, the
cellist Alisa Weilerstein, then Dvorak's Piano Quintet on the stage of Avery
Fisher Hall in February before his full-orchestra debut in March with Ravel's
Concerto in G. Sept. 23, other dates. Various locations.

'MACBETH' Opera lovers could have been forgiven a double take when the
Metropolitan Opera's 2014-15 programming was announced: After beginning the
season for three years in a row (''Anna Bolena,'' ''L'Elisir d'Amore,'' ''Eugene
Onegin''), Anna Netrebko is not the star on opening night. Having declined to
add the Countess in ''Le Nozze di Figaro'' to her repertory, she will have to
wait a couple of days for her latest diva vehicle, but it's a doozy: Lady
Macbeth, who rages her way through Verdi's opera before a delicate, creepy
sleepwalking scene, capped by an ethereal high D flat. There are other singers
in the cast, you say? Yes, and notable ones, including Zeljko Lucic in the title
role, the golden-toned Joseph Calleja as Macduff and René Pape as Banquo. Fabio
Luisi, who remains the Met's principal guest conductor even as his ascension to
the music directorship grows ever more improbable, leads the revival of Adrian
Noble's aptly grim production. Opens Sept. 24. Metropolitan Opera House.

TALEA ENSEMBLE Founded in 2006, this group has proved itself as dedicated and
persuasive an advocate for new music as currently exists in New York. It opens
its season with four works written especially for its nimble, passionate forces,
by Oscar Bettison, Christopher Trapani, Hans Tutschku and Aaron Helgeson. James
Baker conducts, and the sopranos Susan Narucki and Lucy Dhegrae do soloist duty.
Sept. 26. DiMenna Center for Classical Music, 450 West 37th Street, Manhattan,
212-594-6100, dimennacenter.org.

RENÉ PAPE The Metropolitan Opera has of late ventured into the solo recital
business, showcasing one tenor, Jonas Kaufmann, in 2011, and another, Vittorio
Grigolo, this year. But it has been 30 years since the Met hosted a bass in
concert on its stage. If the criteria for such an honor are duration and quality
of service to the company, Mr. Pape -- his tone steady and dark, his
intelligence penetrating -- is a far more deserving choice than Mr. Grigolo or
even Mr. Kaufmann, having sung nearly 200 performances since his house debut in
1995. While his specialty is Wagner -- his breakthrough was as a heart-rending
King Marke in ''Tristan und Isolde'' in 1999 -- his recital program features
works by Dvorak, Beethoven, Ravel and Mussorgsky, the title role in whose
''Boris Godunov'' he sang memorably at the Met in 2010. Sept. 28. Metropolitan
Opera House.

'BECOME OCEAN' Advancing in great orchestral heaves and sighs, this 40-minute
work by the Alaskan composer John Luther Adams, commissioned by the Seattle
Symphony and its music director, Ludovic Morlot, won this year's Pulitzer Prize
in Music. By that time it had already been recorded in Seattle, and is scheduled
for release just as the new season gets underway. Sept. 30. Cantaloupe Music.

OCTOBER

BERLIN PHILHARMONIC Opening Carnegie Hall's season is an ensemble that, perhaps
more than any other in the world, has balanced careful custody of its deep
traditions with innovation and creativity. Both sides of that equation are on
display in four concerts conducted by Simon Rattle, a visionary and savvy music
director. The first, featuring Anne-Sophie Mutter as soloist in Bruch's chestnut
Violin Concerto No. 1, also includes Rachmaninoff's Symphonic Dances and scenes
from Stravinsky's ''The Firebird.'' The next evening brings the complete
''Firebird,'' and in two subsequent performances the Berliners survey Schumann's
four symphonies (recently featured as the first release on the orchestra's
in-house recording label) and a contemporary work, Georg Friedrich Haas's
boiling ''dark dreams.'' Mr. Rattle's style in the standard repertory is assured
yet idiosyncratic -- and his vision unstintingly executed by these formidable
players -- so there may be much to argue about. Oct. 1, 2, 5, 6. Carnegie Hall.

NIELSEN PROJECT Closing one of the great successes of Alan Gilbert's tenure thus
far, the New York Philharmonic comes to the end of a multiyear process of
performing and recording the Danish composer Carl Nielsen's six symphonies and
three concertos for the Dacapo label. The symphonic cycle wraps up in October,
with the Fifth -- Nielsen's great masterpiece -- and the seething Sixth
(''Sinfonia Semplice''), along with the overture to his opera ''Maskarade.'' In
January, Mr. Gilbert leads the Clarinet Concerto, featuring the orchestra's new
principal clarinetist, Anthony McGill, who will be testing the waters at the
Philharmonic in what is officially being called a leave of absence from his
position with the Metropolitan Opera's orchestra. If all that is simply not
enough of Nielsen, whose 150th anniversary is in 2015, his countrymen will have
their say, too: the Danish National Symphony Orchestra, under Cristian Macelaru,
will play the dramatic Fourth Symphony (''The Inextinguishable'') in February at
Carnegie Hall, on a program that also includes Sibelius' ''Valse Triste'' and
Violin Concerto, featuring the great Anne-Sophie Mutter. Oct. 1-3, Jan. 8-10,
13. Avery Fisher Hall. Feb. 11. Carnegie Hall, carnegiehall.org.

COMPOSER PORTRAITS The Miller Theater's invaluable marquee series of deep dives,
a single living composer at a time, continues with a series expanded since last
year. The eminent composer and Columbia University professor Chou Wen-Chung,
born in 1923 and an important mentor to younger generations of Chinese
composers, opens the season, which continues with Chaya Czernowin, Keeril Makan,
Missy Mazzoli, Stefano Gervasoni, Anna Clyne and, on separate evenings, a
husband-and-wife pair: Bernard Rands and Augusta Read Thomas. Melissa Smey, the
Miller's executive director, ensures that this is the rare place in music in
which female and male composers get truly equal attention. Oct. 2. Miller
Theater.

CLAIRE CHASE We know that at least one recipient of a $500,000 MacArthur
Foundation ''genius'' grant is doing good with it. This daring, incisive flutist
and administrator, the founder and artistic director of the International
Contemporary Ensemble, has begun ''density 2036,'' a 22-year project that will
culminate at the 100th anniversary of Varèse's groundbreaking 1936 flute solo,
''Density 21.5.'' Each year from 2014 to 2036, Ms. Chase will commission a new
program of works for her instrument, and things get started with a set of
premieres by George Lewis, Matthias Pintscher, Felipe Lara and Du Yun. Oct. 2.
The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Manhattan, 212-255-5793, ext. 11,
thekitchen.org.

'ST. MATTHEW PASSION' After a weeklong stay at Carnegie Hall, orchestras
generally move on, exhausted. But the Berlin Philharmonic will keep something
special in reserve: just two performances of its spare, powerful staging of
Bach's great masterpiece, the opening event in Lincoln Center's White Light
Festival. Conducted by Simon Rattle and directed by Peter Sellars with a
peerless cast -- including Mark Padmore, perhaps our greatest Evangelist;
Christian Gerhaher; Camilla Tilling; Magdalena Kozena; Topi Lehtipuu; and Eric
Owens -- and the mighty Berlin Radio Choir in an immersive setting within the
grand Park Avenue Armory, it is not to be missed. Oct. 7-8.

WHITE LIGHT FESTIVAL The fifth iteration of Lincoln Center's spirituality-tinged
festival is its finest yet, including performances by the Berlin Philharmonic,
the Berlin Radio Choir, the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, I Fagiolini, Cantus,
Rizwan-Muazzam Qawwali, Roomful of Teeth and, not least, the gospel diva Mavis
Staples. Oct. 7-Nov. 11. Various locations.

LISA BATIASHVILI Bold and extroverted, this Georgian violinist sticks with the
standard repertory for much of her season-long residency with the New York
Philharmonic -- concertos by Brahms and Barber and a recital of Schubert, Bach
and Beethoven -- but contemporary music is certainly in the mix. In February she
joins Philharmonic players in a Contact! program of new works from Israel, and
in April plays the premiere of a concerto for violin and oboe (here, François
Leleux) by Thierry Escaich. Oct. 9, other dates. Avery Fisher Hall.

UBUNTU: MUSIC AND ARTS OF SOUTH AFRICA This capacious festival, organized by
Carnegie Hall, sprawls over jazz, classical and indigenous music, including
maskandi (known as the ''Zulu blues'') and folk music from the country's Cape
region. The concerts include the New York recital debuts of the South African
sopranos Pretty Yende and Elza van den Heever as well as a musical and
theatrical evening conceived by the violinist Daniel Hope and a program of films
by the artist William Kentridge, set to music by Philip Miller. Oct. 10-Nov. 5.
Carnegie Hall.

MET ORCHESTRA His return to the podium in full swing after a long period of
illness and uncertainty, James Levine adds three Carnegie Hall dates to his
beloved orchestra's busy opera season. The first concert includes works by two
composers dear to him: Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 21 in C (with the eminent
Maurizio Pollini as soloist) and Mahler's wrenching Ninth Symphony. In February
comes the voluptuous-toned mezzo-soprano Elina Garanca, singing Berg's ''Seven
Early Songs'' on a full program that also includes Beethoven's Symphony No. 2,
Elliott Carter's ''Three Illusions'' and Schumann's Symphony No. 2, with its
profound slow movement. Soon after the opera season ends in May, the orchestra
returns a final time, with Brahms's youthful Piano Concerto No. 1 (and the
dazzling yet delicate Yefim Bronfman as soloist) and Berlioz's blazing
''Symphonie Fantastique.'' Oct. 12, Feb. 8, May 17. Carnegie Hall.

EMERSON STRING QUARTET The recent replacement of this esteemed group's longtime
cellist, David Finckel, with Paul Watkins has gone smoothly, with Mr. Watkins
contributing a sheerly, sometimes almost excessively, beautiful sound. This
program includes Beethoven's compact String Quartet No. 11 in F minor
(''Serioso'') and Purcell's Chaconne in G minor, arranged by Britten, whose
String Quartet No. 2 is also on offer. Most tantalizing, though, is Schumann's
Piano Quintet in E flat, with the Emerson joined by the great pianist Yefim
Bronfman, fresh from his season-long residency with the New York Philharmonic.
Oct. 14. Carnegie Hall.

'ST. PETERSBURG' The star singer Cecilia Bartoli has used her fame to advocate
for little-known composers and strange corners of the repertory, but thus far
her excavations of musical rarities have been focused on Italy. She travels
further afield this time with a disc of music written by Italian and German
composers who served at the 18th-century Russian court. Few listeners, before
now, will have heard composers like Francesco Domenico Araia and Vincenzo
Manfredini, and, while much of the album is in Italian, even fewer will have
heard Ms. Bartoli sing in Russian. Oct. 14. Decca.

'ALEXANDRE BIS' AND 'COMEDY ON THE BRIDGE' In 2003, Gotham Chamber Opera
presented a Martinu double bill, and now it does so again, this time with two
different works, to open its season. The Surrealist ''Alexandre Bis''
(''Alexander Twice'') depicts a man who tests his wife's fidelity by cutting off
his beard and pretending to be his cousin. (One of the characters is a singing
portrait that narrates the action.) The folksy ''Comedy on the Bridge'' rounds
out the evening. Neal Goren, the company's founder and artistic director,
conducts a staging by James Marvel. Oct. 14-18. Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John
Jay College, 524 West 59th Street, Clinton, 212-279-4200,
gothamchamberopera.org.

'PORT BOU' The title of this new opera by Elliott Sharp refers to Portbou, on
the French-Spanish border, where the philosopher and critic Walter Benjamin died
as he tried to flee Nazi-occupied France in 1940. An evocation of Benjamin's
interior life on his final day, the work features the bass-baritone Nicholas
Isherwood, the pianist Jenny Lin and the accordionist William Schimmel, with
prerecorded electroacoustic backgrounds by Mr. Sharp and a set composed of video
projections by Janene Higgins. Oct. 16-17. Issue Project Room. 22 Boerum Place,
near Livingston Street, Downtown Brooklyn, 718-330-0313 , issueprojectroom.org.

AXIOM This Juilliard School ensemble, led by Jeffrey Milarsky, has made a name
for itself with precise, evocative performances of modern-music pinnacles. Its
three-concert series begins with a program of works by Messiaen, Harrison
Birtwistle and John Adams, then continues in November with a tribute to John
Cage and Conlon Nancarrow. An evening devoted to Ligeti closes the season, with
the talented young cellist Jay Campbell as soloist in the ominously delicate,
and then ominously ferocious, Cello Concerto from 1966. Oct. 17. Peter Jay Sharp
Theater, Juilliard School. Nov. 24, Feb. 25. Alice Tully Hall.

'THE DEATH OF KLINGHOFFER' At least we hope it will go on. John Adams's 1991
opera, a stylized, emotionally resonant reflection on Israel and Palestine told
through the story of a 1987 cruise-ship hijacking, had in recent years seemed to
have lost much of its power to inflame. The Tom Morris staging scheduled to
arrive at the Metropolitan Opera caused little controversy when it opened at the
English National Opera in London in 2012. But the Met's imprimatur still has
special impact, and unfounded allegations of the work's anti-Semitism followed
swiftly on the season announcement. In June, the company struck a cowardly
compromise, sacrificing the work's live movie-theater broadcast but keeping the
run intact, at least as of press time. Assuming audiences get a chance to decide
about the piece for themselves, the conductor will be David Robertson and the
excellent cast will include Michaela Martens, Sean Panikkar, Paulo Szot, Alan
Opie, Aubrey Allicock and Ryan Speedo Green. The choruses are the score's
shining moments, and the Met's great ensemble, prepared by Donald Palumbo, will,
with luck, get the chance to rise to the occasion. Opens Oct. 20. Metropolitan
Opera House.

ROOMFUL OF TEETH This exciting yet unassuming unaccompanied vocal octet, a
purveyor of exotic, eclectic techniques that range from humming to Tibetan
throat singing, flew under the radar of many music lovers until ''Partita for
Eight Voices,'' written for the group by one of its members, Caroline Shaw,
unexpectedly won the Pulitzer Prize in Music last year. The ensemble will
perform the magnificent four-section ''Partita,'' which has become a kind of
trademark, as part of a program for Lincoln Center's White Light Festival that
also includes works by Rinde Eckert, Sam Amidon and Brad Wells, the group's
founder. ''Partita'' pops up again in February, when it will be performed by
Roomful of Teeth, appearing with the American Contemporary Music Ensemble,
alongside Purcell, Gavin Bryars and a new piece by Ms. Shaw, ''Ritornello.''
Those two groups unite again in March at the soaring Temple of Dendur in the
Metropolitan Museum for Johann Johannsson's ''Drone Mass,'' based on Coptic
texts. Oct. 21. Clark Studio Theater.

'THE SOURCE' His style pugnaciously political, Ted Hearne made his name with a
song cycle about Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath, and has also written a
suite for chorus and orchestra taking on racial segregation in New Haven. His
new work, with a libretto by Mark Doten and a production directed by Daniel
Fish, is about Chelsea Manning, formerly known as Pvt. Bradley Manning, and the
reverberations from her disclosure of hundreds of thousands of classified
documents to WikiLeaks. Oct. 22-25. BAM Fisher, 321 Ashland Place, Fort Greene,
Brooklyn, 718-636-4100 , bam.org.

'ALCINA' Harry Bicket and the English Concert's superb three-year series of
Handel operas and oratorios in concert at Carnegie Hall comes to a close with
this alluring, tuneful masterpiece, lately growing in prominence and perhaps
even entering the standard repertory. (Fingers crossed.) The cast is more than
capable, led by three glowing Handelians: the mezzo-sopranos Joyce DiDonato and
Alice Coote and the soprano Anna Christy. The event also marks the start of Ms.
DiDonato's Perspectives series at Carnegie, which includes solo recitals,
chamber music and an evening with the Philadelphia Orchestra. Oct. 26. Carnegie
Hall.

STEVE REICH Two brilliant percussionists, Colin Currie and Daniel Druckman, are
joined by the pianists Simon Crawford-Phillips and Philip Moore for the American
premiere of Mr. Reich's Quartet for two vibraphones and two pianos. The program,
which also features students from the Juilliard School, goes back in time, too,
for ''Clapping Music'' and ''Drumming,'' Reich masterpieces from the early
1970s. Oct. 29. Carnegie Hall.

SPHINX ORGANIZATION The persistent lack of racial diversity on stage in concert
halls remains troubling, but it gets less attention than, say, the continued
underrepresentation of women in the Vienna Philharmonic. The Sphinx venture,
founded by Aaron P. Dworkin, musters competitions, grants and educational
activities in a valuable effort to help young black and Hispanic string players
advance toward performing careers. Its annual concert at Carnegie features the
Sphinx Virtuosi, the organization's flagship orchestra, and the Catalyst Quartet
in a program of American music that includes works by Copland, Ellington, Philip
Glass, John Corigliano, Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson and Jessie Montgomery. Oct.
29. Carnegie Hall.

'CURLEW RIVER' Netia Jones, a young British director who incorporates video and
projections into her productions with brilliant creativity, brings to Lincoln
Center's White Light Festival her recent staging of Britten's stark, stylized
theater work, a melding of Japanese Noh drama and Medieval mystery play. Joined
by the expressive tenor Ian Bostridge, who sings the Madwoman, in the intimate
quarters of a space on the campus of the Cathedral Church of St. John the
Divine, Ms. Jones imagines the piece as a moody installation, flickering with
light. Oct. 30-31, Nov. 1. Synod House, Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine,
1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights, stjohndivine.org.

PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA Yannick Nézet-Séguin, whose energy can seem boundless,
accumulated a troubling quantity of health- and exhaustion-related cancellations
last season, dropping out of an entire tour with his Rotterdam Philharmonic
Orchestra and two weeks with his Philadelphians. Hopefully refreshed and better
in control of a globe-trotting schedule, he brings this shining ensemble to
Carnegie Hall for three sweeping, extroverted programs that suit his vigorous
style, starting with Mahler's Second Symphony (''Resurrection'') in October,
with the soprano Angela Meade, the mezzo-soprano Sarah Connolly and the
Westminster Symphonic Choir. Brahms's Third Symphony shares a program in
December with Strauss's suite from ''Der Rosenkavalier '' and Haydn's Cello
Concerto in C, featuring Jean-Guihen Queyras as soloist, and May brings a
glimmer of new music: the New York premiere of Nico Muhly's ''Mixed Messages,''
alongside Rachmaninoff's Third Symphony and Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 3,
with Emanuel Ax. Oct. 31, Dec. 5, May 14. Carnegie Hall.

NOVEMBER

'LADY MACBETH OF MTSENSK' Why not make room for another Lady Macbeth
barnstorming her way through the Met? Shostakovich's savage opera, banned in the
Soviet Union for decades for its depravity, isn't a Shakespeare adaptation, but
it does feature yet another bloodthirsty prima donna: the central role of the
adulterous Katerina Ismailova goes to the soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek. Despite
well-received turns in Wagner's ''Die Walküre'' and Zandonai's ''Francesca da
Rimini,'' she hasn't yet captivated New York, but Katerina is a prime singing
and acting showcase, particularly in Graham Vick's lurid, galvanizing
production, jammed with bodies and machinery: the set, by Paul Brown, includes
cranes, gantries, an earthmover and an automobile. The tenor Brandon Jovanovich,
who has thus far been seen at the Met only as Don José in Bizet's ''Carmen,''
sings Katerina's lover, Sergei, and James Conlon, who was on the podium when the
production had its premiere in 1994, returns to conduct. Opens Nov. 10.
Metropolitan Opera House.

'WINTERREISE' ''Dayenu,'' they say in Hebrew: ''It would have been enough.'' It
would have been enough for the German baritone Matthias Goerne, a superior
lieder singer, to bring Schubert's moody song cycle to Lincoln Center's White
Light Festival, in a production that pairs his performance with video by William
Kentridge. But to have Christian Gerhaher, more reserved than Mr. Goerne but one
of the few artists who can match him for sensitivity and insight, sing
''Winterreise'' in the same hall a few months later, under the auspices of the
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center? That is special, indeed. Nov. 11, Feb.
24. Alice Tully Hall.

NEW YORK FESTIVAL OF SONG This longstanding art-song series, known for
cultivating talented rising artists, opens its season with two appealing young
singers, the soprano Janai Brugger and the baritone John Brancy, and a program
of early-20th-century German lieder. Later concerts cover music of the Harlem
Renaissance, songs by Italian and Italian-American composers and settings of
Spanish poetry. Nov. 11. Merkin Concert Hall, Kaufman Music Center, 129 West
67th Street, Manhattan, kaufman-center.org;

CONTEMPORANEOUS As part of Ear Heart Music, a feisty contemporary-classical
concert series organized by the flutist Amelia Lukas, this vibrant young chamber
orchestra, which formed at Bard College a few years ago, comes to Roulette with
a program of works by Thomas Adès, John Adams and Yotam Haber. Nov. 12. 509
Atlantic Avenue, Downtown Brooklyn, 917-267-0363, earheartmusic.org.

DANISH STRING QUARTET This youthful ensemble's performances have been acclaimed
for both perceptiveness and sheer excitement, and the members have swiftly built
a substantial New York following. Last season, demand was so great for its first
concert at Alice Tully Hall that an encore was added for the following evening.
Currently in the midst of a three-year stint in the Chamber Music Society of
Lincoln Center's CMS Two program for rising artists, the Danes are joined in
November by the brilliant pianist Gilles Vonsattel for works by Debussy and
Louis Vierne. (The night before, the group plays an intimate program of Nordic
folk music at SubCulture.) In February, the pianist Jon Kimura Parker is the
guest, for a program of Haydn, Nielsen and Brahms. Nov. 12. SubCulture. Nov. 13.
Rose Studio. Feb. 20. Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center.

PIERRE-LAURENT AIMARD Renowned for lucid, even severe, performances of
20th-century music, this fiercely intelligent pianist has lately been spending
time with Bach. In August, he followed his 2008 recording of ''The Art of
Fugue'' with the first book of ''The Well-Tempered Clavier,'' which moves from C
major through all 24 musical keys, one prelude and one fugue for each. That
kaleidoscopic work is the sole item on the agenda for his Carnegie recital in
November, but in March he returns to the hall, and to the modern repertory, with
his protégée, Tamara Stefanovich, and a wide swath of piano music by Pierre
Boulez, with whom Mr. Aimard has been close for decades. The program includes
some of Mr. Boulez's earliest and most recent works, as well as all three of the
mighty piano sonatas. Nov. 13, March 16. Carnegie Hall.

CZECH PHILHARMONIC ORCHESTRA This venerable ensemble -- it gave the premiere of
Mahler's Seventh Symphony in 1908, led by the work's composer -- is known for
its intense performances and distinctive sound: dark string colors, and a wind
section that favors individualism over blend. In the early 1990s, Jiri
Belohlavek, now 68 and the most prominent Czech conductor of his generation, was
dropped after a brief stint as principal conductor, and he went on to found the
competing Prague Philharmonia. But time seems to have healed all wounds, and Mr.
Belohlavek was reappointed in 2010, for a term that began in 2012. He and his
old/new band will show off their refound happiness in a program of virtuosically
grand emotions: Janacek's ''Taras Bulba,'' Liszt's Piano Concerto No. 2 (with
the suave Jean-Yves Thibaudet) and, appropriately, Dvorak's Symphony No. 9,
''From the New World,'' which unforgettably bridges Czech and American styles.
Nov. 16. Carnegie Hall.

CONTACT! The New York Philharmonic's new-music series has a globe-trotting
orientation this year, with programs focused on works from Israel (Feb. 9),
Nordic countries (March 7), Italy (May 11) and Japan (June 5). But the concerts
kick off with an evening of mostly young, mostly American composers -- Ingram
Marshall, Missy Mazzoli and Timo Andres, with Daniel Bjarnason an Icelandic
interloper -- brought together by John Adams, who hosts the evening. Nov. 17.
SubCulture.

MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS It's hard to believe that this ever-youthful conductor,
known almost universally as MTT, turns 70 in December: he has the taste for risk
of a man half his age. His rich New York season begins when he brings the San
Francisco Symphony, which he has led for 20 years, to Carnegie Hall for works by
Mahler, Prokofiev, Ravel and Samuel Carl Adams. In March he and the London
Symphony Orchestra play Britten, Gershwin and Sibelius before an April date with
his New World Symphony and Schubert, Berg, Debussy and Norbert Moret. Nov.
19-20, Carnegie Hall. March 18, Avery Fisher Hall. April 28, Carnegie Hall.

MEREDITH MONK The pioneering composer, vocalist and performance artist, who
graduated from college and began her career in 1964, celebrates her 50th
anniversary with a dazzling parade of activities, starting on her 72nd birthday
in November with a program of piano works at Le Poisson Rouge. The Brooklyn
Academy of Music presents her recent ''On Behalf of Nature'' in December, but
Carnegie Hall, where she holds this season's Debs Composers Chair, gets the
lion's share of events, including performances by the American Composers
Orchestra, Ensemble ACJW, the St. Louis Symphony and Ms. Monk's vocal ensemble
as well as a jam-packed celebration in March with guests including Jessye Norman
and John Zorn. (Presumably not appearing together, but hey, you never know.)
Nov. 20. Le Poisson Rouge, 158 Bleecker Street, near Thompson Street, Greenwich
Village; 212-505-3474, lepoissonrouge.com.

JACK QUARTET Moving increasingly into modern and contemporary art in recent
years, the Morgan Library & Museum has also become a robust presenter of modern
and contemporary music. To complement the exhibition ''Cy Twombly: Treatise on
the Veil,'' on view Sept. 26 through Jan. 25, the intrepid, acute JACK Quartet
will present a selection of Matthias Pintscher's ''Studies for Treatise on the
Veil,'' composed over the past decade as a cycle of responses to Twombly's
painting. The ensemble, which blazed through Helmut Lachenmann's three quartets
at the Morgan in February, will also play new arrangements of Monteverdi's
seminal opera ''L'Orfeo.'' As a bonus, the performance takes place (à la the
Metropolitan Museum's recent ''Grand Tour'' program) in the Twombly exhibition
gallery. Nov. 20. Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street,
212-685-0008, Ext. 560, themorgan.org.

BROOKLYN YOUTH CHORUS ''Black Mountain Songs,'' commissioned by this talented
group and the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is an evening-length program of works
by Bryce Dessner, Richard Reed Parry, Caroline Shaw, Nico Muhly, Aleksandra
Vrebalov, John King and Tim Hecker, based on the spirit of collaboration that
reigned among artists like Merce Cunningham and Robert Rauschenberg in the
middle of the 20th century at Black Mountain College in North Carolina. Nov.
20-23. Brooklyn Academy of Music.

GOLDBERG VARIATIONS While Bach intended this epochal work to be played on a
harpsichord with two manuals, or keyboards, it almost never is. But the
virtuosic pianist Christopher Taylor has made a habit of playing the variations
on a double manual, which can achieve some fuller, richer tones and harmonies,
and he'll do so again at the Met, on a rare example of the instrument
manufactured by Bösendorfer around 1940. Nov. 21 . Metropolitan Museum.

LE CONCERT D'ASTRÉE The French star soprano Natalie Dessay is missing from the
Metropolitan Opera's roster this coming season, but devotees of her febrile
artistry can take heart: she will be featured in a far more intimate venue,
joined at Alice Tully Hall by this superbly lively ensemble; its incisive
founder and director, Emmanuelle Haïm; and the energetic countertenor Christophe
Dumaux. Mr. Dumaux, interpolating a body flip into one aria, and Ms. Dessay both
appeared in the Met's new production of Handel's ''Giulio Cesare'' last year,
and they'll sing selections from that glorious opera, to which Ms. Haïm has
added the Suite in G from the same composer's ''Water Music.'' Nov. 30. Alice
Tully Hall.

DECEMBER

'DIE MEISTERSINGER VON NÜRNBERG' Wagner's great comedy has long been one of
James Levine's favorite scores, so it's no surprise he's including it as he
returns to a fuller schedule after a long, trying period of illness.
(Stravinsky's ''The Rake's Progress,'' which opens May 1, is his other pet
revival.) This may be the last outing for the Metropolitan Opera's storybook
''Meistersinger'' production, originally directed by Otto Schenk, with sets by
Günther Schneider-Siemssen -- a playful staging by Stefan Herheim, seen at last
year's Salzburg Festival, is said to on the horizon for the Met -- but an
excellent cast will see it out in style. Annette Dasch, Johan Botha and Johan
Reuter star, and Johannes Martin Kränzle, Hans-Peter König and Matthew Rose take
supporting roles. Opens Dec. 2 . Metropolitan Opera House.

'THE CLASSICAL STYLE' Billed as ''an opera (of sorts),'' this zany work with a
score by Steven Stucky and a libretto by the pianist Jeremy Denk, which had its
premiere at the Ojai Festival in California this summer, is based on, of all
things, Charles Rosen's influential musicology text of the same title from the
1970s. Those who have read Mr. Denk's blog, Think Denk, are well aware of his
antic imagination, so it's no surprise that the opera's characters include not
just Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann and Mr. Rosen, who died in 2012, but also the
Tonic Chord, Dominant Chord and Tristan Chord in a plot (of sorts) about great
composers returning to Earth to combat the over-analysis of their music. Parody
abounds, but so does sweet sincerity. Robert Spano conducts the enterprising
young ensemble the Knights. Dec. 4. Carnegie Hall.

DOHNANYI/DVORAK The New York Philharmonic's brief immersion in Dvorak, courtesy
of the eminent maestro Christoph von Dohnanyi, mixes slightly less appreciated
works with the blockbuster hits. So the intricate Symphony No. 7 shares a
program with the evergreen Cello Concerto -- Alisa Weilerstein is the soloist --
and the Symphony No. 9 (''From the New World'') is juxtaposed with the stirring,
often overlooked Piano Concerto, featuring Martin Helmchen. As a bonus, Ms.
Weilerstein and Philharmonic musicians come together on Dec. 7 at the 92nd
Street Y for chamber works by Dvorak, Schulhoff and Martinu. Dec. 4-13. Avery
Fisher Hall.

'GUILLAUME TELL' Rossini's radiant final opera of political ideals and fatherly
love is unjustly known today almost solely for its overture. (Think ''The Lone
Ranger.'') But it has many champions, including Gianandrea Noseda, the former
music director of the Teatro Regio in Turin, Italy. (At least for now: he
recently clashed with the theater's administration and has not yet renewed his
contract.) Mr. Noseda brings the forces of the Teatro Regio to New York for a
concert performance, in Italian, with a cast that includes the baritone Dalibor
Jenis, the soprano Angela Meade and, in one of the most difficult roles in the
tenor repertory, John Osborn. Dec. 7. Carnegie Hall.

ANNIE GOSFIELD The ceaselessly experimenting composer has turned her attention
to jammed radio signals, and her ''Signal Jamming and Random Interference,''
developed with the JACK Quartet, includes both acoustic and electronic
evocations of the strange, mysterious effects that emerge when two transmissions
battle for one frequency. Its premiere is the centerpiece of a concert featuring
the quartet, Ms. Gosfield's music and a range of possibilities for found sounds
and radio noise. Dec. 7. Roulette.

WILLIAM CHRISTIE This Baroque master's residencies with the wonderful student
players of Juilliard415 have become an annual gift. Their shining 2012
performance of ''Il Trionfo del Tempo e del Disinganno'' still sticks in the
mind as a highlight, so hopes are high for their collaboration on another Handel
oratorio, the grand ''La Resurrezione.'' Dec. 8. Alice Tully Hall.

'TEARS BECOME...STREAMS BECOME...' The daring, dramatic pianist Hélène Grimaud ,
whose activities have ranged from novel-writing to wolf conservation, always
seems game for experiences outside her standard concert tours, and the Park
Avenue Armory is increasingly the city's go-to site for large-scale cultural
events. It's a natural pairing, and as part of the video artist Douglas Gordon's
water-theme installation (open to the public from Dec. 9 through Jan. 4) in the
armory's soaring Drill Hall, Ms. Grimaud will play 10 performances, over two
weeks, of a program of moist works by Debussy, Ravel, Liszt and others . Dec.
9-21. Park Avenue Armory, at 67th Street; 212-616-3930, armoryonpark.org.

'MACBETH' The Manhattan School of Music likes to seek out rarities for its
student singers, and the school does the Metropolitan Opera, which is reviving
Verdi's classic ''Macbeth,'' one better with Ernest Bloch's obscure 1910
adaptation of the same Shakespearean source. Laurent Pillot conducts a staging
by Dona D. Vaughn, the director of the school's opera programs. Dec. 10, 12, 14.
Manhattan School of Music.

NEW MUSIC IN THE KAPLAN PENTHOUSE The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is
often at its best in this intimate yet expansive space, an ideal setting for
contemporary music. The programs cunningly juxtapose modern masters like
Lutoslawski and Schnittke with rising composers, among them Andy Akiho. Dec. 11,
Jan. 29, April 2, May 7. Kaplan Penthouse.

'MESSIAH' Each December, the New York music world seems to scream ''Hallelujah''
en masse, with a bevy of impressive performances of Handel's evergreen oratorio.
A favorite is the lean, intense version performed by the choral and orchestral
forces of Trinity Wall Street under Julian Wachner, on Dec. 17, 19 and 21 at
Trinity Church and Dec. 18 at Alice Tully Hall. Other notable choices: John
Scott leads the St. Thomas Choir of Men and Boys, in their red cassocks, on Dec.
9 and 11 at St. Thomas Church; Gary Thor Wedow conducts the New York
Philharmonic and the Westminster Symphonic Choir at Avery Fisher Hall, Dec. 16
to 20; and Kent Tritle does double duty, both times at Carnegie Hall, with the
Oratorio Society of New York on Dec. 22 and Musica Sacra on Dec. 23.

'THE MERRY WIDOW' Will the third time at the Metropolitan Opera be a charm for
Jeremy Sams? His English-language texts for the Baroque pastiche ''The Enchanted
Island,'' in 2011, and Johann Strauss Jr.'s ''Die Fledermaus'' last season were
unfunny clunkers, yet he is back for another classic operetta to ring in the new
year. The Met has poached the director and choreographer Susan Stroman from
Broadway, giving her a cast that includes Renée Fleming, Nathan Gunn, Alek
Shrader, Thomas Allen and, in her Met debut, the luminous musical-theater star
Kelli O'Hara, with Andrew Davis conducting. (Other singers, including the great
mezzo Susan Graham, take over later in the run.) Opens Dec. 31. Metropolitan
Opera House.

JANUARY

PROTOTYPE: OPERA/THEATRE/NOW The third installment of this valuable annual
festival of contemporary chamber opera and performance includes ''The Scarlet
Ibis,'' a family drama by Stefan Weisman and David Cote, conducted by Steven
Osgood, which includes puppetry among its storytelling techniques; the composer
and vocalist Bora Yoon's surreal ''Sunken Cathedral,'' featuring the Korean
dancer and drummer Vong Pak; ''Toxic Psalms,'' an evening of politically charged
choral works performed by the Slovenian vocal theater troupe Carmina Slovenica;
and Todd Almond's idiosyncratic love story ''Kansas City Choir Boy,'' directed
by Kevin Newbury. Jan. 7-17. Various locations, prototypefestival.org.

GREEN MOUNTAIN PROJECT Deriving its clever name from the Baroque master
Monteverdi, this centerpiece of the season for the early-music ensemble Tenet
and its artistic director, Jolle Greenleaf, returns with both its brilliant
version of that composer's 1610 ''Vespro Della Beata Vergine'' (Jan. 10, St.
Jean Baptiste Church, 184 East 76th Street) and a new reconstruction of vespers
by Charpentier (Jan. 9, Church of St. Joseph, 371 Avenue of the Americas).

BUDAPEST FESTIVAL ORCHESTRA Ivan Fischer, this vibrant ensemble's conductor,
loves to fiddle with the standard orchestra, constantly meddling with seating
arrangements and concert formats. So while the programs for these two concerts
couldn't be more traditional -- Mendelssohn and Brahms the first night, Mozart
and Brahms the second -- count on him to spice things up, even if only with
performances of rare liveliness and commitment. Jan. 18, 21. Avery Fisher Hall.

NATE WOOLEY Best known for its annual Avant Music Festival, the organization
Avant Media expands its offerings this year to include monthly concerts. One of
the most intriguing features this avant-garde trumpeter and composer in an
evening-length work, ''For Kenneth Gaburo,'' dedicated to the pioneer of what he
called ''compositional linguistics,'' which brought variously complete and
fragmented, live and electronically processed voices into the instrumental mix.
Jan. 19. Wild Project, 195 East Third Street, East Village.

THE GRAND TOUR Met Museum Presents, the Metropolitan Museum's concert and
lecture series, aims to connect its offerings to the collections and exhibitions
on display, and the connection doesn't get closer than this: a rotation through
several mini-concerts, held in era- and nationality-appropriate galleries of the
beautifully reinstalled European paintings collection. This event was one of the
highlights of last season, and it returns with solo harp music from the British
Isles, played by Paula Fagerberg, in the English painting galleries; Dutch songs
and dances, with the ensemble Ciaramella, alongside Bruegel, Vermeer and
Rembrandt; 16th-century Spanish works, with Ensemble Viscera, amid the El
Grecos; and, in front of late-Renaissance paintings, music for the concerto
delle donne, the pioneering female singing group in 16th-century Ferrara, Italy,
performed by the superb ensemble Tenet. Now how about getting the non-Western
galleries in on the action? Jan. 21-22. Metropolitan Museum.

GIDON KREMER AND DANIIL TRIFONOV In a crowded field, a young musician benefits
from a nod from a celebrated artist, so it's a resounding affirmation for the
elegant rising pianist Daniil Trifonov to join the distinguished violinist Gidon
Kremer on Carnegie Hall's main stage for a duo recital of works by Mozart,
Schubert and Mieczyslaw Weinberg. The evening is a proper culmination to a New
York season for Mr. Trifonov that also gives him a solo recital at Carnegie on
Dec. 9, playing Bach, Beethoven and Liszt, as well as an extroverted turn, from
Dec. 30 to Jan. 6, with the New York Philharmonic and Rachmaninoff's Piano
Concerto No. 1. Jan. 23. Carnegie Hall.

FOCUS! FESTIVAL Joel Sachs, the founder and director of the New Juilliard
Ensemble, casts a far wider net than many on the music scene, with forays into
parts of the world that others in New York rarely touch. The group's annual
festival is an opportunity to focus, as it were, on a particular place and time,
and this year, the theme is Nippon: Japanese Music Since 1945. It opens with a
program of works for chamber orchestra by Toshio Hosokawa, Akira Nishimura,
Somei Satoh and others, and continues with four chamber-music events and a
closing concert by the Juilliard Orchestra, conducted by Tadaaki Otaka, that
features a tribute to Toru Takemitsu as well as works by Akira Miyoshi and
Takashi Yoshimatsu. Jan. 23-30. The Juilliard School.

'IOLANTA' AND 'BLUEBEARD'S CASTLE' Anna Netrebko brought her first Tchaikovsky
role, Tatyana, in ''Eugene Onegin,'' to the Metropolitan Opera last season, and
now she introduces another: the title role in ''Iolanta,'' a fairy tale, never
before seen at the Met, about a princess whose blindness is cured by love. The
modern, slightly surreal production is directed by Mariusz Trelinski, and as in
''Onegin,'' Ms. Netrebko is conducted by the Russian master Valery Gergiev, who
also leads the second half of the evening, Bartok's ''Bluebeard's Castle,''
whose mysterious central couple arrives at a less happy ending. The glittering
score of ''Bluebeard's Castle'' makes it a natural fit for orchestras, and the
Dallas Symphony and its music director, Jaap von Zweden, take it up in concert
in November with the excellent pairing of Matthias Goerne and Michelle DeYoung.
Before that, in October, the Los Angeles Opera presents the work, on a double
bill with Purcell's ''Dido and Aeneas,'' in a production by Barrie Kosky. And
for ''Bluebeard'' obsessives, the New York Philharmonic offers performances in
May of Peter Eotvos's new one-act opera ''Senza Sangue,'' an ominous work for
two singers (here Anne Sophie von Otter and Russell Braun) that is eventually
intended to be paired with Bartok's classic. Opens Jan. 26. Metropolitan Opera
House.

MARIINSKY ORCHESTRA In town to lead the opening night of the
''Iolanta''/''Bluebeard's Castle'' double bill at the Metropolitan Opera on Jan.
26, Valery Gergiev, never one to let a gap in his schedule go unfilled, will
spend the following two evenings in Midtown with his marvelous ensemble from St.
Petersburg. Shostakovich's gripping Symphony No. 4 shares the first concert with
Prokofiev's Piano Concerto No. 3, with the assured Behzod Abduraimov as soloist.
Another, more showboating virtuoso pianist, Denis Matsuev, plays Tchaikovsky's
Concerto No. 2 the next day, alongside Rodion Shchedrin's sassy Concerto for
Orchestra No. 1 (''Naughty Limericks'') and Prokofiev's giddy Symphony No. 5.
Jan. 27-28. Carnegie Hall.

CHICAGO SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA After a fusillade of Russian music from the Mariinsky
Orchestra, Riccardo Muti and his gleaming ensemble answer, just a couple of days
later, with their own mini-festival of music from that country. Their three
programs include the first and third symphonies of Scriabin, a visionary
composer Mr. Muti has long favored, and Prokofiev's grand cantata ''Alexander
Nevsky.'' Works by Mendelssohn, Debussy, Schumann and Brahms (the Piano Concerto
No. 2, with Yefim Bronfman) fill out the programs. Jan. 30-31, Feb. 1. Carnegie
Hall.

JORDI SAVALL The brilliant, intrepid early-music specialist makes his annual
stop at the Juilliard School, leading the Juilliard415 ensemble in works by
Leclair, Geminiani, Telemann and Rameau. In April, under the auspices of
Carnegie Hall's Before Bach festival, comes a rare opportunity to hear him in
solo recital on his main instrument, the viola da gamba, as well as a
performance of French music with his group Le Concert des Nations. Jan. 31.
Juilliard School. April 13, 16. Carnegie Hall.

FEBRUARY

'LA DONNA DEL LAGO' Joyce DiDonato, whose melting lyricism is as arresting as
her vocal fireworks, plays Elena, Walter Scott's Lady of the Lake, in the
Metropolitan Opera's first production of Rossini's adaptation of that Scottish
poem, the latest in the company's recent flurry of bel canto operas. The tenors
Juan Diego Flórez and John Osborn both love Elena, but she wants only the
mezzo-soprano Daniela Barcellona, in the pants role of Malcolm. Drama ensues
before a happy ending sealed with ''Tanti affetti,'' one of Rossini's most
stunning arias. Michele Mariotti, scrupulous and stylish at the podium for
Bellini's ''I Puritani'' last season, conducts Paul Curran's staging, seen last
summer at the Santa Fe Opera. Opens Feb. 16. Metropolitan Opera House.

JAMIE BARTON This big-voiced, generous mezzo-soprano made a splash at the
Metropolitan Opera last season in two galvanizing performances of Bellini's
''Norma.'' She's persuasive in concert, too, and her plummy voice is ideal for
Dvorak's ''Gypsy Songs,'' which anchors a program, performed with the pianist
Bradley Moore, that also includes ''The Work at Hand,'' a new piece by Jake
Heggie. Feb. 17. Zankel Hall.

TRINITY WALL STREET Under the leadership of Julian Wachner, the musical forces
of Trinity Church have provided some of the best early-music performances in the
city, with stimulating forays into later music, too. After last season's
four-month Britten Festival, the most extensive local commemoration of that
composer's centennial, things are a little quieter this year. But the church's
third annual Twelfth Night Festival, from Dec. 26 to Jan. 6, includes highlights
like Handel's ''Saul'' and Gotham Early Music Scene's well-loved production of
''The Play of Daniel.'' And at Carnegie Hall, Trinity's intimate yet mighty
choir will be joined by other choruses and the church's new-music orchestra,
Novus NY, for a rare performance of Ginastera's grand ''Turbae ad Passionem
Gregorianam.'' Feb. 21. Carnegie Hall.

VIENNA PHILHARMONIC Not content to leave sweeping cycles of symphonies to the
Berlin Philharmonic, which opens Carnegie Hall's season with Schumann's four
contributions to the genre, this most eminent of ensembles counters with the
four by Schumann's dear friend, Brahms, conducted by the sometimes willful
Daniele Gatti, who makes his first visit to New York since being passed over for
the music directorship of the Boston Symphony Orchestra last year. The
performance of Brahms's sublime ''German Requiem'' that follows the symphonies
is much more than a simple bonus, particularly since the Viennese have engaged,
as soloists, two of the world's finest singers, the soprano Diana Damrau and the
baritone Christian Gerhaher. The orchestra has scaled back to normal after the
five concerts and two operas it presented as part of last season's ''Vienna:
City of Dreams'' festival at Carnegie, but it has still managed to make a
statement. Feb. 27-28, March 1. Carnegie Hall.

MARCH AND APRIL

ANNA CATERINA ANTONACCI After a long absence from the United States and a career
focused on Europe, this inimitable singer, whose eloquent voice and daring
artistry encompass both soprano and mezzo roles, has lately made her visits to
this country more frequent. She returns for an ambitious immersion in the French
repertory, her recent passion, with her longtime collaborator, the pianist
Donald Sulzen. Songs by Debussy, Duparc and Poulenc will be on offer, and likely
keen, but aficionados will be there for two things: Berlioz's haunting ''La Mort
d'Ophélie'' and Poulenc's ''La Voix Humaine,'' a harrowing 40-minute monodrama
in which the audience listens in on one side of a woman's final telephone
conversation with the lover who abandoned her. March 5. Alice Tully Hall.

ANONYMOUS 4 This radiant vocal quartet, specialists in early music and much
else, plans to disband after the 2015-16 season, but not before releasing its
final album, ''1865,'' in the spring, with songs from the aftermath of the Civil
War. Appearing under the auspices of the invaluable series Music Before 1800,
the group performs the program at the Great Hall at Cooper Union, where Lincoln
delivered a key antislavery speech in 1860. April 23. Great Hall, Cooper Union.
7 East Seventh Street, Manhattan.

URL:

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Top, the bass René Pape will have a solo recital at the
Metropolitan Opera House this month
above from left, Brett Umlauf, Kate Soper and Gelsey Bell in ''Here Be Sirens''
below the composer John Luther Adams. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DIETER NAGL/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES
CHESTER HIGGINS JR/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR38)
Missy Mazzoli of Victoire, the subject of a Composers Portrait at the Miller
Theater. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR40)
From the top, the countertenor Christophe Dumaux, left, and the soprano Natalie
Dessay in the opera ''Giulio Cesare''
the pianist Gilles Vonsattel, center, with members of the Danish String Quartet
and the pianist Hélène Grimaud. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES

JACOB BLICKENSTAFF FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR42)
Above, the Anonymous 4, from left, Susan Hellauer, Marsha Genensky, Jacqueline
Horner-Kwiatek, and Ruth Cunningham
right, the soprano Anna Caterina Antonacci
and below, the mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT CAPLIN FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES
JENNIFER TAYLOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 ERIC THAYER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR43)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


