                             1408 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Back to American Force in Iraq

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 500 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Obama Allows Airstrikes Against Iraq Rebels'' (front page, Aug. 8):

President Obama made a decision, obviously reluctantly, to aid the besieged
Yazidi refugees in the Mount Sinjar area of Iraq.

The need for this is uncontested as a humanitarian necessity. But I have to
wonder why this humanitarian necessity was placed again on the United States.
Where were the other members of the caring world, like NATO, the United Nations
and the Arab states?

The silence from others is deafening!

DORIS FENIG Floral Park, Queens, Aug. 8, 2014

To the Editor:

We are slipping gradually and without enough thought into what may soon become a
global struggle of civilizations. The situation could hardly be more dangerous.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, which is on the rise, has values
that are anathema to those of Western societies. These deeply contrary values
include genocidal violence against religious minorities, like the Yazidis.

ISIS cannot be allowed to succeed (if it does, it will be to our everlasting
shame), but stopping it threatens to ignite war throughout the Middle East, if
not beyond.

Quick action is nevertheless preferable to inaction. The sooner ISIS is stopped,
if we are willing and able to do so, the less likely there will be a general
conflagration.

The fuse has been lit, and it is burning. Analogies to August 1914 may seem
extreme, but I do not think they are inappropriate.

MICHAEL F. KERR Santa Monica, Calif., Aug. 8, 2014

To the Editor:

Having already destabilized Iraq and destroyed its infrastructure through
invasion and occupation, the United States now seeks to re-engage militarily in
that country -- this time citing protection of minorities and American strategic
interests, with the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria as the new bogyman.

There is nothing ''humanitarian'' about such intervention, which represents yet
another misguided effort to impose the West's will on Iraq, and can only lead to
retaliatory violence against American and allied citizens and institutions. If
the government and the people of Iraq are unable to withstand ISIS on their own,
then outside powers have no right to step in to alter the outcome.

JOHN S. KOPPEL Bethesda, Md., Aug. 8, 2014

To the Editor:

Re ''A Return to Action'' (news analysis, front page, Aug. 8):

You quote President Obama as saying, ''As commander in chief, I will not allow
the United States to be dragged into fighting another war in Iraq.''

Since when does dropping bombs on another sovereign country not constitute
fighting a war? How about no troops in Iraq or Afghanistan, and no airstrikes by
drones or piloted aircraft? Send food and aid to those in need in our country
instead of foreign countries.

The only thing Congress seems to be able to agree on is to spend money on the
use of military force anywhere in the world or expenditures for any weapon
system, needed or not.

Our country needs to stop the endless state of war, or we will be its greatest
casualty.

BOB FUNCK Harrison, N.Y., Aug. 8, 2014

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/opinion/back-to-american-force-in-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY WESLEY BEDROSIAN)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


