                             1454 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 9, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Bond Fraught With Danger

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1125 words


On newspaper front pages around the world late last month, a photograph from
Gaza showed masked Hamas gunmen about to execute bound, kneeling prisoners
suspected of collaborating with Israel. That same fate would probably have
befallen Mosab Hassan Yousef, the protagonist of the new documentary ''The Green
Prince,'' had this secret been discovered: For nearly a decade, he was an
informant for Israel, operating at the highest levels of Hamas itself.

But ''The Green Prince,'' which opens on Friday, is not just the story of Mr.
Yousef, now 36 and living on the West Coast of the United States. It is also the
story of Gonen ben Yitzhak, his handler in the Shin Bet, Israel's internal
security service, and how both men became outcasts in their own organizations
and ultimately developed a strong loyalty to each other, one that has withstood
a life-threatening test.

''Many times, working for the intelligence service, I came to realize that our
minds are very limited, and that we really need to see things through the heart
sometimes,'' Mr. Yousef said in an interview in New York last week. ''I'm not
expecting from a film like this to reshape the human condition. But I'm
expecting at least to give people some hope that they can rise above their pain
and sorrow and come to a place to hopefully be able to make a difference.''

Mr. Yousef is the oldest son of Hassan Yousef, a founder of Hamas who was one of
the most visible figures during the second Palestinian intifada and remains one
of the group's senior leaders on the West Bank. Mosab Yousef served for several
years as his father's close aide, all the while supplying information that
allowed Israel to thwart suicide bombings and other attacks.

''When Mosab was recruited, we knew very little about Hamas, what it is, how it
worked, the inner politics, the really deep ideology,'' Mr. ben Yitzhak said in
a separate interview last week. ''He gave us a very special insight: His father
was in touch with all the leaders in Gaza, the West Bank and Syria. So it was
like going into their minds somehow.''

The picture Mr. Yousef paints in the film is gruesome. Jailed by the Israelis,
he was sent to a Hamas-controlled prison wing, where, he angrily recounts, he
saw Hamas operatives, including an uncle, torture and kill hundreds of prisoners
they thought the Shin Bet might have recruited, an experience he found so
repugnant that it contributed, he says, to his own decision to spy for Israel.

''The Green Prince,'' which takes its title from the code name Israeli
intelligence gave Mr. Yousef, is the third part of an informal documentary
trilogy that has occupied the Israeli director Nadav Schirman for the better
part of a decade. The first film, ''The Champagne Spy,'' is the story of a
12-year-old boy who learns that his father is a Mossad agent. The second, ''In
the Darkroom,'' focuses on the lives of the wife and daughter of the Venezuelan
Carlos the Jackal, the most wanted terrorist in the world during the 1970s and
'80s.

All three films take place in a shadowy world where espionage and terrorism
intersect. But Mr. Schirman, the son of an Israeli diplomat who spent much of
his childhood in France, Canada and the United States, regards the three films
primarily as dramas about family and other personal relationships.

''It's a human story, not a regional story,'' he said. ''Yes, there is politics
in the background, but it could have been between the Irish and the English. So,
for me, it's not about politics, and it's not about Hamas. The film is about
Mosab Hassan Yousef and Gonen ben Yitzhak, about the relationship between a
handler and a source.''

But the timing of the film's release clearly provides additional resonance and
significance. It was released in Israel this spring, as the latest American
effort to put together a regional peace plan was falling apart, and is coming
out here after a summer-long conflict between Israel and Hamas in Gaza that left
more than 2,000 dead and thousands more wounded or homeless.

''It's definitely relevant to what is happening now,'' said Mr. Yousef, who has
renounced Islam and converted to Christianity. With the rise of Hamas in Gaza
and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and ''all these radical Islamic groups,
it's not an accident,'' he said. ''I know how they recruited those people,
because they tried to do the same with me, they tried to do the same in the
mosque.''

Much of ''The Green Prince'' consists of scenes in which the camera switches
back and forth between Mr. Yousef and Mr. ben Yitzhak, speaking in English on a
set in Munich. That is augmented by Israeli surveillance film, simulated drone
images, re-creations of military actions and Mr. Yousef's re-enactments of his
own interrogations by the Shin Bet, as well as period television footage showing
him with his father at public rallies and private meetings.

''This is innocuous, innocent footage, but in the context of the story, it
becomes highly charged,'' Mr. Schirman said. ''It's meaningless B roll from Arab
news agencies, and all of a sudden it becomes a treasure.''

True to its title, the film is shot in muted tones of green and gray. Green, of
course, is the color of Islam, but Mr. Schirman said he chose that palette,
thinking of olive trees, which ''on a very deep level symbolize that region.''

''It's also the uprooting of the olive tree,'' he continued, ''and for me, Mosab
is an olive tree.''

After going to the United States over the objections of the Shin Bet, which
wanted him to continue working undercover, and his family, Mr. Yousef wrote a
book, ''Son of Hamas,'' published in 2010, in which he revealed his role. His
father disowned him, and he now lives alone. ''I came to realize that living a
simple life, an unattached life, is the way to peace,'' he said.

In the movie, which has won audience awards at several festivals, Mr. ben
Yitzhak, 43, tells how he violated internal Shin Bet procedures and established
a relationship of mutual trust with Mr. Yousef. He said he was fired by the Shin
Bet in 2006, but later, in a move that was widely reported at the time, he went
to the aid of his former asset when the United States tried to deport Mr. Yousef
as a terrorist.

''I'm not naïve,'' said Mr. ben Yitzhak, now a lawyer in Tel Aviv. ''I worked in
a place where you can't be naïve. But my father was a general in the Israeli
army, Mosab's father founded Hamas, and those two figures were fighting each
other. Now Mosab and I have become brothers.

''Not all Palestinians and Israelis are going to become brothers,'' he
continued, citing the example of Hamas. ''But it means when people get together,
they can find a way. It's not going to be easy, but when people watch the movie,
they will understand: There is a different way.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/09/movies/the-green-prince-tells-the-story-of-mos
ab-hassan-yousef.html

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Mosab Hassan Yousef, center, and Gonen ben Yitzhak, subjects of
''The Green Prince.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID WALTER BANKS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
(C1)
 Mosab Hassan Yousef, left, used to be a top aide to his father, Hassan Yousef,
center, a Hamas founder who has disowned him. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUSIC BOX FILMS)
(C5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


