                             1479 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Airstrikes, U.S. Targets Cell Said to Plot an Attack

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER; Reporting was contributed by Matt Apuzzo, Mark Mazzetti,
Charlie Savage, Michael S. Schmidt, Eric Schmitt and Jonathan Weisman from
Washington; Mark Landler and Somini Sengupta from New York; Ben Hubbard from
Beirut, Lebanon; and Alan Cowell from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1448 words


WASHINGTON -- American forces took advantage of the airstrikes against the
Islamic State extremist group in Syria to try to simultaneously wipe out the
leadership of an unrelated cell of veterans of Al Qaeda that the White House
said Tuesday was plotting an ''imminent'' attack against the United States or
Europe.

The barrage of bombs and missiles launched into Syria early Tuesday was aimed
primarily at crippling the Islamic State, the formidable Sunni organization that
has seized a large piece of territory to form its own radical enclave. But the
blitz also targeted a little-known network called Khorasan, in hopes of
paralyzing it before it could carry out what American officials feared would be
a terrorist attack in the West.

American military and intelligence analysts were still studying damage reports
from the initial air assault, but senior Obama administration officials
expressed hope that they had killed Muhsin al-Fadhli, the leader of Khorasan and
a onetime confidant of Osama bin Laden. The officials said they had been
contemplating military action against Khorasan in recent months, but President
Obama's decision to hit the Islamic State's forces inside Syria provided a
chance to neutralize the other perceived threat.

Several officials said Khorasan had an advanced plan for an attack involving a
bomb that could pass undetected through airport security systems, perhaps by
lacing nonmetallic objects like toothpaste tubes and clothes with explosive
material, although officials offered no details in public and did not provide
specifics on how soon an attack might be carried out.

Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said the concerns about Khorasan were behind
a decision last summer to ban uncharged laptop computers and cellphones from
some United States-bound commercial airliners.

The air campaign against Khorasan and the Islamic State got underway even as Mr.
Obama flew to New York to meet with world leaders gathering at the opening
session of the United Nations General Assembly. Mr. Obama did not seek United
Nations permission for the military campaign, but he presented the strikes as
the collaboration of a multinational coalition that included five Arab nations:
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain.

''Because of the almost unprecedented effort of this coalition, I think we now
have an opportunity to send a very clear message that the world is united,'' Mr.
Obama said during a hastily arranged photo opportunity in New York with Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq, King Abdullah II of Jordan and representatives
of the other Arab allies.

Still, the bulk of the military efforts were conducted by American forces, and
reaction in the Middle East was mixed. President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, which
is allied with the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, said the
airstrikes were illegal because they were not conducted with the approval of
Syria's government, a point later echoed by President Vladimir V. Putin of
Russia, another ally of Syria's.

The Syrian government itself seemed more accepting, probably because it was glad
to see military power brought to bear against forces that have been fighting Mr.
Assad and recently killed many of his soldiers. The Syrian Foreign Ministry said
the government ''backs any international effort that contributes to the fight
against terrorists,'' whether it is the Islamic State, the Nusra Front ''or
anyone else.''

Samantha Power, the American ambassador to the United Nations, informed her
Syrian counterpart about the strikes ahead of time, but did not seek permission
or disclose the timing or targets. ''In fact, we warned them to not pose a
threat to our aircraft,'' said Benjamin J. Rhodes, the president's deputy
national security adviser. Mr. Rhodes said Mr. Obama had issued the order for
the strikes on Thursday, a day after visiting the United States Central Command
headquarters in Tampa that would carry out the operation.

In his public appearances on Tuesday, Mr. Obama cautioned again that the
campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, would take time.
He also cited the strike on Khorasan, the first time he has mentioned the group
in public. ''Once again, it must be clear to anyone who would plot against
America and try to do Americans harm that we will not tolerate safe havens for
terrorists who threaten our people,'' he said at the White House before his
departure for New York.

Most officials speaking publicly on Tuesday characterized the Khorasan threat as
imminent. Lt. Gen. William C. Mayville Jr., who is in charge of operations for
the Pentagon's Joint Staff, said the terrorist group was nearing ''the execution
phase of an attack either in Europe or the homeland.''

But one senior counterterrorism official, who insisted on anonymity to discuss
intelligence matters, said the group might not have chosen the target, method or
even the timing for a strike. An intelligence official said separately that the
group was ''reaching a stage where they might be able to do something.''

Khorasan is closely allied with the Nusra Front, which is Al Qaeda's designated
affiliate in Syria, according to American intelligence officials. The group,
they said, is made up of Qaeda operatives from places like Pakistan,
Afghanistan, North Africa and Chechnya who have traveled to Syria on the orders
of Ayman al-Zawahri, the Qaeda leader.

Mr. Holder told Katie Couric of Yahoo News that the United States had followed
the group for two years. ''I can say that the enhanced security measures that we
took'' banning uncharged electronic devices on some flights were ''based on
concerns we had about what the Khorasan group was planning to do,'' he said.

The strikes on Tuesday were aimed at the group's leaders, including Mr. Fadhli,
a Kuwaiti associate of Bin Laden's who moved to Syria last year. Officials said
they were not certain if he had been killed, but Twitter accounts associated
with jihadist groups said that he and another Khorasan leader, Abu Yusef
al-Turki, had died in the airstrikes.

One Twitter user said that by killing Mr. Fadhli, the United States had
''presented him a great wish and a most honorable gift'' of martyrdom, according
to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors militant groups' social media
postings.

Lawmakers and terrorism experts said that even if Mr. Fadhli had been killed, it
would not necessarily derail the group's ambitions. ''Fadhli is certainly one of
the most capable of the Al Qaeda core members,'' said Representative Adam B.
Schiff, a California Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee. ''His loss
would be significant, but as we've seen before, any decapitation is only a
short-term gain. The hydra will grow another head.''

Congressional leaders largely rallied behind the strikes, including Republicans
who oppose the president on most other issues, although some of them still
faulted his strategy and many disagreed on whether he needed approval from
lawmakers. The administration contends he does not need new action by Congress
because of the authorization it passed targeting Al Qaeda and affiliates after
the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

''ISIL is a direct threat to the safety and security of the United States and
our allies,'' the House speaker, John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, said in a
statement. ''I support the airstrikes launched by the president, understanding
that this is just one step in what must be a larger effort to destroy and defeat
this terrorist organization.''

The participation of the five Arab countries may bolster Mr. Obama's argument
that the campaign does not pit the United States against the Sunni Muslim world,
but is, rather, a broad alliance of Sunni Muslim countries against a radical
group. Qatar and Saudi Arabia have been heavily involved in Syria's civil war,
so joining the coalition was merely a more direct form of intervention.

Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Bahrain worry that their citizens who joined the
Islamic State's forces will later return and plot attacks at home. ''This is the
right way to do it, if you want to defeat the Islamic State, because you cannot
cut off the tail and leave the head,'' said Ebtesam al-Ketbi, the chairwoman of
the Emirates Policy Center.

But evident elsewhere was a familiar current of cynicism about the motives
behind the strikes. The United States and its allies ''want to divide our lands,
destroy our nations, occupy our homelands and monopolize our choices, without
shedding one drop of their blue blood,'' Massoud al-Hennawi wrote in Al Ahram, a
state-run newspaper in Egypt. ''They have no problem that our cheap Arab blood
flows in rivers, if it achieves their goals and purposes.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/24/world/middleeast/us-isis-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Men in Raqqa, Syria, with what they claimed was wreckage of an
American drone that crashed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY
IMAGES) GRAPHICS: Airstrikes in Syria: Initial round of strikes on Tuesday
(Sources: United States Department of Defense
Institute for the Study of War) (A1)
 Some of the Targets Hit in Syria (Sources: United States Department of Defense)
(GRAPHICS BY GOOGLE) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


