                             1495 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Deadly Blast, Bulgaria Asks if Arms Disposal Is Worth It

BYLINE: By GEORGI KANTCHEV

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 836 words


The explosions were so powerful that they annihilated the factory, leaving
behind little but two yawning craters. All 15 people in the building were
killed, and a mourning nation was left to question its embrace of a perilous
industry: the dismantling of obsolete munitions.

The explosions that wrecked the Midzhur plant in Gorni Lom, Bulgaria, about 90
miles from Sofia, the capital, on Wednesday were the latest in an increasingly
deadly string of accidents at munitions-dismantling plants across the country.
Workers were taking apart old Greek land mines when the first explosion occurred
in the afternoon, and smaller blasts continued into the evening hours.

The site remained so dangerous on Thursday that rescue and recovery crews were
not allowed to enter; instead, the government sent a team of experts with an
armored vehicle into the blast zone to assess the damage, with unmanned
surveillance drones flying overhead. What the experts saw were two craters, each
the size of a football field, and debris scattered hundreds of feet away.

''Everything there looked just like a moonscape,'' Valentin Radev, an industry
expert who was part of the team, said in an interview. ''The plant and the
people have just vanished.''

Bulgaria, once a staunch Soviet ally, joined NATO and the European Union after
the fall of communism, but it has struggled economically and remains among the
poorest countries in Europe. Against that backdrop, the industry that sprang up
to deal with the large quantities of aging munitions left over from the Cold War
has been a welcome source of jobs -- but one plagued by safety problems.

It is also a part of a global trend that has seen the number of accidents at
ammunition depots rise ''dramatically'' in the last 35 years, according to the
Small Arms Survey, a research group in Geneva.

In Bulgaria, a series of explosions in 2008 at an arms disposal depot just
outside Sofia shook the city like an earthquake, registering 3.2 magnitude on
seismographs and panicking thousands of residents; three people were injured. In
June 2012, three people were killed at an explosives facility near Sliven in the
east. Two previous explosions at the Midzhur plant, in 2007 and 2010, injured
six people, and two buildings were flattened in the 2010 blast.

Similarly, a huge 2008 explosion at a plant in Albania, where inexperienced
villagers were pulling apart old artillery shells with their bare hands, killed
26 people and created a shock wave that damaged the country's main international
airport a short drive away.

The specific cause of the devastating blast in Gorni Lom on Wednesday was not
immediately known, but President Rosen Plevneliev of Bulgaria said Thursday that
''arrogant nonobservance'' of safety rules and regulations were to blame for the
deaths at the plant.

''Unfortunately, this is not the first time, but yet another case which takes
the lives of workers that dismantle ammunition,'' Mr. Plevneliev said in a
statement.

The government declared that Friday would be a day of national mourning. The
country's major political parties said they would suspend campaigning for the
day; the country is due to hold a general election on Sunday.

The labor ministry said on Thursday that an inspection of the plant two months
ago found outdated equipment, improperly stored explosives and more munitions at
the site than it could safely handle, in defiance of regulations.

The labor minister, Yordan Hristoskov, vowed Thursday that the plant, which
employed about 150 people, would never reopen. But workers protested, saying
they had no other means of making a living.

Montana Province, where the plant is, has one of the highest unemployment rates
in Bulgaria -- 21 percent in July, according to the most recent government
statistics. Mr. Hristoskov said workers at the plant were paid about 240 leva,
or $154, a month -- meager even for Bulgaria.

Mr. Radev, the expert who visited the blast zone, is a former defense official
who now serves as chairman of a trade association for ammunition specialists. He
said that ''accidents like this are not a Bulgarian patent -- they happen in
other countries in the region and beyond, every year.''

According to the Small Arms Survey, accidental explosions have been reported at
a rate of 26.8 a year since 2010, up considerably from the 4.3 a year reported
in the 1980s, before the Cold War ended. Russia alone has had 66 accidents since
1979, killing more than 400 people; the United States has had 19 in that period,
with four deaths. Wednesday's accident in Bulgaria was the country's 10th since
1979.

Still, Bulgaria badly needs economic success stories, and orders for munitions
disposal keep coming in from Bulgaria's Balkan neighbors, like Greece, and from
as far away as Indonesia, Mr. Radev said.

''During the Cold War, Bulgaria specialized in the production of ammunition and
small arms, and there are a lot of qualified people out there,'' he said. ''It
is still a big business for Bulgaria, one that is now becoming more and more
deadly.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/03/world/europe/deadly-blasts-in-bulgaria-rip-thr
ough-plant-decommissioning-land-mines.html

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Bulgarian Red Cross members with relatives of workers killed
Wednesday in an explosion at a munitions-dismantling plant.
 Boxes of ammunition were piled in a yard in the village of Gorni  Lom, where
the plant was. Fifteen people were killed. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY VASSIL DONEV/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


