                             1402 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Investigators in Ukraine Begin Long-Delayed Search of Plane Crash Site

BYLINE: By ANDREW E. KRAMER; Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reporting from
Washington, and Neil MacFarquhar from Moscow.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 950 words


GRABOVO, Ukraine -- Dutch and Australian police officers on Friday were finally
able to fan out over the site where Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 crashed in
Ukraine last month, to search for human remains overlooked by local emergency
workers.

As wind rustled over the wheat and sunflower fields, the police officers
observed a moment of silence in deference to the dead and then spread out,
carrying maps, GPS devices, blue plastic buckets and rubber gloves.

''We in the joint operation to salvage all the human remains here and bring them
back to their families are very happy we finally touched ground and can send our
guys to work,'' Cornelis Kuijs, the Dutch police colonel who is commanding the
recovery mission, said in a brief statement as the long-delayed search began.

''Professionally, we have an interesting, challenging job, being done in a very
polite, respectful way,'' Mr. Kuijs said. The police officers, who were blocked
from reaching the site for nearly a week by fighting between Ukrainian troops
and pro-Russia separatists, are motivated by knowing that they will help
grieving families, he said, adding: ''I'm happy I can do it side by side with my
colleagues. We're here to do that, and it's a privilege.''

It was the first day of work at the site for the Dutch-led crash investigation
and recovery mission, 15 days after the airliner broke apart in midair. The
United States says pro-Russian separatists shot the plane at its cruising
altitude of about 33,000 feet with a Russian-supplied missile. The separatists
and Russia deny this. The debris and bodies were scattered over 14 square miles,
falling in three villages and fields in rebel-controlled territory in eastern
Ukraine.

Although the situation in the area was initially calm enough to allow rebels and
local volunteers to recover bodies, fighting soon broke out near the site as
Ukraine pushed an offensive to surround the rebel-held regional capital,
Donetsk.

The Ukrainian military released a battlefield map on Friday indicating that it
had succeeded in surrounding Donetsk, and the Dutch and Australian police
officers will now operate from Ukrainian-held territory to the north.

The Dutch-led investigators have not said how many bodies are believed to be at
the site. European monitors say the bodies of about a third of the 298 people on
board the plane remain unaccounted for, either burned or overlooked.

The police officers set up a base at a chicken farm near where the plane's main
landing gear and tail hit the ground. Their first task was to thoroughly search
the area around the farm.

Every piece of human remains or personal belongings picked up will be plotted
with a GPS unit, Mr. Kuijs said, adding that the police would follow an Interpol
protocol for recovering remains. Cadaver dogs will soon arrive to search for
even the smallest fragments in the cornfields. The police used satellite images
to plan the search and expect to use drones to take aerial photographs.

About 100 police officers and European monitors reached the site on Friday; the
Ukrainian government has authorized up to 700 foreign police officers to search
for clues and bodies. ''We will find them and bring them home,'' Mr. Kuijs said.

Yet even as the officers waded into the windblown grass, kneeling from time to
time to more closely examine objects on the ground, explosions from tank rounds
boomed over the fields.

''It's not landing here, so it's O.K.,'' said Brian McDonald, a commander in the
Australian Federal Police and deputy head of the mission here. ''We've got a job
to do, so we will get on with it.''

Despite the team's success in reaching the site, the shelling underscored the
continuing tensions in the region and between the United States and Russia.
President Obama used a telephone call on Friday to question President Vladimir
V. Putin of Russia over his intervention in Ukraine.

White House officials said that Mr. Obama had ''reiterated his deep concerns
about Russia's increased support for the separatists in Ukraine'' and
''reinforced his preference for a diplomatic solution to the crisis.''

Appearing in the White House briefing room shortly after his phone conversation
with Mr. Putin, Mr. Obama seemed to question Mr. Putin's rationality.

''Short of going to war, there are going to be some constraints on what we can
do if President Putin and Russia are ignoring what should be their long-term
interests,'' he said. ''Sometimes people don't always act rationally, and they
don't act on their medium- and long-term interests.''Mr. Putin objected to the
latest American sanctions, according to a statement on the Kremlin website. But
the two leaders agreed that the current tense relations did not serve either
country's interests, the statement said.

In another call on Friday, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. told President
Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine that the United States would send about $8
million in additional assistance to Ukraine's border guard corps. That appeared
to be part of an effort to help counter what American officials say has been a
buildup of Russian forces along the border.

On Thursday, separatists and a Ukrainian armored column exchanged fire along a
tree-lined lane outside the village of Petropavlovka, where personal belongings,
including a Dutch children's book and many shoes, fell to earth. A separatist
commander who gave only his nickname -- Voron, or the Raven -- said the
Ukrainian column had not directly attacked the debris site.

The fighting ignited a fire in a wheat field that burned over fuselage
fragments, including one that was potentially relevant to the crash
investigation because it had what appeared to be shrapnel holes. The field still
smoldered on Friday.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/02/world/europe/investigators-in-ukraine-begin-se
arch-of-plane-crash-site.html

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Investigators from the Netherlands and Australia began on Friday
to look for human remains in the 14-square-mile area of debris. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)     MAPS

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


