                             1491 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 1, 2014 Wednesday
                        The International New York Times

Al Shabab's Internal Split

BYLINE: By MURITHI MUTIGA

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER; Pg.

LENGTH: 1016 words


NAIROBI, Kenya -- At ceremonies here to mark the first anniversary of the
shooting rampage at the Westgate Mall by four Al Shabab gunmen that left 67
people dead, Sgt. Godfrey Emojong offered a remarkable tale of survival. He was
one of the first policemen to arrive at the scene that Sept. 21, one of the
lightly armed officers who believed they were responding to a robbery.

But the sight of the dead bodies piling up told a different story. Minutes
later, as he was helping to move people out of the line of fire, Sergeant
Emojong was hit, downed with 15 bullet wounds.

''I have been through hell and back,'' he said. ''And every day I am grateful
for the time I have been given to be with my wife and two young children.''

For Sergeant Emojong and hundreds of others who survived four days of mayhem at
Westgate, there's a small crumb of comfort in the fact that Al Shabab's leader,
Ahmed Abdi Godane, was killed on Sept. 1 in a drone strike by American forces.
But Mr. Godane's death does not spell the end of Al Shabab. Rather, it offers a
narrow window of opportunity for the international community to exploit the
power vacuum in its leadership and offer solid, practical reasons for its rank
and file to put down their weapons.

The Somalia-based terrorist group has been severely weakened in the year
following the Westgate killings, not just by the death of its leader, but also
because he had eliminated potential successors. Moreover, a United
Nations-funded African coalition of 22,000 troops has pushed the group out of
key population centers in Somalia, closing off vital sources of income.

Thus it was hardly surprising that President Obama, in his recent speech
outlining his administration's strategy against the Islamic State group, cited
Somalia as one of the places where American ''air power and our support for
partner forces on the ground,'' have borne fruit. Yet to expect that these
military advances will lead to the comprehensive defeat of Al Shabab is to
misapprehend the nature of the group.

''Al Shabab'' means ''the youth.'' It was the name given to the armed wing of
the Islamic Courts Union, an alliance of clerics that, at the turn of the
century, began ousting the warlords who had controlled Somalia since the fall of
the central government in 1991. Although the Islamic Union imposed a harsh
interpretation of Shariah law, a war-weary public largely welcomed the return to
a semblance of law and order.

But the Islamic Union came on the scene at the wrong time. Claims that it
harbored an extremist agenda set off alarms in Washington, especially following
the Sept. 11 attacks. In December 2006, Washington gave the green light for
Ethiopian troops to enter Somalia and battle Al Shabab. A two-year insurgency
against troops from a traditional enemy (Ethiopia-Somalia rivalry goes back
centuries) only made Al Shabab more popular, and the group hit a high-water mark
in 2009 when Ethiopian troops withdrew.

However, an internal split soon cost Al Shabab most of its public support. The
group has long been divided between nationalist leaders interested in ruling
Somalia under Islamic law and those aligned with Al Qaeda and its vision of
global jihad. This second group, led by Mr. Godane and backed by Gulf-state
financing, alienated many Somalis with its indiscriminate killings.

''A lot of people advised the international community to reach out to the
moderates within the Shabab and arrive at an accommodation with them to isolate
the extremists,'' says Rashid Abdi, a specialist on the Horn of Africa.
''Critics in the West said that would be a policy of appeasement, but the
outcome of the failure to engage was the rise in the power of the hard-line,
much more radicalized faction of Al Shabab.''

The death of Mr. Godane offers an opportunity. There are scant prospects of
talks with Al Shabab's core leadership, which is firmly aligned with Al Qaeda
and must continue to be dealt with militarily. But these jihadists should be
viewed separately from the thousands of young men who joined the movement mainly
to earn a living. Reaching out to them and to more moderate mid-ranking members
is essential.

The Somalia government has offered a 45-day amnesty for Shabab fighters to give
up their arms, but it's not clear what kind of treatment those who surrender
their weapons might expect. The government must make concerted efforts to
improve the lives of citizens in the areas where Al Shabab has been routed.
Washington and its allies should press Mogadishu to channel Western aid into
these efforts and work with some of the more effective federal administrations
in various parts of the country to improve the water supply, health care and
economic activity.

The world community should make it clear that African coalition troops are not
battling Somali nationalists but a diminished jihadi force that includes foreign
fighters intent on terrorizing Somalis and waging terrorism abroad.

Here in Kenya, fear of Al Shabab remains strong. The border with Somalia is
porous, and corrupt police and immigration officials have been known to turn a
blind eye to the activities of the extremists. Moreover, in the year since the
Westgate Mall attack, the sense of national unity many Kenyans shared in its
immediate aftermath has given way to mistrust of our Muslim minority. Security
service actions that seem to target Kenya's ethnic Somali Kenyan citizens can
fuel suspicion and resentment that Shabab extremists can readily exploit. It is
far better to build bridges of cooperation with the Muslim community, whose
leaders in turn have a duty to act against radicalization in their midst.

The United States and its allies are right to confront the more implacable
elements of Al Shabab militarily. But the tragedy of Somalia is that military
solutions have trumped nearly all other approaches. We must adopt a more nuanced
strategy, one that acknowledges Al Shabab's complex makeup and attempts to
isolate its hard-line extremists from its many young members who joined the
group merely to make a living.

Murithi Mutiga is an editor at the Nation Media Group in Kenya.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/opinion/murithi-mutiga-al-shababs-internal-spl
it.html

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


