                             146 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 6, 2014 Monday 11:45 AM EST

In its fourth season, 'Homeland' crowns Carrie Mathison 'Drone Queen';
The fourth season of "Homeland" was supposed to be a reboot, but mostly it
brings a new perspective to the same questions that have always animated it.

BYLINE: Alyssa Rosenberg

LENGTH: 688 words


This post discusses the plot of the Oct. 5 episode of "Homeland."

When Carrie Mathison's (Claire Danes) co-workers in Afghanistan present her with
a birthday cake, she notices that below the blazing candles is a new title for
her: "The Drone Queen." It would be an uneasy sobriquet under any circumstances:
We first met Carrie three years ago when she was investigating Sgt. Nicholas
Brody (Damian Lewis), an American soldier and prisoner of war who dedicated
himself to terrorism after a young boy he'd come to know in captivity was killed
in a drone strike. And there is something particularly uneasy about watching
Carrie, who used to do her best work on the ground at personal risk to herself,
call in strikes from the the sterile chill of an operations center.

"We had an unbelievably rigorous first three months of this season because it is
like a pilot," Meredith Stiehm, an executive producer on "Homeland," said in
August, talking about the show's reboot in the wake of Brody's death last
season. "We went to this week in Washington talking to these CIA people and
asked State Department people, asking them, 'What's on your mind?' And then we
debated all five to seven of those countries for quite some time. So it did feel
like the process you go through when you're creating a new show."

But even though "Homeland" is focused on Pakistan this year, the show feels more
like a reset than a whole new program. Drones are still its main concern. It is
just the way into the subject that is different.

In its initial iteration, "Homeland" focused on the impact of drone strikes by
emphasizing how a Westerner - if one who had converted to Islam and spent years
living with the Osama bin Laden-like Abu Nazir (Navid Negahban) - was
radicalized by America's use of the weapons. This time, the show is coming in
from a number of new angles.

First, there is Ayaan Ibrahim (Suraj Sharma), a young man who survives a drone
strike that Carrie calls in. The hit was  supposed to take out just the No. 4
figure on the American kill list, but the weapon ended up detonating in the
middle of a wedding. Ayaan is the only person pulled out of the rubble, and the
look he aims at the cameras in the sky after identifying the bodies of his
families is poisonous and grief-stricken.

"Homeland" has been talking for years about how collateral damage from drone
strikes can produce new enemies for America. Ayaan's performance for the cameras
is unnerving to Carrie and her colleagues because it is clear he knew to look
for them. The American drone teams are no longer anonymous figures raining death
down on unsuspecting targets.

Pakistani citizens may not have the technology to shoot drones out of the skies,
but they can make clear to drone operators that they know who they are and what
they are doing. And they can visit their own kind of horror back on
casualty-averse Americans, as they do when Sandy (Corey Stoll), the station
chief in Islamabad, has his cover blown. The scene of him being cornered on a
street, then dragged from Carrie and Quinn's (Rupert Friend) car, is among the
most effective and unnerving action sequences "Homeland" has ever put on-screen.

The cumulative impact of drone strikes grinds away at American personnel, too,
as becomes clear in a young drone pilot's tense confrontation with Carrie in a
bar.

"You know me as Smash 12. I flew the mission into Pakistan the other night," the
man tells Carrie, before demanding to know how she deals with making calls that
lead men like him to kill innocent civilians, as with the guests at the wedding.
"Do you ever feel that? Sick to your stomach? ... I killed 4 Canadian soldiers
in January on bad orders. Dropped a 200-pound bomb on their heads. Monsters. F--
monsters. All of you."

"It's a job," Carrie tells Quinn, who is clearly distressed by the prospect of
"checking names off a kill list for a living." They both know that what they are
doing is not just a job. The new "Homeland" is not that new, and it has a major
trust deficit to pay off. But it can still be unsettling when it asks whether
jobs like this one should even be done at all.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


