                             1496 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 4, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Saturday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 732 words


8 P.M. (Flix) GREEN CARD (1990) Brontë (Andie MacDowell), an American botanist,
and George (Gérard Depardieu), a French musician, above, construct an instant
marriage so she can get a plant-filled New York apartment unavailable to a
single person and he can find work in the United States in this comedy directed
by Peter Weir. Then the Immigration and Naturalization Service comes knocking.
''The film's charms are as picture-perfect as anything George and Brontë manage
to manufacture,'' Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. In ''Amélie''
(2001), at 10, Audrey Tautou, in her breakthrough role, plays a French sprite
working as a waitress who lays out elaborate practical jokes as payback for
those who offend her friends.

When she falls in love with Nino (Mathieu Kassovitz), Amélie finds herself
unable to reveal her feelings and instead turns Paris, recreated through sets
and computer-generated imagery, into a kind of treasure hunt as she leaves clues
about her identity and he trails after her. Writing in The Times, Elvis Mitchell
called this comedy from Jean-Pierre Jeunet whose original title was ''Le
Fabuleux Destin d'Amélie Poulain,''''a sugar-rush of a movie.'' It has, he said,
''a hypnotic sense of romance; it's a fable filled with longing, with a heroine
who constantly flirts with failure.'' Mr. Mitchell added that there is no
denying ''that 'Amélie' is, to paraphrase its title, fabulous.''

10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Fred de Sam Lazaro reports on
Doctors Without Borders and the organization's efforts to preserve its
independence from governments. Tim O'Brien examines a case, to go before the
Supreme Court on Tuesday, about whether Arkansas prison officials can ban an
inmate from growing a beard in observance of his Muslim faith. And Bob Abernethy
and Kim Lawton discuss the coming Vatican meeting about ministering to families.
In ''Richard Heffner's Open Mind,'' at noon, Alexander Heffner interviews Sue
Gardner, the former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, about the
evolution of Wikipedia and her vision for an Internet committed to the public
good. In ''Our Cameras, Our Stories,'' at 1:30 p.m., young New York filmmakers
share their short-form autobiographical documentaries. And in the premiere of
''SciTech Now,'' at 6:30, Hari Sreenivasan looks at 3-D printings, drones, tech
start-ups, women in technology, Wi-Fi hot spots in cities and the future of the
universe.

8 P.M. (Lifetime) RUN FOR YOUR LIFE (2014) A journalist (Amy Smart) in an
abusive marriage flees with her two children. But when her ex-husband (Mark
Humphrey) tracks her down she must decide whether to disappear -- or kill him.

8 P.M. (Oxygen) MAGIC MIKE (2012) In a role loosely inspired by his stint as a
stripper in Florida, Channing Tatum, center, stars as the gyrating main
attraction at the Xquisite club, in what Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times,
called ''Steven Soderbergh's funny, enjoyable romp about male strippers and the
American dream.'' Alex Pettyfer plays Adam, a college dropout who is pushed
onstage. At first Adam is resistant. Then Madonna's ''Like a Virgin'' begins to
throb. ''The collaboration between Mr. Soderbergh and the relatively untested
Mr. Tatum is itself a gamble, one that has brought out the best in each,'' Ms.
Dargis said.

10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS Richard Schlesinger investigates the case of Linda
Cooney, who in 1992 shot and killed her former husband as their 10-year-old son,
Kevin, watched through a hole in his bedroom door. Ms. Cooney was acquitted when
a jury found she had acted in self-defense. Then, in 2011, she used the same gun
to shoot Kevin, leaving him paralyzed.

11:30 P.M. (NBC) SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE Sarah Silverman hosts the show 20 years
after she worked for it as a writer; Maroon 5 is the musical guest. ''S.N.L.
Vintage'' leads in at 10 with Steve Martin and the Blues Brothers.

What's Streaming Now

GILMORE GIRLS Netflix now has exclusive rights to all seven seasons of Amy
Sherman-Palladino's banter-rich series starring Lauren Graham as Lorelai
Gilmore, a teenage runaway turned stubbornly independent single mother and inn
owner in her Connecticut hometown, and Alexis Bledel as her Ivy League-bound
daughter, Rory, who dreams of becoming a foreign correspondent. Kelly Bishop and
Edward Herrmann play Lorelai's wealthy parents, for whom appearances are
everything. (netflix.com) KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/04/arts/television/whats-on-tv-saturday.html

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY LAM PING LTD.)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


