                             141 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 8, 2014 Friday 7:07 PM EST

BYLINE: Catherine Ho

LENGTH: 387 words


Online retail giant Amazon has teamed with three drone manufacturers to push
federal agencies and lawmakers to move forward with regulations for unmanned
aerial vehicles.

The group's main goal is to urge the government to grant permission to companies
to test and operate small commercial drones that weigh less than 55 pounds and
fly under 400 feet or above 60,000 feet. The coalition is made up of Amazon's
Prime Air unit and drone manufacturers DJI Innovations, Parrot Corp. and 3D
Robotics.

Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, who owns The Washington Post and associated
publications, has expressed interest in starting a service for Amazon.com
customers that would deliver packages via small drones in less than 30 minutes.

Drones, also known as unmanned aerial vehicles, are already being used by some
law enforcement agencies to fight fires and photograph accident scenes. The
Federal Aviation Administration in 2013 authorized the first commercial flight
by a drone chartered by ConocoPhillips to scan the sea floor to survey marine
mammals before drilling. But the group wants to expand the ways consumers and
private companies can use drones to accomplish a host of other functions, such
as photographing real estate properties, tracking poachers who hunt game
illegally and expanding broadband to parts of the world with limited access.

"The possibilities for [unmanned aerial vehicles] use are limitless," said
lobbyist Michael Drobac of law and lobby firm Akin Gump, which is representing
the group. Drobac and fellow Akin Gump lobbyists Jennifer Richter and Greg
Walden have been meeting with staff and policymakers in Congress, the FAA, the
Federal Communications Commission and in the White House's Office of Science and
Technology Policy. Most drone-related regulations fall under the authority of
the FAA, but the FCC would deal with spectrum issues, and the White House's
technology policy arm could have a hand in shaping privacy-related rules.

The FAA is slated to announce proposed rules for small commercial drones later
this year. The agency estimates that by 2018, there could be as many as 7,500
small commercial drones in use in the United States. In 2013, the FAA announced
six U.S. sites for drone research and testing in Alaska, North Dakota, Nevada,
New York, Texas and Virginia.

catherine.ho@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


