                             1458 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 11, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Extending a Legacy of War

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1330 words


WASHINGTON -- In ordering a sustained military campaign against Islamic
extremists in Syria and Iraq, President Obama on Wednesday night effectively set
a new course for the remainder of his presidency and may have ensured that he
would pass his successor a volatile and incomplete war, much as his predecessor
left one for him.

It will be a significantly different kind of war -- not like Iraq or
Afghanistan, where many tens of thousands of American troops were still deployed
when Mr. Obama took the oath nearly six years ago. And even though Mr. Obama
compared it to the small-scale, sporadic strikes against isolated terrorists in
places like Yemen and Somalia, it will not be exactly like those either.

Instead, the widening battle with the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria will be
the next chapter in a grueling, generational struggle that has kept the United
States at war in one form or another since that day 13 years ago on Thursday
when hijacked airplanes shattered America's sense of its own security. Waged by
a president with faded public standing, the new phase will not involve many
American troops on the ground, but seems certain to require a far more intense
American bombing blitz than in Somalia or Yemen.

The battleground for that new phase will now extend beyond the well-known sands
of Iraq into the new theater of Syria, a nation racked by more than three years
of brutal civil war. After years of trying to avoid entangling the United States
in another ''dumb war,'' as he called the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Mr. Obama is
now plunging the United States into the middle of one of the world's bloodiest,
most vicious and fratricidal conflicts.

Whether he can wage this war in a more effective way, crushing a jihadist group
while minimizing American casualties, could be the central national security
test of his final two years in office -- and the first one confronting his
successor. Mr. Obama acknowledged that ''it will take time to eradicate a
cancer'' like ISIS, but gave no estimates.

''This is going to be more than three years,'' said former Representative Pete
Hoekstra of Michigan, a Republican who was once the chairman of the House
Intelligence Committee. ''Confronting ISIS, we may get done with the biggest
part of this in three years, but that's not going to take care of the threat
from radical Islam.''

Mr. Obama's move into Syria reinforces the need for an approach that draws
lessons from the mistakes of both President George W. Bush and his own
administration, Mr. Hoekstra said. ''What we need is a consistent doctrine that
Republicans and Democrats from one administration to another can embrace,'' he
said.

Leading such a campaign will present a challenge to Mr. Obama perhaps unlike
that confronted by any of his predecessors. While other commanders in chief
enjoyed a surge in public support when they took the nation to war, the nation
is not exactly rallying behind Mr. Obama this time around. A fresh battery of
polls this week indicated that most Americans do want him to go after ISIS yet
disapprove of his leadership. In other words, they support the policy but not
the president.

Peter D. Feaver, a former national security aide to Mr. Bush and President Bill
Clinton, said the public unease was due, in part, to Mr. Obama's own shifting
descriptions of the threat and his acknowledgment two weeks ago that he had no
strategy yet. ''Until tonight, the Obama administration has done a textbook job
of following the script on how to undermine public confidence,'' he said.

But he added that Mr. Obama had a chance to change that and called his
nationally televised speech from the White House ''a strong step in the right
direction'' that may have ''set the predicate for a rally.''

In the speech, Mr. Obama tried to strike a balance, again presenting himself as
the anti-Bush while embracing a military action he had long sought to avoid. He
talked almost as much about what he would not do -- ''We will not get dragged
into another ground war in Iraq'' -- as what he would do to counter ISIS.

But he also advanced an argument that in some ways mirrored Mr. Bush's
much-debated strategy of pre-emption -- that is, acting to forestall a potential
threat rather than waiting for it to gather. Mr. Obama acknowledged that ISIS
did not currently pose a direct threat to the United States, but he contended
that ''if left unchecked'' it could.

That left many divided about his approach. Barry Pavel, a former Obama national
security aide now at the Atlantic Council, said the president might be acting
too tentatively.

''I'm not sure half-steps into Syria are ultimately going to achieve the
president's goals,'' he said. ''It's a fine strategy for contain and disrupt.
It's not a strategy for defeat by any means. If you want to defeat ISIS, you
have to go all-in to Syria, which the president isn't prepared to do.''

But others warned against that sort of thinking, viewing it as Mr. Bush's
approach all over again. Such advocates expressed concern that Mr. Obama would
be too precipitous in hunting down ISIS, when in fact it could be successfully
contained by a regional coalition working together without the risks of a deeper
military engagement.

''I do hope that he's going to resist a rush to outcome'' said Maj. Gen. Paul D.
Eaton, a retired Army officer at the National Security Network, ''and that the
president will move in a deliberate, methodical fashion with a coalition willing
to engage on the ground to resolve the problem over a period of months and
years, as opposed to days and weeks.''

In his speech, Mr. Obama tried to equate the emerging strategy to the way he has
pursued terrorist cells in Yemen and Somalia. Aides said that by working with
local forces on the ground and targeting leaders from the air, the United States
had been able to damage extremist groups without occupying territory or engaging
in costly nation building, although some former officials like Mr. Pavel noted
that terrorist groups remained in both countries.

But what Mr. Obama has in mind for Iraq and Syria goes beyond that approach. By
some counts, the United States under Mr. Obama has conducted a dozen or so
lethal strikes in Somalia in recent years and about 100 in Yemen. Even at the
height of the drone war in Pakistan, Americans conducted fewer than 120 strikes
in a single year, 2010, and were down to seven so far this year, according to
the Long War Journal.

By contrast, the air campaign against ISIS that Mr. Obama ordered in Iraq has
involved 154 strikes in the course of a month -- far fewer than necessary in the
view of some hawks, but far more than the occasional attacks on satellite terror
groups in Africa and Arabia. And that was before Mr. Obama officially expanded
the mission to destroying ISIS and effectively erased the border with Syria to
send warplanes there as well.

In addition, this war involves a more sprawling and complicated geopolitical
landscape than that of Somalia and Yemen, encompassing a broad array of groups,
multiple countries, and the broken relationship between the United States and
President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, whom Mr. Obama has called on to give up
power.

For all that, the campaign Mr. Obama outlined Wednesday night is likely to
continue past his departure from office. Much as he was inaugurated with the
challenge of finishing Mr. Bush's wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the next
president will be heir to Mr. Obama's war in Syria and Iraq.

Mr. Obama's aides said they hoped to use the next two years to reduce the threat
of ISIS enough so that the president's successor would have an easier time --
much as Mr. Bush's aides strived to get Iraq under control with a troop surge
and strategy change before turning it over to Mr. Obama.

''We will do as much of that work as we can with the time that is available to
the president,'' said a senior administration official who briefed reporters
under ground rules that did not allow him to be identified.

And then it will be someone else's turn.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/11/world/middleeast/extending-a-legacy-of-war.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


