                             1442 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is Owning Overrated? The Rental Economy Rises

BYLINE: By CLAIRE CAIN MILLER

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; SHARING EVERYTHING; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 994 words


Things that you can now rent instead of buying: a power drill, a song, a tent,
an office for an hour, a Prada handbag, a wedding dress, a painting, a dog, your
neighbor's car, a drone.

This new way of consuming -- call it the Netflix economy -- is being built by
web start-ups that either rent items themselves or serve as middlemen,
connecting people who want something with people who own it. They are a growing
corner of the broader sharing economy, in which people rent out rooms in their
homes on Airbnb or drive people in their cars with Uber or Lyft. Soon, tech
entrepreneurs and investors say, we'll be able to rent much of what we always
thought we must own.

It is no coincidence that many of these companies -- like Rent the Runway for
designer dresses and Getaround for private cars -- were born during the
financial crisis, when people needed new ways to save money, as well as new ways
to make it. The ones that have survived and grown during the recovery could
herald a cultural shift away from the overconsumption that has driven so much of
American culture -- not to mention American debt.

''It's very counterintuitive from the old individualistic American culture,
where what people aspire to has been increasing amounts of privacy, gated
communities, owning your own,'' said Juliet Schor, a sociology professor at
Boston College who is studying the sharing economy for a MacArthur Foundation
research project. ''So it is a real twist on where values, sensibilities and
culture have been.''

Then again, it might just be a new way to fuel conspicuous consumption, albeit
in a more financially responsible and potentially less wasteful way. In other
words, for some it is less about saving the planet than being seen in the
latest, unaffordable Versace gown.

Either way, the entrepreneurs say the rental economy is part of a growing,
post-recession movement to value experiences over possessions. Anticipating a
new belonging can bring more happiness than actually owning it, studies have
shown, and everyone knows how quickly the glow of a new purchase wears off.

''Our value set has changed as a younger generation,'' said Jennifer Hyman,
co-founder and chief executive of Rent the Runway. ''We are now in a state of
mind where we want to acquire more experiences. The 1990s 'MTV Cribs'
show-off-how-much-money-you-have generation is over.'' (The customer who rents
that $1,895 Versace gown for $80 might disagree.)

Even as the economy improves, there is evidence that people might have a
chastened approach to discretionary spending. Though overall consumer spending
has returned to pre-crisis levels, it has been rising at a disappointing rate,
and the biggest increases are coming from necessities like food and
transportation as opposed to small luxuries like apparel and entertainment.

Before the recession and before she was a senator, Elizabeth Warren was a
professor at Harvard Law School, and she found that Americans were winding up in
debt and without nest eggs not because of spending on clothes, gadgets or
restaurants but because of spending on the basics of middle-class life, like
homes and cars.

So could the answer be to forgo ownership of everything else?

In many ways, renting is just a continuation of what people have always done --
borrowing a cup of sugar or a pick-up truck from a neighbor. The difference is
that technology has made borrowing possible at a broader scale, and between
strangers. Social networking profiles and rating systems offer a level of trust
and verification, and mobile phones equipped with GPS take much of the work out
of pairing people. Examples are TurningArt for renting artwork, Pley for renting
Legos and LiquidSpace for renting an office by the hour.

Still, the services raise questions for consumers -- mainly around trust. What
happens if someone stains the dress being rented, crashes the car or loses the
dog? (The companies have different ways to deal with the risks, including
insurance policies, contracts and fees.)

Several such start-ups, like SnapGoods, which was for renting items in your
house to neighbors, have been forced to shut down or change their business. Ron
J. Williams, the co-founder of SnapGoods, said he learned a lesson about the
limits of the rental economy.

''I will not go across town to rent a vacuum cleaner when Amazon can have one on
my doorstep tomorrow for only $20 more than it would have cost me to rent it,''
said Mr. Williams, who now has a start-up called Simplist. ''I will, however, go
across town to rent a motorcycle that will make indelible memories at a fraction
of that bike's full cost.''

If the idea persists, these companies could put a dent in retail sales and
manufacturing of new products. Some already are. As more people forgo buying
songs and stream them using services like Spotify, for instance, music downloads
worldwide fell for the first time last year. Uber has tried to make an economic
case that sharing cars is more affordable than owning one.

Rent the Runway, which was started in 2009, said that so far this year, new
customers and orders were more than double those of last year. Last month, it
expanded beyond fancy dresses to accessories like bags and jewelry, which
customers can rent for as long as they desire. Ms. Hyman said this service
competes with fast-fashion retailers like Zara, from which people buy things to
wear for just a few months.

The idea works best for ''fallow assets,'' or expensive items that people rarely
use, said Aileen Lee, founder of the venture capital firm Cowboy Ventures, who
is on the board of Rent the Runway. That is why the company rents cocktail
dresses but not jeans.

As for how much this trend will change consumer culture, consider this: People
who rent items often end up buying them. Maybe in this economy, people just need
a little hand-holding before making big splurges. And particularly for things
that wear out, Ms. Schor said, buying might even be the most ecological and
economical choice.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/30/upshot/is-owning-overrated-the-rental-economy-
rises.html

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY YEHTEH)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


