                             1464 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lost Homes and Dreams at Tower Israel Leveled

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN and FARES AKRAM

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1591 words


GAZA CITY -- The men of Zafer Tower No. 4 sit in the shade across the street
from the wreckage.

Somewhere in there is Dr. Mohammad Abu Rayya's stethoscope. Buried, too, is a
hard drive filled with 15 years of articles, photos and notes by Hisham Saqalla,
a journalist and blogger. And a three-foot replica of the Eiffel Tower that
Faraj Shorafa, a 72-year-old lawyer, brought from Paris in 1999.

Nobody was killed in Israel's destruction of the tower, the first of three
high-rises felled in the finale of this summer's fighting with Hamas, the
militant Palestinian movement that dominates the Gaza Strip. But about 500
people lost more than their homes. ''They have destroyed our dreams,'' said Dr.
Abu Rayya, 38.

Zafer 4 was erased by two powerful explosions around 7 p.m. on Aug. 23, 17 years
to the day after it opened with two penthouses and 40 three-bedroom apartments
of 1,615 square feet that originally sold for $60,000. Filled by high-ranking
government officials and private-sector professionals, the 11-story tower was an
alternative to the Gaza way of extended families living in compounds. It was
part of a construction empire whose founder quit school after ninth grade to
pick tomatoes in Israel and now lives in a four-story villa with its own
elevator and a mosaic-tiled pool in the basement, where Zafer 4's evacuees
waited out the attack.

The Israeli military said the building was ''a command and control center''
where ''multiple floors'' were ''used regularly by Hamas for operational
activities'' throughout the seven-week battle. Military officials refused to say
what types of activities, why the entire tower was targeted or what type of
bombs were used.

In interviews, more than half the tower's occupants said that Hamas had taken
over one of the penthouse apartments in 2007 for what several said was a ''media
office'' filled with computers and communications equipment. Residents said the
unit was abandoned during the war, and that teenagers passed many nights on that
floor using PlayStation as bombers buzzed overhead.

Atef Adwan, one of 28 Hamas lawmakers elected in 2006, bought a first-floor
apartment five years ago for his second wife, and spent much of the summer there
with her and their two young sons, fearing the Israelis would target his home in
the border town of Beit Hanoun. (They did not.)

''There was concern and people are still concerned'' about Hamas presence in the
building, said Wael Abu Najja, 47, who lived on the ninth floor, ''but they
can't talk about this publicly.''

Most of the tower was taken by leaders of Hamas's rival, Fatah, men who
continued to receive salaries but had not actually worked in the security
services or the president's office since 2007, when Hamas routed Fatah from
power in Gaza.

So when residents received mobile-phone evacuation orders that Saturday from an
Arabic-speaking Israeli soldier named Mousa, they never expected the entire
tower to be destroyed. Many fled without the emergency bags that Gazans keep
packed with cash, documents and mementos.

''Hamas is everywhere -- in every building, they have an apartment,'' said
Mohammed Owda H. Abu Mathkour, the wealthy mogul who runs the Zafer contracting
company and lives in the villa across Safed Street from the fallen tower.
''Israel has no right to destroy the whole building because of one apartment.''

Mr. Mathkour said he could rebuild the tower in eight months for $3 million, a
fraction of the $7 billion the Palestinian leadership estimates is required to
reconstruct some 11,000 demolished and more than 50,000 damaged structures
across Gaza. Besides the money, the massive effort depends on a new arrangement
for the import of cement and steel, which Israel has restricted for fear it
would be used to manufacture rockets or build tunnels like those militants used
to repeatedly penetrate Israeli territory this summer.

First, though, there is the rubble -- 2.5 million tons of it. Removal alone
could cost $10 million, and the minister of public works said his five
bulldozers are not enough to tackle the task.

The pile that was Zafer 4 is perhaps three stories high, topped by a Palestinian
flag that Mr. Saqalla's 17-year-old son, Shafiq, planted with pride. Mattresses
and bedclothes peek out between the sandwiches of concrete floors -- or
ceilings?

There is an Angry Birds notebook and papers from an engineering course
explaining ''probability theory'' and ''The Normal Distribution.'' A flower pot.
A green suitcase, a mangled bathtub, a cracked microwave. Protruding from the
back is a crushed white Kia Sportage that belonged to Mr. Adwan, the Hamas
lawmaker.

Zafer was the name of a cousin of Mr. Mathkour's who died of cancer in an
Israeli prison in 1993, the year the company was founded.

Mr. Mathkour said three of his 14 Zafer towers were hit by Israel this summer,
including the curved glass No. 9, an office building where Gaza's first rooftop
restaurant opened June 13 (his wife's birthday). On July 17, he said, a missile
hit an interior-ministry antenna on Zafer 9's roof; over the next two weeks,
tank shells sprayed the tower three times.

The Israeli military, in an emailed statement, called Zafer 9 ''a hub of Hamas
terror activity'' that had ''been 'on the radar' for years'' and housed
''several senior Hamas members.'' The statement said the tower was ''struck with
precise Air Force fire,'' though Mr. Mathkour has the tank shells in his office,
and walls on several floors were clearly pockmarked by them.

''They broke my heart when they hit the tower, so I'm trying to break them when
I am rebuilding,'' said Mr. Mathkour, who reopened the restaurant Sept. 4.

Zafer 4 was a workmanlike tower of two-toned stucco, whose apartments had
L-shaped living/dining areas around ample kitchens and larger-than-usual
bathrooms. In the early years, security guards and drivers were often stationed
outside; so many Palestinian Authority bigwigs lived there that it was nicknamed
''Fatah Tower.''

Ghazi al-Jabali, the former Gaza police chief who once challenged Yasir Arafat
for the Palestinian presidency, used to own the penthouse where Hamas later set
up shop. Abdel Rahman Mustafa Yasin, a major general in the security service,
had two linked units on the fourth floor. Mr. Abu Najja's father, the former
deputy Parliament speaker, lived on the first.

Ahmad and Rihad Ibrahim, a young couple with a 5-year-old son and an 8-month-old
daughter, paid $50,00 for a seventh-floor unit June 25, bought a beige-and-rose
sectional sofa and new curtains, and moved in July 5, their sixth wedding
anniversary.

''It was the first time it was written under my name for a property,'' said Mr.
Ibrahim, 31, who did marketing for an insurance company whose offices were also
hit during the war. ''The lifetime dream of the Palestinian is to own a home.
Now I'm looking for an apartment to rent.''

The summer's fighting brought residents closer, as most spent day after day
inside. With potable water scarce, residents ponied up $140 per apartment to dig
a 170-foot well during a temporary cease-fire in August. It was two days later
that Mousa, the Arabic speaker from Israel, called to tell them to get out.

Dr. Abu Rayya, on crutches, took the elevator up to the ninth floor, where his
mother and brother lived in separate apartments, only to learn they had already
left. Ms. Ibrahim, 26, said she almost forgot her baby as she shepherded her
husband's 75-year-old mother and 80-year-old aunt.

In Mr. Mathkour's beautiful basement, Mousa called again, asking if everyone had
evacuated. Residents realized an old woman who could not walk was still inside.
Mousa gave them five minutes, and five young men ran back in and carried her out
on a plastic chair.

A drone-fired warning missile hit the roof. Mousa called again, and Mr.
Mathkour's wife, Aisha, took the phone.

''She asked him which floor or which apartment are you going to hit,'' recalled
Mr. Mathkour, who is known as Abu Rani. ''He said we're going to hit the whole
building. She said that's haram -- forbidden -- she was appealing to him. He
said yala yala -- let's go, let's go -- goodbye. She came to me, hey, Abu Rani,
they are going to bring down the whole building. I told her he is joking. He
wants to terrify you.''

Mr. Ibrahim said he needled Mr. Mathkour about how many bombs it would take to
topple the tower. The proud builder said 10. Turned out two did the job.

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights considers the attack on Zafer 4 a war
crime, and has filed complaints with Israel seeking both compensation for
residents and a military-police investigation. The site has become a focal
point: A group recently adorned it with 101 children's artworks -- 101 because
that is the number Gazans dial in emergencies.

The men sit across the street, in the shade of the ''umbrella'' of Zafer 1,
which was one of Gaza's first high-rises when it opened in 1994. They are
scattered now, at relatives' homes or in apartments rented for up to double the
normal rates.

One afternoon, a teenager told Ramadan Helmi El Saqqa, 58, a retired brigadier
general, that there was a unit available in Zafer 1. It was on the 10th floor,
just like Mr. El Saqqa's old place in Zafer 4, which he shared with 10 relatives
from three generations.

The unit had windows broken from the blast across the street, and glass littered
the floors. He stood on the balcony overlooking the rubble pile. The rent was
$600, up from $400 before the war, but it was furnished. ''We're not looking for
something to like,'' he sighed. ''We're looking for something to contain us.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/15/world/middleeast/at-gaza-tower-israel-leveled-
lost-homes-and-dreams.html

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Dr. Mohammad Abu Rayya and his family lived in Zafer Tower No.
4, a Gaza City high-rise, before Israel destroyed it Aug. 23 in its fight
against Hamas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WISSAM NASSAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
One of two explosions that reduced Zafer 4 to debris, and inspections of the
damage, above. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KHALIL HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS
ADEL HANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A4)
 The week after their home was destroyed, children lit candles in commemoration.
The Israeli military said the tower was a Hamas ''command and control center.''
(PHOTOGRAPH BY WISSAM NASSAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


