                             1410 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Fighting a Bid for Leverage as a Gaza Cease-Fire Expires

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN and ISABEL KERSHNER; Jodi Rudoren reported from Gaza,
and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem. Merna Thomas and Kareem Fahim contributed
reporting from Cairo, Somini Sengupta from the United Nations, and Fares Akram
from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1376 words


GAZA CITY -- Israel and Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip resumed
cross-border air assaults after a three-day cease-fire expired on Friday, but
the renewed violence seemed less about meeting military goals than about
jockeying for leverage in talks that had made little progress toward a more
durable truce.

Militants led by Hamas, the Islamist faction that dominates Gaza, sent a rocket
soaring toward southern Israel exactly as the agreed-upon pause expired at 8
a.m., and fired about 50 throughout the day, wounding one soldier and one
civilian and damaging a house in the border town of Sderot.

Israel, which withdrew its ground troops earlier this week, responded quickly
with airstrikes and artillery shelling that by day's end had hit nearly 50
targets and killed five people, including three children. But Israel showed no
signs of seeking to re-invade Gaza or escalate its airstrikes.

The cause of the fighting appeared to be Hamas's frustration that it could not
get what it considers meaningful concessions from Israel and Egypt at the talks
in Cairo.

The Egyptian foreign ministry asserted that the parties had reached agreement on
''the great majority of topics'' and urged an extension of the cease-fire to
address ''the very limited points still pending.'' But Palestinian officials
said the Israeli delegation had hardly addressed their demands to open border
crossings, remove restrictions on trade, establish a seaport and release
prisoners.

Palestinian and Israeli analysts alike said that after a month of death and
destruction, Hamas could not stop fighting without a tangible civic achievement,
and was finding it difficult to climb down from an ambitious agenda in the face
of a strong Egyptian-Israeli alliance.

The conflict on the ground between an advanced, high-tech military and a
guerrilla group appeared to find an echo in diplomacy, as Egypt, Israel and the
United States all pushed for President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian
Authority to take a leading role in running and rehabilitating Gaza. That would
be a blow to Hamas, which took control of the territory in 2007, and tricky for
Mr. Abbas, whose perceived cooperation with Israel has already hurt his
credibility among Palestinians.

Ahmed Yousef, a former Hamas leader who remains close to the movement, likened
the renewed fighting to two people biting each other's fingers to see who would
surrender first.

''This is like a game, a chess game -- you have all the time to continue, to
show your enemy that you stay strong,'' Mr. Yousef said in an interview at a
seaside hotel in Gaza City. ''For three days we couldn't have a solid answer
from the Israelis, so you have to go back to fighting. Your legitimate demand is
not answered, so you have to put pressure on the other side.''

Ehud Yaari, an Israel-based fellow of the Washington Institute for Near East
Policy who specializes in Arab affairs, said, ''Hamas is in a bind because they
have set such a high bar with their demands.

''But you can see today Hamas and Israel exchanged blows but on a low scale --
they were not firing all that they can,'' Mr. Yaari noted. ''Everybody
understands there may be an extension or a new cease-fire.''

A senior Palestinian official briefed on the Cairo negotiations said that Israel
and Egypt had essentially dismissed all talk of a seaport or restored airport in
Gaza, and only agreed to ease limits on travel and imports. In exchange for
these concessions, Israel and its international backers demanded the
demilitarization of Gaza, something the Palestinians said would come only with
the establishment of an independent state.

''As Palestinians, we don't want escalation, but it is our right to defend
ourselves,'' Azzam al-Ahmed, a negotiator who is close to Mr. Abbas, said in
Cairo. ''We won't stay here indefinitely,'' he added, referring to the talks.

Kobi Michael, former head of the Palestinian desk at Israel's Strategic Affairs
Ministry, said the negotiations so far had proved ''a very humiliating treatment
of Hamas by Egypt.'' The country's new president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, views
Hamas as an enemy because it sprang from his main domestic rival, the Muslim
Brotherhood.

Egypt's role is critical not only as a broker of the talks, but because it
controls Gaza's gateway to the world, the Rafah border crossing, which has been
closed much of the past year. Cairo has indicated that having Mr. Abbas's
security forces back on the border, as they were before Hamas wrested control of
Gaza in 2007, would be required to get it reopened.

''The Egyptians don't bother with political correctness -- they are very
direct,'' Mr. Michael said. ''The Egyptians have a long memory, and like to
serve up revenge cold.''

Except for the weapons so central to its identity, Hamas has little to offer at
the bargaining table. Renewing the rocket fire not only sent Israelis scrambling
into bomb shelters on another sunny Friday. It also returned the world's
attention to the killing of nearly 1,900 Gaza residents since July 8, most of
them civilians, including a 10-year-old boy felled by a drone Friday morning as
he played at a mosque under construction near his home.

The day's exchanges, however, were much less aggressive than before the
cease-fire. An afternoon airstrike hit a Gaza City home belonging to a Hamas
leader, Mahmoud al-Zahar, injuring three, witnesses said. A strike in Al Qarara,
a village near Khan Younis, killed three cousins, ages 10, 12 and 22, who were
in a crowd of people waiting outside a grocery store to fill bottles with clean
water.

The Israeli military reported that two rockets were fired into southern Israel
even before the cease-fire expired, but the barrage began exactly at 8 a.m. for
maximum public-statement effect. The rockets continued for hours, but none went
beyond southern Israel, a contrast from a month in which a few sirens sounded in
the Tel Aviv area most days.

''This is not a worsening of the conflict -- this is a tactical move, and we
need the perspective of time to understand whether this is also a strategic
move,'' Amos Yadlin, a former head of Israeli military intelligence, said on
Israel Radio. ''Military Hamas did not absorb a strong enough blow in order to
have it agree to the conditions the Egyptians and Israelis are trying to force
on it.''

Mkhaimer Abusaada, a political scientist at Al-Azhar University in Gaza City,
said that firing a few dozen rockets into Israel was not, ''from a rational way
of thinking,'' likely to move Israel on core issues it considers a threat to its
security. The audience for Friday's display, he said, was really the beleaguered
population of Gaza, where whole neighborhoods have been reduced to rubble,
displacing nearly a quarter of the 1.7 million residents, and virtually everyone
has buried a loved one.

''Hamas is trying to send a macho message to the Palestinian people -- that we
bring Israel to the negotiating table and we are still launching missiles,'' Mr.
Abusaada said. ''The problem is, Hamas is acting like a superpower. We know that
Israel is the superpower, and Hamas can only annoy the Israelis, but Hamas is
not in a position to put enough pressure on Israel to make concessions.''

Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an Israeli military spokesman, called the renewed rocket
fire ''unacceptable, intolerable and shortsighted.'' A senior Israeli government
official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the delicate
diplomacy, said the Palestinian militants ''have taken away the premise'' for
the Cairo talks -- ''an unconditional cease-fire.''

But Sam Bahour, a Palestinian-American business consultant and political
commentator, said the Cairo process was inherently flawed because Israel and the
Palestinians did not come to it on equal footing after 47 years of occupation.

''The sheer use of the word 'cease-fire' is insulting -- it depicts an
artificial symmetry,'' Mr. Bahour wrote on the blog Middle East Eye, ''even
though reality on the ground is totally contrary.''

Pointing to Egypt's border restrictions on Gaza, he added: ''To be conducting
these 'cease-fire' talks in the capital of a country that participates in the
siege of the Gaza Strip should be an embarrassment to every member of the
Palestinian negotiating team, first among them Hamas.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/world/middleeast/israel-gaza-strip-conflict.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A girl inside a United Nations school hosting displaced
Palestinians in Gaza City, where plastic bottles stood empty, awaiting the
return of the water supply. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SIEGFRIED MODOLA/REUTERS)
 Smoke, dust and debris rose over Gaza City after an Israeli airstrike on
Friday, when the fighting resumed upon the expiration of a three-day cease-fire.
Strikes and shelling by Israel killed five. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM
MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A8)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


