                             1468 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 18, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Science Fiction Writers Take a Rosier View

BYLINE: By NICK BILTON

SECTION: Section E; Column 0; Style Desk; DISRUPTIONS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 856 words


Imagine living in a weird science-fiction story where everything you dreamed up
actually came true.

Well, for some, that is not too far from reality. For decades sci-fi writers
have been making bold predictions of what tomorrow might look like. But now
writers are starting to realize that in predicting the future, they have
actually helped shape it.

For example, we can thank sci-fi authors for first envisioning credit cards,
which go all the way back to 1888 when Edward Bellamy wrote about them in his
novel ''Looking Backward.'' Additionally, solar power and radar were envisioned
by Hugo Gernsback in his 1911 magazine stories; H.G. Wells anticipated voice
mail in 1923; in-ear headphones and large flat-screen TVs were in Ray Bradbury's
1953 novel, ''Fahrenheit 451;'' virtual reality was dreamed up by Arthur C.
Clarke in 1956; Jules Verne told stories about electronic submarines all the way
back in 1870; and Martin Cooper, who created the first mobile phone, said the
idea came to him after watching ''Star Trek.''

But not all of the predictions have been rosy. We can also thank these writers
for contributing to dark advances in technology.

Atomic bombs first appeared in H. G. Wells's 1914 novel ''The World Set Free;''
George Orwell aptly predicted -- and maybe contributed to -- our N.S.A.-like
surveillance state in ''Nineteen Eighty-Four;'' and writers have been
envisioning incredibly destructive weapons of all shapes and sizes, including
biological warfare, for centuries.

Now a group of visionaries have banded together to offer stories that are more
utopian, which they hope will contribute to a more positive future.

This work began in 2011, when Arizona State University's president, Michael
Crow, challenged Neal Stephenson, the author of several sci-fi novels, to stop
writing dystopian stories, and offer ideas with a brighter outlook. The concept
caught on and last week a group of writers, in collaboration with the
university, released ''Hieroglyph: Stories and Visions for a Better Future,''
which hopes to be a blueprint for these new concepts.

''Sci-fi stories have helped shape technology at crucial points,'' said Kathryn
Cramer, co-editor of Hieroglyph. ''But a lot of the past was dystopian. We're
hoping to show that there are a lot of things we can do better.''

One thing writers are pushing back against in particular is Hollywood's
depiction of the future. You know, where robots roam the earth killing puppies
and enslaving humans. Take ''Transcendence,'' an action film this year starring
Johnny Depp, who plays a brilliant scientist who is resurrected as an artificial
intelligence program that becomes evil. Or ''12 Monkeys,'' in which a man-made
virus wipes out most of the planet's population.

''I got into a little bit of a rut thinking that the way to be cool was to be
cynical and dark,'' Mr. Stephenson said. ''I don't regret that at all. Now I
have a license to go out and try something with a different tone.''

Mr. Stephenson's story in the new collection is about an engineer's effort to
build a 20-kilometer-tall skyscraper. Other tales envision an alternative
Internet that is free from N.S.A. snooping and corporate tracking, and is
powered by thousands of homemade drones. Another story is about a group of
hardware hackers and Burning Man devotees who build an autonomous 3-D printing
robot that goes to the moon. A third imagines a future world without border
fences.

The stories still offers plenty of drama, death and destruction, but many have a
sort of happy ending. Cory Doctorow, a contributor to Hieroglyph, wrote that the
stories are not ''optimistic or pessimistic about the future. Instead, they are
hopeful about it.''

Last week, the editors of the collection took a trip around Silicon Valley,
giving talks at big companies, including Google -- which is building a bunch of
robots that may one day roam the earth, but (one hopes) won't enslave people --
to try to persuade engineers to think differently.

While Mr. Stephenson isn't so Pollyanna-ish as to think that these sci-fi
narratives will make the world a better place, he hopes that they can have a
constructive influence. ''There's definitely some kind of a feedback loop
between science fiction and technological fact,'' he said.

But these negative stories can serve a positive role, too.

Daniel Suarez, author of the popular novel ''Daemon,'' about a computer program
that tries to destroy the world and kill people, said it is the job of science
writers to help computer engineers understand how technology can adversely
affect humanity. ''Science fiction is never about the machines themselves, it's
about humanity's relationship with those machines,'' he said.

Mr. Suarez believes that science fiction can help prevent technology-driven
calamities by serving as a warning. ''Because people worry about being under the
control of dystopian robot overlords, we're less likely to be in that
situation,'' he said. ''By going through all the different ways that we might
end up there, we will figure out all the ways that we might not end up there.''

In other words, we need to imagine the nightmare so it doesn't become real.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/18/fashion/science-fiction-writers-take-a-rosier-
view.html

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JAMES C. BEST, JR./THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


