                             1418 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 15, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Get the Military Off of Main Street

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH R. BEAVERS and MICHAEL SHANK.

Elizabeth R. Beavers is the legislative associate for militarism and civil
liberties, and Michael Shank is the associate director for legislative affairs,
at the Friends Committee on National Legislation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 679 words


WASHINGTON -- FERGUSON, Mo., has become a virtual war zone. In the wake of the
shooting of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, outsize armored vehicles
have lined streets and tear gas has filled the air. Officers dressed in
camouflage uniforms from Ferguson's 53-person police force have pointed M-16s at
the very citizens they are sworn to protect and serve.

The police response has shocked America. The escalating tension in this town of
21,200 people between a largely white police department and a majority
African-American community is a central part of the crisis, but the
militarization of the police is a dimension of the story that has national
implications.

Ferguson's police force got equipped this way thanks to the Pentagon, and it's
happening all over the country. The Department of Defense provides
military-grade weapons and equipment to local law enforcement agencies through
the 1033 program, enacted by Congress in 1997 to expand the practice of
dispensing extra military gear. Due to the defense industry's bloated contracts,
there is a huge surplus. To date, the Pentagon has donated military equipment
worth more than $4 billion to local law enforcement agencies. And the giving
goes on, to police forces in all 50 states in the union.

Ferguson's police department is just one recipient; small towns all over America
are now the proud owners of ''MRAP'' armored vehicles. The largess has gotten so
out of hand that a congressman, Hank C. Johnson, is introducing a bill to block
the 1033 handouts.

Whereas the Department of Defense hands over weapons directly, the Department of
Homeland Security provides funding for arms. It has distributed more than $34
billion through ''terrorism grants,'' enabling local police departments to
acquire such absurd items as a surveillance drone and an Army tank.

For a police department like Ferguson's, the path to becoming a paramilitary
force is a short one. After loading up with free military gear, it is no
surprise that law enforcement agents want to use it. In fact, the 1033 program's
regulations require that the police use what they receive within one year.

In the absence of extreme violence or actual terrorist threat, what happens --
as the American Civil Liberties Union has documented -- is that the equipment
and weapons are used by SWAT teams in routine situations, such as low-level drug
raids or the execution of search warrants. As Ferguson shows, this militarizing
of routine police work exacerbates tensions and increases the likelihood of
disorder. This, in turn, appears to justify a militarized police response, and
so the cycle continues.

The federal government can stop this increased militarization at its source. The
Pentagon must end its transfer of military-grade weapons through the 1033
program. And the Department of Homeland Security should stop handing out the
terrorism grants. The ease with which police departments can avail themselves of
Homeland Security funding for enormous caches of weapons and ammunition in the
name of counterterrorism is deeply disconcerting.

Veteran police chiefs who have served on the front lines of America's biggest
police forces are voicing their concern. Norman H. Stamper, the former police
chief of Seattle, has written with regret about the military-style tactics
employed during the protests against the 1999 World Trade Organization
conference in Seattle; he now advocates ''an authentic partnership in policing
the city,'' involving rank-and-file officers, civilian employees and community
representatives.

Militarizing our police officers does not have to be the first response to
violence. Alternatives are available. Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.'s
statement Thursday highlighting resources like the Department of Justice's
Community Oriented Policing Services office is welcome. This is where the
government should be investing -- instead of grants for guns.

Police militarization is a growing national threat. If the federal government
doesn't act to stop it, the future of law enforcement everywhere will look a lot
like Ferguson.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/15/opinion/ferguson-shows-the-risks-of-militarize
d-policing.html

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


