                             1422 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Russia, Iran and Egypt Heckle U.S. About Tactics in Ferguson

BYLINE: By ROBERT MACKEY

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; OPEN SOURCE; Pg.

LENGTH: 1212 words


After St. Louis county police officers in full battle gear trained sniper rifles
on peaceful protesters in the suburb of Ferguson last week, and then proceeded
to douse the streets in tear gas and round up journalists, a Russia analyst
named Mark Adomanis observed that images of a crackdown on dissent in the United
States would make life easier for the man recently put in charge of propaganda
for the Kremlin, Dmitry Kiselyov.

Dear Ferguson Police Department: Dmitry Kiselyov sends you his thanks. You just
gave him his next year's worth of talking points -- Mark Adomanis
(@MarkAdomanis) August 14, 2014

As my colleague David Herszenhorn reports, Russia's state television channels
have indeed featured the violence in Ferguson in heavy rotation since then and
an anchor in Moscow told Russian viewers on Tuesday that the situation in
Ferguson was veering close to civil war. ''Cases of racism are still not rare in
the nation of exemplary democracy,'' the government-controlled channel Rossiya
24 explained.

Konstantin Dolgov, the Russian foreign ministry's commissioner for ''human
rights, democracy and rule of law,'' also weighed in Tuesday on the police
response to the protests in Ferguson over the killing of Michael Brown, an
unarmed teenager, on Aug. 9. Taking note of ''the high degree of tension in U.S.
society, which remains split along racial lines,'' Mr. Dolgov said that the U.S.
''should take care of large-scale internal problems and take effective measures
to resolve them.''

The ministry's official Twitter feed shared a report on Mr. Dolgov's comments
with a photograph of Hedy Epstein, a 90-year-old Holocaust survivor and
political activist based in St. Louis, being arrested on Monday for protesting
the Missouri governor's decision to deploy the National Guard in Ferguson.

.@KKDolgov: #US should mind its own problems, not meddle in others' affairs
http://t.co/8Eq55gwWM7 #Ferguson pic.twitter.com/FaSehCeEfj -- MFA Russia
(@mfa_russia) August 19, 2014

''While urging other countries to guarantee the freedom of speech and not to
suppress antigovernment protests, the United States authorities at home are not
too soft with those actively expressing discontent over persistent inequalities,
actual discrimination and the situation of 'second class' citizens,'' Mr. Dolgov
added.

The ''extreme mayhem'' has also become a major focus for the Kremlin-funded news
network Russia Today, or RT, which targets viewers abroad through broadcasts in
English, Spanish and Arabic that often highlight America's shortcomings with a
neo-Soviet zeal.

This week, RT's main English-language channel featured regular updates from the
''war zone'' by its correspondent Anastasia Churkina -- a daughter of Russia's
United Nations ambassador, Vitaly I. Churkin.

[Video: An update from Ferguson, Mo., on the Kremlin-funded news network Russia
Today, or RT. Watch on YouTube.]

RT's news agency, Ruptly, has filled its YouTube channel with live streams from
Ferguson, raw footage of tear gas victims and a drone's-eye view of protesters
near a looted and torched gas station.

[Video: Raw footage of a photographer suffering from the effects of tear gas in
Ferguson. Watch on YouTube.]

[Video: Video of the damage in Ferguson from a state-funded Russian news agency.
Watch on YouTube.]

Absent from this coverage was any mention of the laws that effectively ban
street protests in Russia or the jailing of prominent bloggers and dissidents.
Then again, as the Russian-American writer Julia Ioffe explained in The New
Republic last week, officials in Moscow have long relied on discussions of
racial inequality in the United States to counter criticism of their own human
rights abuses. ''The now sacred Russian tactic of 'whataboutism' started with
civil rights,'' Ms. Ioffe wrote. ''Whenever the U.S. pointed to Soviet human
rights violations, the Soviets had an easy riposte. 'Well, you,' they said,
'lynch Negros.'''

While the unrest has also shocked American observers and foreign correspondents
from other Western democracies -- including British and German reporters who
have been struck by the ''sounds of battle'' and endured arrest -- some of the
most strident criticism of the police violence in Ferguson has come from
authoritarian nations where the police are often venerated and dissent is
scarcely tolerated.

Audio: Aid distribution, child trauma counsellors, sounds of battle....is this
really suburban Missouri? https://t.co/ObvgraRCmE -- Aleem Maqbool
(@AleemMaqbool) August 19, 2014

News from Ferguson: A colleague and me got handcuffed and for 3 hours arrested
because we did our job to investigate the Michael Brown case -- Ansgar Graw
(@Potomaker) August 18, 2014

Coverage that echoes the broadcasts from Moscow has also appeared on Iran's
state-run Press TV, in reports about the use of force ''to suppress protests in
Ferguson,'' that also make no mention of how demonstrations are dispersed in
Iran.

[Video: An English-language broadcast from Iran on the unrest in Ferguson. Watch
on YouTube.]

A series of updates to the Twitter feed of Iran's nation's ruling cleric,
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, took matters further. Several tweets in the ayatollah's
name drew attention to America's long history of racism.

Today the world is a world of tyranny and lies. The flag of #HumanRights is
borne by enemies of human rights w/US leading them! #Ferguson -- Khamenei.ir
(@khamenei_ir) August 15, 2014

Racial discrimination is still a dilemma in the U.S. #Ferguson
http://t.co/k1jpN89Qze pic.twitter.com/whAH2NblgF -- Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir)
August 17, 2014

Other messages from Iran's supreme leader were premised on the conspiracy theory
that American leaders ignore the suffering of their own people because of
''Zionist domination'' and a preoccupation with the defense of Israel.

The day when American nation realize their socioeconomic problems stem from
domination of #Israel over their govt, what'll happen? #Ferguson -- Khamenei.ir
(@khamenei_ir) August 18, 2014

US govt is #unreliable& egotistical; due to Zionist domination over it,US
prefers #Israel's interests 2 that of its nation.10/5/13 #Ferguson --
Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) August 19, 2014

Not to be outdone, a spokesman for Egypt's foreign ministry, Badr Abdel-Atti,
told the official news agency MENA on Tuesday that his country was ''closely
following'' the protests in Ferguson. According to the state-owned Ahram Online,
Egypt ''called on U.S. authorities to exercise restraint and deal with the
protests in accordance with U.S. and international standards.'' The statement
came just days after the first anniversary of the massacre of hundreds of
peaceful protesters by the same military-backed government.

As my colleague Austin Ramzy reported, China's official Xinhua news agency also
published a commentary this week attacking the United States for racism and
hypocrisy when it comes to human rights. ''The Ferguson incident once again
demonstrates that even if in a country that has for years tried to play the role
of an international human rights judge and defender, there is still much room
for improvement at home,'' Xinhua editorialized. ''Obviously,'' it concluded,
''what the United States needs to do is to concentrate on solving its own
problems rather than always pointing fingers at others.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/20/world/europe/russia-iran-and-egypt-heckle-us-a
bout-tactics-in-ferguson.html

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


