                             1480 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Philippines Pulls Troops From Zone Near Syria

BYLINE: By RICK GLADSTONE and JODI RUDOREN; Rick Gladstone reported from New
York, and Jodi Rudoren from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 685 words


The four-decade-old United Nations peacekeeping operation in the Golan Heights
region between Israel and Syria, largely curtailed last week because of Syria's
civil war, was further undermined on Tuesday with confirmation that the
Philippines contingent was going home.

President Benigno S. Aquino III of the Philippines said in an interview while
attending the United Nations Climate Summit that most of the Filipino soldiers,
having retreated from the buffer zone between Israel and Syria to the Israeli
side last week because of Syrian insurgent attacks, had departed for the
Philippines, with the rest to follow.

Mr. Aquino has grown increasingly exasperated with the Golan peacekeeping
operation, known as the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, or Undof,
which is ill equipped to deal with heavily armed Syrian insurgents who have
encroached with growing frequency.

The peacekeepers have not been permitted to significantly strengthen their own
arsenal despite recurrent threats of kidnapping and attack. A group of Filipino
soldiers was abducted in March 2013 by one Syrian rebel faction, and last month
two outposts staffed by Filipinos came under insurgent assault.

''The rules of engagement, the terms of engagement, are not really clear,'' Mr.
Aquino said in explaining why the contingent, which numbers about 300 troops, or
roughly a quarter of the Undof deployment, was going home.

It was unclear when, or even whether, the Filipino forces would be replaced in
the Undof operation, which also includes troops from Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal
and the Netherlands, some of them also subjected to attacks from the Syrian
side.

Forty-five Fijian soldiers were abducted last month by the Nusra Front, an
affiliate of Al Qaeda, but released unharmed on Sept. 11 after two weeks.

A United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations official, who spoke on
the condition of anonymity because the issue is politically delicate, said that
the Philippines had long signaled its intention to withdraw from Undof, and that
after its soldiers were attacked in August, ''a decision was made to advance
their planned repatriation.''

The official said none of the other contributing countries had withdrawn. But he
said their ability to monitor the buffer zone had been greatly reduced because
most had been redeployed, at least for the time being, to the Israeli side for
their own safety.

Undof and the peacekeeping operations department ''are working to determine how
the force will be reconfigured to ensure that Undof is able to execute its
mandated tasks in the current exceptionally challenging environment,'' the
official said.

The absence of an international presence in the area of separation, created
after the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, has added new instability to the frontier
between Israel and Syria, which technically remain in a state of war.

That instability was reinforced Tuesday when Israel said it had shot down a
Syrian fighter jet over the Israeli-controlled Golan that the Israelis contended
had strayed into their airspace. It was the first time in at least a
quarter-century that the Israelis had downed a Syrian warplane.

Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israeli military, said a Patriot air
defense system had intercepted a Russian-made Sukhoi warplane around 9:15 a.m.
Brig. Gen. Ram Shmueli, a former head of intelligence in the Israeli Air Force
who is now serving in the reserves, said the pilots of the jet, which he
identified as an Su-24, had ejected in Syrian territory.

Israel has responded on several occasions in the last three years to what it has
described as errant fire from the Syrian civil war that landed in the Golan
Heights. In August, Israel shot down a Syrian drone.

Eitan Ben Eliyahu, a retired major general who was commander of the Israeli Air
Force from 1996 to 2000, said he did not believe the Syrian fighter jet's
intrusion was deliberate because ''the Syrian regime would not dare'' to provoke
Israel.

''It's hard to analyze and explain and assess the situation because the
situation is absurd,'' General Ben Eliyahu said in an interview on Israel Radio.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/24/world/middleeast/israel-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


