                             1453 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 8, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Medieval Message, Modern Delivery

BYLINE: By DAVID CARR.

Email: carr@nytimes.com; Twitter: @carr2n

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; THE MEDIA EQUATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1227 words


The ostensible purpose of the recent videos that show the beheadings of two
American journalists by Islamic militants is to deter attacks -- your missiles
on our positions will beget our knives on Western hostages -- but the true aim
is to spread dread and terror.

The videos deliver in miniature the same chilling message as the footage of the
towers falling 13 years ago: Everything has changed, no one is safe and the
United States is impotent against true believers. It is a memo from a foe that
has everything to gain by goading America into a fight in a faraway land where
its enemies are legion. The tactic worked back then.

And while the videos convey barbarism on an elemental level, dismissing them as
crude or one-dimensional would be wrong. The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria,
known as ISIS, clearly has a sophisticated production unit, with good cameras,
technically proficient operators and editors who have access to all the best
tools.

What they made are modern media artifacts being used to medieval ends. The
videos serve as both propaganda and time machine, attempting to wipe away
centuries of civilization and suggest that the dreamed-of caliphate flourishes
and blood is cheap currency.

The real warriors in those videos are the journalists who were killed, James
Foley and Steven Sotloff, who were trying to do a terrible, dangerous job when
they were grabbed opportunistically in Syria. Innocent people end up tragically
caught in the crossfire of war, but the targeting of journalists who provide
witness for the rest of us is particularly appalling to people in the news
business.

I initially had no interest in seeing the videos -- the beheading of Daniel
Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, in 2002 is still fresh -- but
watched the footage of Mr. Sotloff's death after I decided to write about it.

The mastery of medium and message is evident in the careful crafting of the
video. (Anybody who doubts the technical ability of ISIS might want to watch a
documentary of Falluja that includes some remarkable drone camera work.)

In the Sotloff clip, the enemy, in this case President Obama, is shown through a
video effects filter to make his visage in a news conference about ISIS appear
distorted and sinister. An electronic buzz effect signals an interruption -- a
kidnapping, if you will -- of the broadcast before a graceful typographical
segue promises ''A second message to America.''

We are then in a desert, the horizon carefully situated at the midpoint of a
two-camera shoot. There is thought put into the wardrobe selection; the victim
is dressed in an iconic orange jumpsuit -- a reference to detainees in American
custody -- and the killer costumed more as a ninja than a jihadist, all in black
and his face obscured, holding a small knife and holster.

The actual murder is performed in the unflinching sunlight of the desert. (I
thought more than once of the brutally clear morning of Sept. 11, 2001.) Because
sound is difficult to capture on a windy expanse of arid land, the victim is
wearing a lapel mike. Mr. Sotloff introduces himself in sober tones and begins
to read a scripted statement off what seems to be a teleprompter.

The executioner is cocky and ruthless, seemingly eager to get to the task at
hand. When he does attack his bound victim, only the beginning is shown and then
there is a fade to black. Once the picture returns, the head of the victim is
carefully arranged on the body, all the violence of the act displayed in a
bloody tableau. There is another cutaway, and the next potential victim is shown
with a warning that he may be next.

''It is an interesting aesthetic choice not to show the actual beheading,'' Alex
Gibney, a documentary filmmaker, said. ''I can't be sure, but they seemed to
dial it back just enough so that it would get passed around. In a way, it makes
it all the more chilling, that it was so carefully stage-managed and edited to
achieve the maximum impact.''

The act is shocking regardless of the context. Remember near the end of Season 1
of ''Game of Thrones,'' when Eddard Stark, a main character, was poised to lose
his head? We expected an arrow to come in from stage right to save him, but it
did not and the blade fell swiftly. The audacity of the scene was something
people talked about for weeks afterward, and the show's unflinching violence has
been a core element of its escalating popularity.

And so it is in real life. Video beheadings are a triple death -- murder and
defilement in a public way -- and YouTube becomes the pike on which the severed
heads are displayed. The actual butchery of the act is minimized by strategic
editing, which suggests that the video is not an attempt at leverage but a
carefully produced infomercial about how gangster and merciless ISIS is. It is a
kind of global invitation: Come for the jihad and stay for the killing.

Writing in The New Yorker, Dexter Filkins did a remarkable job explaining what
takes place in the videos.

''For the guys who signed up for ISIS -- including, especially, the masked man
with the English accent who wielded the knife -- killing is the real point of
being there,'' he wrote.

Robert Baer, a former C.I.A. officer and the author of the coming book ''The
Perfect Kill: 21 Laws for Assassins,'' has worked extensively in the Middle East
and continues to be in touch with many of the factions there. He points out that
a lot of the jihadists involved in filmed killings seem to be from the West and
suggests that the combination of swagger and brutality reflects the worst of
modern youth culture finding traction in the deadly mission of jihad.

''It is very old, going back to the Middle Ages when people were drawn and
quartered, a visual lesson to the living of retribution,'' he told me in a phone
call, ''but it also reminds us that they think that they can level the playing
field through their commitment, that they are not going away.''

Many people have suggested that those who hosted or passed around the video have
blood on their hands by proxy. I wondered what someone in the middle of things
would think of the videos' dissemination. I called my friend and colleague Tim
Arango, who is the Baghdad bureau chief for The New York Times and has been
reporting in the region for five years.

''I think the more people who watch it, the more people will know what we are up
against,'' he said from Istanbul, after many months in Iraq.

''I felt like I had to see them for two reasons,'' he said. ''One, I cover these
guys and I need to know what they are saying. And two, if they are targeting
American journalists in the region for propaganda uses, you need to be aware of
what happened. You don't want to be the next guy kneeling in the jumpsuit.''

Tim and I are old friends examining and discussing the same thing over Skype
despite being a world apart, which is a wonder of the age that we live in. But
those frictionless media dynamics carry darker cargo as well. And in the same
way that the sheer size of the World Trade Center was used against itself, the
modern social media apparatus is now used to menace us.

We don't want to look, but some of us do and the rest of us talk about it. ISIS
seems to understand that the same forces that carried the Ice Bucket Challenge's
message of uplift -- the desire to be part of something, to be in the know --
can be used to spread fear and terror as well.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/08/business/media/with-videos-of-killings-isis-ho
nes-social-media-as-a-weapon.html

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A frame from the video released by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, of the death of the journalist Steven Sotloff. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SITE
INTELLIGENCE GROUP, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


