                             1497 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Creating Drama 'by the Seat of Our Pants'

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 988 words


When the terrorist turned hero Nicholas Brody died last year on the Showtime spy
thriller ''Homeland,'' the producers of the series knew they would be facing a
total reinvention this season.

But the show enters its fourth season Sunday under unexpected pressure and a bit
damaged psychologically -- mirroring, in an odd way, its main character, the
bipolar C.I.A. officer Carrie Mathison.

Last season, many onetime supporters, including some critics and fans, turned on
''Homeland,'' accusing it of manipulative plotting in four early episodes
(involving an elaborate con by Carrie's patron, Saul, in which he seemed to turn
on her) and losing focus with emphasis on minor characters like Brody's
daughter, Dana.

''I don't think I ever really care to watch 'Homeland' again,'' the Slate critic
Willa Paskin wrote, saying she had ''lost faith'' in the show's ''ability to be
coherent.''

The disrespect was new for a show once so hot that President Obama requested
screeners to watch in the White House, and once so honored it was given the Emmy
for best drama after its first year. In what might have been the low point, the
series was excluded from last season's ferociously competitive Emmy field for
best drama. ''We love our show, and we bleed for our show,'' said Alex Gansa, a
creator of ''Homeland.'' ''So when there is a degree of criticism, it can't help
but hurt. And the lack of an Emmy nomination really hurt.''

But he added: ''I'm unable to watch the show objectively. So I look at Season 3,
and I choose to focus on the strengths. I love those first four episodes and the
way we brought the season home.''

Claire Danes, who has won the best-actress Emmy twice for her portrayal of
Carrie, defended what she called ''a beautiful season.'' She added: ''It was a
long game the writers were playing. I think maybe some viewers felt excluded in
the reveal after the first four episodes. I thought it was a thrilling magic
trick. Some viewers might have felt it was a gotcha. But that was never the
intention. It was to delight and surprise and show Saul's brilliance.''

She acknowledged that ''Homeland'' was a ''high risk'' enterprise because later
episodes are being written even as the first ones are shown, and the end of each
season is not determined beforehand. This ''flying by the seat of our pants''
approach, as Mr. Gansa put it, allows ''Homeland'' to stay remarkably close to
unfolding events in real life, even appearing prescient at times, Ms. Danes
said.

But the risks can sometimes take a toll, as Mr. Gansa explained: ''You're making
so many decisions and so immediately that you're bound to get one or two
wrong.'' He added, ''If I had it to do over again, I probably wouldn't have
given Dana Brody a love story last season. I would have done something else.
That said, I thought Morgan Saylor did an amazing job in the part.''

The absence of Brody will hang over the new season, Ms. Danes said, and not just
because she will miss playing opposite the Emmy winner Damian Lewis. Their
characters' baby will be a major theme, Ms. Danes said, and postpartum
depression will be added to Carrie's challenges. ''That naturally interests me,
just because I'm a new mom,'' she added. (She and her husband, Hugh Dancy -- of
NBC's ''Hannibal'' -- have an 18-month-old son.)

So how is ''Homeland'' being reinvented? Mr. Gansa said he decided to take his
characters ''to their real milieu, to a place where they've been trained to
operate.'' Though Carrie was last seen being promoted to C.I.A. station chief in
Istanbul, now she is heading the operation in Kabul, and running into tension
with the American Embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan.

With Mr. Lewis gone, Mandy Patinkin's role as Saul -- now out of the C.I.A. and
relegated to work with a private contractor -- will take on greater weight.
''He'll do anything to save his metaphoric child, Carrie,'' Mr. Patinkin said,
''because he feels she's the ticket, no matter what her struggles or troubles
are.''

The show originally planned to shoot in Israel, but then reconsidered because of
uncertainty about events there. Ms. Danes said Turkey was the next choice until
the production learned that the Turkish government was insisting on vetting
every script that might contain ''an unflattering depiction of Turkey.''

So South Africa -- Cape Town, specifically -- is standing in for both
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Viewers will again find in ''Homeland'' parallels to real events in the Mideast,
Mr. Gansa said. Drone and airplane attacks, terrorist cells and embassy security
all play a role in the season.

There were suggestions that ''Homeland'' was an inspiration for videos issued
this summer by the Islamic State. An article in The Daily Mail speculated that
the group included scenes that imitated the show's choppy opening credits.

''I think that's nonsense,'' Mr. Gansa said. ''But I don't think it's nonsense
that these terrorist organizations are using social media in very sophisticated
ways.''

Whatever questions critics have, the show is still proving influential on the
rest of television. Series that in some way borrow its look or character types
include ''Madam Secretary'' on CBS, as well as the coming ''State of Affairs''
and ''Odyssey'' on NBC, and ''Dig'' on USA.

''It's wonderful that we're inspiring so many other shows,'' Ms. Danes said.
''There was so much talk about the show after the first year, I think we became
a target. I understand that's the nature of television. But it's also true that
more people are watching the show than ever.''

''Homeland'' drew its biggest audience last season, averaging seven million
viewers.

As for the new season, Mr. Gansa shrugged off any suggestion that the show
needed to defend its record.

''I didn't take the hype of the first season all that seriously,'' he said. ''I
don't take criticism all that seriously. We're making the best show we can each
week. It's up to us to work our tails off to make the show great.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/arts/homeland-enters-its-fourth-season.html

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above from left, Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison in the coming
fourth season of ''Homeland''
 the show's chief creative executive producer, Alex Gansa, speaks with the
Showtime executive Randy Runkle on a set in Cape Town, South Africa.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOE ALBLAS/SHOWTIME)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


