                             1463 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Like Handel and Bach, a Pair of Contemporaries

BYLINE: By ZACHARY WOOLFE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 889 words


Phasing, the signature technique of Steve Reich's early music, involves rhythms
that begin in sync and gradually shift just far enough from each other to create
blossoming landscapes of patterns and tensions. Eventually, even if just in
passing, synchronicity returns and resolution occurs.

Evidently Mr. Reich and Philip Glass, titans of what came to be called
Minimalism and close collaborators in the 1970s, were enmeshed for decades in a
quiet professional and personal feud. While the details are unclear, many years
passed before they and their ensembles once more ended up together on stage on
Tuesday -- and again on Wednesday and Thursday -- at the Brooklyn Academy of
Music, each time to a packed theater and roaring ovations.

The occasion was the start of a festival celebrating the 50th anniversary of
Nonesuch Records, the groundbreaking, wide-ranging label that crucially
supported both composers as their careers took flight. So did the Brooklyn
Academy, which made this an ideal location for their public reconciliation and
the substantial three-concert retrospective that went with it. Mr. Glass played
in Mr. Reich's ''Four Organs'' and Mr. Reich joined the Philip Glass Ensemble
for ''Music in Similar Motion'': thus did these two men, both 77, come back into
phase.

Even more affecting than their grinning curtain calls were the obvious
crosscurrents of influence in their music. The combination of marimbas and
female voices in the second part of Mr. Reich's ''Drumming'' (1971) anticipated
similar sounds -- milky keyboards; pure, high singing -- in ''Einstein on the
Beach'' (1976), Mr. Glass's epochal opera collaboration with Robert Wilson. The
alluring nocturnal passages of ''Einstein'' and Mr. Glass's ''Facades'' (1981),
redolent of smoky jazz, left their fingerprints on Mr. Reich's ''Sextet''
(1985).

Throughout Wednesday and Thursday's concert -- I missed Tuesday's -- I thought
of the critic Russell Platt's recent suggestion, in The New Yorker, that Mr.
Glass and Mr. Reich can profitably be compared to Handel and Bach, another pair
of composer contemporaries. Mr. Reich, like Bach, creates works of shining
austerity, while Mr. Glass -- like Handel, an opera specialist -- has a more
capacious eclecticism, a gaudier style.

For both better and worse, Mr. Glass is almost always a little much. He borrows
from Asian music qualities of repetition and drone, adding to them
globe-trotting references and a distinctly American abundance. The academy
audiences heard, among other things, a hard-driving, almost carnival-like
excerpt from his score for the film ''Koyaanisqatsi'' (1982); the Indian-raga
pastiche of a section of the score for ''Powaqqatsi'' (1988); the
pseudo-Parisian barcarole lilt of ''Floe'' (1981); the over-the-top drum kit in
the leaden second movement of his Symphony No. 1 (''Low,'' 1992); and the
relentless fanfares of the finale of ''In the Upper Room'' (1986).

While Mr. Reich's music is made of wood, stone, hands (''Clapping Music,'' from
1972) -- fundamental elements -- Mr. Glass composes in neon: swirling and flashy
in ''Music in Similar Motion'' (1969), diabolically dense in the climax of
''Einstein'' and full of synthesizer choir effects in the final act of his
chamber opera ''The Photographer'' (1983). His best work elicits a sense of
childlike wonder and delight at the grand spectacle, as if you were taking in
the lights from the center of an emptied-out Times Square. Mr. Glass's less
effective pieces are murky and overstuffed, grandiose rather than grand: you're
still in Times Square, but the crowds have flooded back in.

Mr. Reich's textures, on the other hand, are rarely muddy. Even when the mood
lags in the slow central section of the troubled, anxious ''Sextet,'' the
feeling isn't heavy. That he sustains lightness and transparency in the richly
droning ''Four Organs'' (1970) and over the hourlong span of ''Drumming'' is a
remarkable achievement. A glimpse of a similar lucidity is the most memorable
moment in his generally wan ''WTC 9/11'' (2010), a response to the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks, which happened exactly 13 years before Thursday's concert:
the combination of silvery, almost medieval string-quartet harmonies with a
fuzzy recorded voice singing a Hebrew psalm.

''WTC 9/11'' was the only work from the past 20 years on these three academy
programs. It was a poignant reminder that while Mr. Glass and Mr. Reich continue
to write, often intriguingly and beautifully, their truly pioneering successes
are many decades in the past.

But those triumphs still sound fresh, and our understanding of them can still
deepen. On Thursday, David Cossin presented his ingenious 2000 version of Mr.
Reich's gorgeous ''Piano Phase'' (1967), originally composed for two pianos.
Using drum pads that activated the work's melodic elements, Mr. Cossin filmed
himself performing one of the parts.

Visible behind the screen on which the film was projected, he performed the
other part live, demonstrating the phasing technique in real time as his arms
slowly appeared to multiply, like a Hindu deity. Music became visible, and the
beauty of Mr. Reich's vision was even more clearly apparent.

The Nonesuch Records at BAM festival continues through Sept. 28 at the Brooklyn
Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene;
718-636-4100, bam.org.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/15/arts/music/after-decades-steve-reich-and-phili
p-glass-reunite-at-bam.html

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Steve Reich and Philip Glass, from left, during their musical
reunion at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


