                             1437 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 29, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Urges Calm in Face of Two Crises

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1126 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama confronted a pair of volatile international crises
with restraint on Thursday as he said he was not close to authorizing airstrikes
against Islamic extremists in Syria and played down the latest escalation of
Russia's military intervention in Ukraine.

With tensions rising in Europe and the Middle East, Mr. Obama emphasized that a
military response would not resolve either situation and pledged to build
international coalitions to grapple with them. Despite pressure from within his
own government for more assertive action, he tried to avoid inflaming passions
as he sought new approaches.

Mr. Obama confirmed that he had asked Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel for options
for military strikes in Syria to target the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria,
which has established a virtual state straddling the border of those countries.
But speaking with reporters before a meeting of his national security team, the
president said no action in Syria was imminent because he had not even seen
military plans.

''We don't have a strategy yet,'' he said. ''I think what I've seen in some of
the news reports suggests that folks are getting a little further ahead of where
we're at than we currently are.''

His comment drew fire from critics and prompted aides to clarify that he was
only talking about Syria. Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, posted
on Twitter and went on television to say Mr. Obama did, in fact, have a strategy
to combat ISIS in Iraq. He said it included military action, building an
inclusive government, supporting Iraq's military and recruiting regional
partners.

Mr. Obama seemed equally intent on managing expectations about what the United
States may do in response to reports that Russia has sent forces into Ukraine.
Although he said he expected to impose additional sanctions, he declined to call
Russia's latest moves an invasion, as Ukraine and others have, saying they were
''not really a shift'' but just ''a little more overt'' form of longstanding
Russian violations of Ukrainian sovereignty.

''I consider the actions that we've seen in the last week a continuation of
what's been taking place for months now,'' Mr. Obama said. ''The separatists are
backed, trained, armed, financed by Russia. Throughout this process, we've seen
deep Russian involvement in everything that they've done.''

In both cases, Mr. Obama took a strikingly different tone than his own advisers.
The nation's top military officer and the president's deputy national security
adviser both talked in sharper terms over the last week about the possibility of
striking in Syria, while Mr. Obama's United Nations ambassador expressed outrage
on Thursday at Russia's latest actions in Ukraine.

In a blistering statement to the United Nations Security Council just hours
before the president spoke, the ambassador, Samantha Power, bluntly accused
Russia of lying about its intervention. ''The mask is coming off'' Russia's
denials, Ms. Power said, calling its actions a ''threat to all of our peace and
security.''

''Russia has come before this Council to say everything except the truth,'' she
said. ''It has manipulated. It has obfuscated. It has outright lied. So we have
learned to measure Russia by its actions and not by its words. In the last 48
hours, Russia's actions have spoken volumes.''

On both Syria and Ukraine, officials are having separate, if parallel, debates
on how aggressive to be, with Mr. Obama seemingly acting as a brake on more
robust actions some advisers seek.

Administration officials are preparing for another round of sanctions against
Russia with European allies, but they are unsure if the president will take them
to the next level, affecting broader swaths of Russia's financial and energy
sectors at the risk of harming American and European economic interests.

Some officials have urged going beyond such economic measures and intervening
more directly to tilt the odds on the battlefield in favor of Ukraine's new
pro-Western government. Not only do some administration officials want to speed
up promises of limited aid to Ukraine's military, but some are also pressing to
provide arms and intelligence that would help Ukraine counter the sophisticated
equipment that the United States and Europe say Russia is providing to
separatists, as well as to its own forces now crossing the border.

Officials are also struggling with how far to go in taking on ISIS in Syria,
where Mr. Obama has been deeply reluctant to intervene in a bloody civil war. He
has ordered at least one Special Operations raid there, a failed effort to
rescue Americans held by ISIS, but it is unclear how willing he would be to
authorize more. Officials are debating whether an air campaign would involve
manned jets or just drones, and whether it would target massed forces or
specific leaders.

These were questions Mr. Obama was not eager to address during his session with
reporters on Thursday. Instead, he noted that even the airstrikes he had
authorized in Iraq for the last few weeks were ''limited'' and said, ''Syria is
not simply a military issue; it's also a political issue.''

Mr. Obama acknowledged, however, that Syria had given ISIS ''a safe haven here
in ungoverned spaces'' and that to roll back the group, ''we're going to have to
build a regional strategy.''

He used the occasion to chastise allies in the Middle East for playing both
sides when it came to ISIS and said he was sending Secretary of State John Kerry
to the region to assemble a coalition against the group. He also rejected the
notion that attacking ISIS might help President Bashar al-Assad of Syria in the
civil war there. ''I don't think this is a situation where we have to choose
between Assad or the kinds of people who carry on the incredible violence that
we've been seeing there,'' he said.

The Russian escalation came as Mr. Obama prepared to travel to Europe next week
to meet with NATO allies and try to reassure the Baltic States that the United
States would stand by them in case of aggression from Moscow. Mr. Obama spoke by
phone on Thursday with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany to discuss their next
moves and invited President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine to visit him next
month.

While Mr. Obama has been reluctant to send substantial American forces to allies
in Eastern Europe, NATO plans to create a ''spearhead'' rapid deployment force
and a ''more visible'' presence in the region. But Mr. Obama ruled out direct
involvement.

''We are not taking military action to solve the Ukrainian problem,'' he said.
''What we're doing is to mobilize the international community to apply pressure
on Russia. But I think it is very important to recognize that a military
solution to this problem is not going to be forthcoming.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/29/world/obama-vows-new-russia-penalties-over-ukr
aine.html

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


