                             1484 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 26, 2014 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

British Police Arrest 9 in Antiterror Sweep

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 437 words


A day after Prime Minister David Cameron pledged British support for the
American-led air campaign in Iraq, the counterterrorism police in Britain
rounded up nine men suspected of having links to a banned Islamist group and
searched 18 buildings across the capital and in the English Midlands.

The men were not identified by name, but news reports citing unidentified
sources said they included Anjem Choudhury, an Islamic preacher and organizer
who has frequently voiced radical views and was associated with the Al
Muhajiroun group before it was outlawed in 2010.

Scotland Yard said the men, age 22 to 51, were arrested on suspicion of being
members of, or supporting, a banned organization, said in news reports to be Al
Muhajiroun.

Before it was banned, the group was led by a Syrian-born Islamist cleric, Omar
Bakri Muhammad, who left Britain for Lebanon in 2005 and has been barred from
returning. He was arrested in May in Lebanon, where he had expressed support for
the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, the Sunni militant group that has taken
over tracts of Iraq and Syria in its quest to establish an Islamic caliphate.

The British police said the arrests were ''part of an ongoing investigation into
Islamist-related terrorism and are not in response to any immediate public
safety risk.''

Mr. Choudhury has frequently courted official disapproval in Britain, voicing
support for radical Islamists such as Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born
preacher who was killed by an American drone strike in Yemen in 2011.

He has also organized protests against British military involvement in Iraq and
Afghanistan, seeking to disrupt ceremonies and parades marking the return of
British soldiers, or their bodies, from those distant battlegrounds.

The arrests came a day after Mr. Cameron told the United Nations in New York
that he would recall Parliament on Friday to seek lawmakers' approval for
British participation in the campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq. But he
stopped short of saying British warplanes, based on the Mediterranean island of
Cyprus, would join attacks by the United States and several Arab nations on
targets in Syria.

''We should be uncompromising, using all the means at our disposal -- including
military force -- to hunt down these extremists,'' Mr. Cameron said. He told
reporters that the Islamic State militants represented a ''clear and present
danger to the United Kingdom.''

The British leader said he was confident of winning support for the deployment
from Parliament, which last year refused to authorize military action in Syria
after chemical weapons were used in the civil war there.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/26/world/europe/british-police-arrest-9-in-antite
rror-sweep.html

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


