                             1478 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Strikes Follow Plea by Syrian Opposition Leader on Behalf of Kurds

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 800 words


The leader of the moderate Syrian opposition appealed Monday for American
airstrikes to halt the fierce attacks by militants from the Islamic State
against Kurdish communities in northern Syria, just hours before the United
States and allies began a campaign against the terrorist group.

Hadi al-Bahra, the president of the Syrian opposition coalition, said in an
interview that he was requesting that the United States and its partners ''act
fast.''

More than 130,000 Syrian Kurds have fled north to Turkey in recent days to
escape attacks by the militants near a Syrian border town that Arabs refer to as
Ayn-al-Arab and that Kurds call Kobani.

Earlier Monday, a senior State Department official declined to say whether the
United States would take military action to protect the Syrian Kurds, saying,
''I can't basically signal where we're going to take airstrikes.''

While American fighter jets and armed Predator and Reaper drones, flying
alongside warplanes from several Arab allies, struck a broad array of targets in
Syria early Tuesday, it was not clear whether they included militants who had
been pressing attacks against the Kurdish communities.

The Islamic State's attacks against Kurds in northern Syria had escalated in
recent days, prompting grave concern in neighboring Turkey, which closed its
borders near Ayn-al-Arab to try to stop Turkish Kurds from joining the fight.

Abdul Hakim Bachar, the vice president of the Syrian opposition coalition and an
ethnic Kurd, said that the Islamic State appeared to have attacked vulnerable
Kurds in northern Syria in retaliation for earlier American airstrikes aimed at
protecting Erbil, the capital of the Kurdish region in northern Iraq.

Mr. Bachar said in an interview that the group also aimed to carve out something
of a refuge for itself in Syria's north.

The Obama administration had indicated that it was planning airstrikes in Syria.
By moving into Kurdish areas, Mr. Bachar said, the militants seemed to be
occupying ground that they thought the United States would be reluctant to bomb.

The heightened concern over the Kurds in Syria came as American officials
asserted that they were having success building a political and military
coalition to take action against the Islamic State.

Saudi Arabia has agreed to host military training of moderate Syrian opposition
fighters, and the United Arab Emirates is allowing France and Australia to base
aircraft on its territory. But the full extent of the Saudi and U.A.E. roles,
and the roles of other Arab states, remains unclear.

And not all members of the international coalition who are prepared to help Iraq
battle the militants are prepared to intervene against the Islamic State in
Syria.

France, for example, has already carried out an airstrike against Islamic State
militants in Iraq. But on Monday, Laurent Fabius, France's foreign minister,
ruled out strikes in Syria.

''France cannot do everything,'' Mr. Fabius said in an appearance before the
Council on Foreign Relations.

France's reluctance to take military action against Islamic State militants in
Syria appeared to be something of a switch from last year when France was
prepared to bomb Syria in response to chemical weapons attacks carried out by
forces loyal to the country's president, Bashar al-Assad.

Mr. Fabius, however, insisted that there was no contradiction, saying that the
rationales for the two military interventions differed. And he said France was
prepared to help the moderate Syrian opposition.

The United States carried out airstrikes last month to help members of the
Yazidi minority escape from Mount Sinjar in northern Iraq, where they had been
driven by the militants.

Some American lawmakers were urging that similar action be taken to help the
Kurds in Syria. Representative Eliot L. Engel, Democrat of New York, said in a
statement issued Monday, ''Now is the time for targeted American airstrikes on
ISIL tanks, artillery pieces and other heavy weapons to help save the lives of
thousands of Syrian Kurds and prevent a potential massacre.'' Mr. Engel, who
serves on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, was using an alternative name for
the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS.

While Turkish officials insisted that Kurdish militias in Syria had blunted the
Islamic State's attacks there, Mr. Bahra asserted that the Syrians Kurds did not
have an effective means of protecting themselves.

''There are now approximately 300 villages emptied from their civilian
population,'' he said. ''There are now around 130,000 confirmed refugees inside
Turkey, and today I heard there's around 70,000 more to come.''

He continued, ''The international community has to act fast in delivering
humanitarian aid.''

The Syrian situation is to be discussed in a meeting of American, European and
Arab diplomats this week.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/23/world/middleeast/syrian-opposition-leader-call
s-on-us-to-strike-militants-from-air.html

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


