                             1486 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Founts of Classic and Progressive in a Straight Ahead Way

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 851 words


Tashi Wada

DUETS

''Duets'' is a record of problem-solutions for the cellists Charles Curtis and
Judith Hamann. The songs were written by Tashi Wada, son of Yoshi Wada, the
Fluxus artist who also studied with the Hindustani singer Pandit Pran Nath; it
makes sense that the son inherited an interest in drones as well as small but
powerful riddles. (The album is released on Saltern, his own label.) Here's the
concept: the record's four tracks are about slow and coordinated change, with a
very simple directive. The cellists bow slowly through a moving unison,
progressing downward in pitch at a somewhat regular rate. There's nothing for
them to do but stay together; the composer's only instruction is ''The players
descend in unison very slowly.''

And so the drama is in how well they can do it. (Achieving unison on a given
note is one thing; unison through a gradual slide is another.) Sometimes, as in
''September 2006,'' the road is clear and the progress steady: about a half tone
every 20 seconds, to span two octaves. In ''April 2007,'' the distance traveled
is the length of an entire string, but the pitches seem wild and uncertain, yet
still in unison: The players are using natural harmonics, listening to each
other to locate the same glassy whistles and ghost tones -- pitches that seem to
suddenly dive down deep or leap up high. But they're still in sync, as much as
they can be.

Anna Webber

SIMPLE

A young Canadian saxophonist and flutist now living in Brooklyn, Ms. Webber is
writing music that goes two ways: toward plotted percussive cycles, precise and
gamelan-like, in which repetition becomes its own reward; and toward the kind of
playful and thinky, tone-smearing, what-is-a-sound? experiments that the
composers of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians started
working on nearly 50 years ago. She's played with a number of groups from
Montreal and New York, some of them her own, but ''Simple'' (Skirl) is her best
work yet, recorded with two of the best musicians working in New York's
compositional, high-concept avant-garde -- the pianist Matt Mitchell and the
drummer John Hollenbeck. These pieces are bracing, argumentative and engineered
to show the range of the group members: fulminous, intense collective
improvisation; rapid, chromatic steeplechases; research into long tones and
textures.

Spanish Harlem Orchestra

SPANISH HARLEM ORCHESTRA

A well-armed group strikes again, backing up a renovated ideal of an old sound:
the hard-salsa orchestra. Funded by its audience through artistshare.com,
''Spanish Harlem Orchestra'' is the fifth album from this band of arrangers and
soloists full of names that you might not know if you only recognize the singers
in Latin music. It collects the progressive energies of a lot of musicians who
worked in the later phases of the music's greatest figures -- Tito Puente, Eddie
Palmieri, Ray Barretto.

The pianist Oscar Hernández is the musical director, spreading the duties around
into a collective. There are three singers (Ray De La Paz, Marco Bermudez and
Carlos Cascante), but you will find yourself drawn to the design and scaffolding
of some of the world's most complex dance music. Three tracks were arranged by
Gil Lopez, who died last year, and whose career traced back to the 1940s mambo
era.

There's a reimagining -- kaleidoscopic and airy -- of the Cuban nueva-trova
singer Pablo Milanés's ''De Qué Callada Manera,'' with lyrics by the poet
Nicolás Guillén, arranged by the energetic Venezuelan composer Gonzalo Grau. At
the end of the record, the jazz musicians Chick Corea and Joe Lovano add solo
features to a version of ''You and the Night and the Music.''

Rotem Sivan Trio

FOR EMOTIONAL USE ONLY

You will have to adjust your hearing slightly for the 30-year-old Israeli
guitarist Rotem Sivan's second album, ''For Emotional Use Only'' (Fresh Sound).
It's a guitar-bass-drums trio (Haggai Cohen Milo on bass, Mark McLean on drums)
playing a new straight-ahead jazz language in a very live-in-the-studio way,
with closeness, flexibility, immediacy.

Mr. Sivan runs through the music with natural confidence. He's not spare. He
plays a lot of notes. But he is quiet: almost always quieter than someone with
this much training and musicality tends to be, and this is what makes him more
than a very good young guitar player.

Made of all originals but two -- Jobim's ''Useless Landscape,'' and the song ''A
Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes'' from the original ''Cinderella'' movie -- the
record is a three-way conversation that never stops, and Mr. Sivan adds passing
notes, ornament and afterthought to everything. But he's not overbearing. He
lets you hear the innate sound of his instrument, using classic jazz-guitar tone
with dynamics and a searching quality to his improvising that risks awkwardness.
Sometimes he appears to be fighting his own fluency: Here and there you hear him
start a lick, or half-quote Charlie Parker's ''Au Privave,'' before stopping
himself cold. He attains a kind of private language of hesitation and
inward-turning commentary. It's the kind of thing that makes you listen harder.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/arts/music/new-music-from-the-rotem-sivan-trio
-and-anna-webber.html

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The soloists and arrangers in the Spanish Harlem Orchestra
spread across the eras in their influences and their play. Complex dance music
is a signature of their new album, a record dominated by instrumentalists but
also featuring three singers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AB MCNEELY)
The composer Tashi Wada wrote the songs for the cellist showcase ''Duets.''
(PHOTOGRAPH BY RICK BAHTO)
Rotem Sivan Trio is, left to right, the bassist Haggai Cohen Milo, the guitarist
Rotem Sivan and the drummer Mark McLean. Their new record is ''For Emotional Use
Only.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNIE BARST)
 The saxophonist Anna Webber is playful and precise on her new album.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY JONNO RATTMAN)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


