                             1407 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 8, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A New Chip Functions Like a Brain, IBM Says

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF.

Floyd Norris, whose High & Low Finance column normally appears on this page, is
away.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 827 words


Inspired by the architecture of the brain, scientists have developed a new kind
of computer chip that uses no more power than a hearing aid and may eventually
excel at calculations that stump today's supercomputers.

The chip, or processor, is named TrueNorth and was developed by researchers at
IBM and detailed in an article published on Thursday in the journal Science. It
tries to mimic the way brains recognize patterns, relying on densely
interconnected webs of transistors similar to the brain's neural networks.

The chip's electronic ''neurons'' are able to signal others when a type of data
-- light, for example -- passes a certain threshold. Working in parallel, the
neurons begin to organize the data into patterns suggesting the light is growing
brighter, or changing color or shape.

The processor may thus be able to recognize that a woman in a video is picking
up a purse, or control a robot that is reaching into a pocket and pulling out a
quarter. Humans are able to recognize these acts without conscious thought, yet
today's computers and robots struggle to interpret them.

The chip contains 5.4 billion transistors, yet draws just 70 milliwatts of
power. By contrast, modern Intel processors in today's personal computers and
data centers may have 1.4 billion transistors and consume far more power -- 35
to 140 watts.

Today's conventional microprocessors and graphics processors are capable of
performing billions of mathematical operations a second, yet the new chip system
clock makes its calculations barely a thousand times a second. But because of
the vast number of circuits working in parallel, it is still capable of
performing 46 billion operations a second per watt of energy consumed, according
to IBM researchers.

The TrueNorth has one million ''neurons,'' about as complex as the brain of a
bee.

''It is a remarkable achievement in terms of scalability and low power
consumption,'' said Horst Simon, deputy director of the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory.

He compared the new design to the advent of parallel supercomputers in the
1980s, which he recalled was like moving from a two-lane road to a superhighway.

The new approach to design, referred to variously as neuromorphic or cognitive
computing, is still in its infancy, and the IBM chips are not yet commercially
available. Yet the design has touched off a vigorous debate over the best
approach to speeding up the neural networks increasingly used in computing.

The idea that neural networks might be useful in processing information occurred
to engineers in the 1940s, before the invention of modern computers. Only
recently, as computing has grown enormously in memory capacity and processing
speed, have they proved to be powerful computing tools.

In recent years, companies including Google, Microsoft and Apple have turned to
pattern recognition driven by neural networks to vastly improve the quality of
services like speech recognition and photo classification.

But Yann LeCun, director of artificial intelligence research at Facebook and a
pioneering expert in neural networks, said he was skeptical that IBM's approach
would ever outpace today's fastest commercial processors.

''The chip appears to be very limited in many ways, and the performance is not
what it seems,'' Mr. LeCun wrote in an email sent to journalists. In particular,
he criticized as inadequate the testing of the chip's ability to detect moving
pedestrians and cars.

''This particular task,'' he wrote, ''won't impress anyone in computer vision or
machine learning.'' Mr. LeCun said that while special-purpose chips running
neural networks might be useful for a range of applications, he remained
skeptical about the design IBM has chosen.

Several neuroscience researchers and computer scientists disputed his critique.

''The TrueNorth chip is like the first transistor,'' said Terrence J. Sejnowski,
director of the Salk Institute's Computational Neurobiology Laboratory. ''It
will take many generations before it can compete, but when it does, it will be a
scalable architecture that can be delivered to cellphones, something that Yann's
G.P.U.s will never be able to do.''

G.P.U. refers to graphics processing unit, the type of chip being used today to
deliver graphics and video to computer screens and for special processing tasks
in supercomputers.

IBM's research was funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, a
research arm of the Pentagon, under a program called Systems of Neuromorphic
Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics, or SyNapse. According to Gill Pratt, the
program manager, the agency is pursuing twin goals in its effort to design
ultralow-power biological processors.

The first, Dr. Pratt said, is to automate some of the surveillance done by
military drones. ''We have lots of data and not enough people to look at them,''
he said.

The second is to create a new kind of laboratory instrument to allow
neuroscientists to quickly test new theories about how brains function.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/08/science/new-computer-chip-is-designed-to-work-
like-the-brain.html

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A silicon chip relies on webs  of transistors similar to the
brain's neural networks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IBM)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


