                             1426 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 24, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Strike Destroys Apartment Tower in Gaza

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER and FARES AKRAM; Isabel Kershner reported from
Jerusalem, and Fares Akram from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 816 words


JERUSALEM -- An Israeli missile strike on an 11-story apartment tower in Gaza
City brought the entire building crashing down on Saturday, soon after its
residents were told to evacuate, according to residents and the military. The
attack signaled Israel's willingness to take more audacious military action in
Gaza, as Palestinian militants continued to fire barrages of rockets and mortar
rounds into Israel.

Ten people were wounded in the strike on the apartment building, four of them
children, according to a health ministry spokesman in Gaza.

Earlier in the day, the government of Egypt and President Mahmoud Abbas of the
Palestinian Authority issued calls in Cairo for a new, open-ended cease-fire in
Gaza and a resumption of indirect talks between the Israelis and the
Palestinians to try to bring an end to the fighting, which shows no sign of
abating after more than six weeks. Mushir al-Masri, a Hamas official in Gaza,
said in a statement that the Palestinian groups were studying Egypt's call to
return to negotiations. Israel refuses to negotiate under fire.

The Israeli military said the apartment building contained an operational
command and control center of Hamas, the Islamic militant group that dominates
the Palestinian coastal territory, and that operatives were using the building
as a base for their activities. Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the
Israeli military, could not immediately specify which floor, or floors, of the
building were the targets in the attack, or whether the intention had been to
destroy the whole tower.

The military said residents of the building, known as Al Zafer Tower 4, were
given warning by telephone and by means of a small warning missile fired at the
roof.

Israel has fired missiles to destroy apartments within a building, but this was
the first time since the start of its military offensive on July 8 that a strike
had completely brought down so large a building.

Hesham Saqallah, a father of four who lived on the first floor, said a resident
received a warning call about 6 p.m. and started shouting in the stairwell to
alert his neighbors to leave. About 20 or 30 minutes later, he said, a missile
fired from a drone hit the roof, and about 20 minutes after that, a warplane
struck.

Mr. Saqallah said there were 42 apartments in the building and that it was
purely residential, with no offices.

As for the Israelis' claim that the building housed a Hamas base, he said,
''They are lying.''

''I did not take anything from my home, even my money, because I thought they
would hit a specific apartment or floor,'' Mr. Saqallah said. ''I did not expect
they would bring down the entire tower.''

The attack followed airstrikes on Thursday that killed three senior Hamas
commanders, and the attempted assassination on Tuesday night of the chief of
Hamas's military wing, Mohammed Deif, whose fate remains unknown.

The Israeli military said in a statement that it had conveyed warnings over the
course of the day to residents across the Gaza Strip using text messages,
recorded messages and leaflets, saying that Israel would attack any area or
house ''from which terror activities against Israel originate.''

The warnings advised residents to prevent their property from being used by
militants, and to stay away from militant sites, according to the text of one of
the leaflets, which the military also distributed to reporters. It ended with a
clear message: ''Beware.''

Colonel Lerner, the military spokesman, added, ''Hamas will not be free to
continue its indiscriminate aggression against Israel from the comfort of
high-rise buildings, farmhouses or greenhouses.''

The military released footage on Saturday showing rockets being launched from
what it said was a medical facility in the Shati refugee camp on the edge of
Gaza City.

In other Israeli airstrikes on Saturday, at least 10 Palestinians were killed,
including four women and three children in strikes on two homes in the central
Gaza Strip, according to the Gaza Health Ministry.

Gaza militants launched more than 100 rockets and mortar rounds against Israel
during the day. At least two rockets that were fired after the building collapse
reached the Tel Aviv area. One was intercepted by Israel's Iron Dome antimissile
defense system, and another apparently landed in open ground.

On Saturday night, at least one rocket fired from southern Lebanon struck the
Upper Galilee region in northern Israel, according to the police, causing damage
to a house and wounding a child. Rockets from Lebanon have landed across the
border in Israel at least twice before during the current Gaza conflict, in what
may be a show of solidarity by Palestinian groups in Lebanon. On Friday, a
mortar round fired from Gaza killed an Israeli boy, 4, in a small community near
the border, and an off-duty soldier was critically wounded by a rocket that
struck a road near the Israeli port city of Ashdod.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/world/middleeast/israeli-strike-destroys-apart
ment-tower-in-gaza.html

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Palestinians watched as an Israeli bomb, top, flew toward a
building in Gaza City on Saturday. They scrambled to escape  the debris after it
exploded. In a separate strike in the city, an Israeli  missile brought down an
11-story apartment building. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERTO SCHMIDT/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


