                             1492 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serving Without Protecting

BYLINE: By FRANK BRUNI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 787 words


My mother used to leave the front door unlocked. She used to leave the side and
back doors unlocked, too. This was mostly a function of sloppiness -- she had
four kids, three pets and a whole lot else on her mind -- but when pressed about
it, she reasoned that anyone bent on intrusion would find a way and that it was
all a matter of chance in the end.

She missed her calling as the director of the Secret Service.

What we've discovered over the last week and a half about the crackerjack
operations of this elite agency boggles the mind, and nothing I learned during
Tuesday's congressional hearing into its procedures did anything to un-boggle
it.

The subject was how, on Sept. 19, a deranged man managed to get deep inside the
White House -- much deeper, it turns out, than the agency initially let on. We
were first given the impression that he'd merely made it through the front door.
Only later did The Washington Post and other news organizations unearth that he
had zipped down the vestibule, past a staircase, through the East Room and
almost to the Green Room. By the time all the facts emerge, we'll find out that
he treated himself to a grilled cheese and a glass of Ovaltine in the kitchen,
where he was interrupted mid-sandwich and given a doggie bag.

At the hearing, there were acute questions and ludicrous ones, genuine concern
and disingenuous grandstanding, florid preening and runaway egos, which is to
say that many politicians were crowded into one room.

There was verbiage so oblique it barely qualified as English, which is to say
that government officials testified. Front and center was the head of the Secret
Service, Julia Pierson, who behaved in the manner of so many beleaguered
bureaucrats before her. She pledged reviews, reports, inquiries and assessments
-- a brimming thesaurus of self-examination -- and tried to run out the clock.

She muttered sentences like this: ''In downtown areas, there is sound
attenuation.'' This was a reference to the Secret Service's confusion in 2011
over whether someone had been shooting at the White House or a motor vehicle in
its vicinity had backfired.

The answer was shooting: Seven bullets hit one of this country's defining
symbols, which is also the president's private residence, in which he and his
family must feel -- and be -- unconditionally safe. And it wasn't Secret Service
agents who identified the evidence. It was a housekeeper, happening upon
shattered glass days after the fact.

These aren't minor, random smudges on the record of the Secret Service, which
was also embarrassed a few years ago when agents on assignment in Colombia
partied with prostitutes. They're cause for grave worry and a different kind of
housecleaning.

Nothing about the events of Sept. 19 honors the responsibilities and
capabilities of a great nation. According to Pierson's testimony, two agents
that day had eyes on the intruder, who was known to them as a potential
troublemaker and had shown up at the White House fence less than a month earlier
with a hatchet. They were right not to detain him then: He'd committed no crime.
But how could their monitoring of him during his return visit be so lax that he
even got over that fence?

Not a beast or a beep worked properly. The guard dogs didn't guard. The alarm
boxes didn't alarm. The front door couldn't be locked automatically as he
sprinted toward it, because it wasn't rigged that way. We can fly drones over
Pakistan, but we can't summon a proper locksmith to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue?

Time and again, Washington validates the naysayers who like to dismiss it as the
capital of bureaucratic incompetence. The president unveils his signature health
care reform -- arguably the cornerstone of his legacy -- and the website
repeatedly crashes. The I.R.S. loses whole years of emails. A contractor for the
National Security Agency steals away with a seemingly bottomless trove of
classified documents.

The Department of Homeland Security fails to keep track of more than 6,000
foreigners in the country on student visas, or so ABC News reported in early
September. And don't even get me started on the Department of Veterans Affairs.

There's precedent, yes, for White House intrusions. An uninvited guest once
watched a movie with Franklin Delano Roosevelt before being detected.

And America isn't alone. In 1982, Queen Elizabeth II awoke in Buckingham Palace
to encounter a strange man in her bedroom. He and she reportedly chatted for 10
minutes.

I guess the palace didn't have all the ''layers'' and ''rings'' of security
repeatedly mentioned at the congressional hearing, though a lot of good all
those layers and rings did us. In the end, it's people who make the difference.
The Secret Service needs better ones.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/opinion/the-secret-service-the-white-house-and
-a-public-embarrassment.html

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


