                             1475 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Allies Strike Sunni Militants in Syria

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon contributed
reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1365 words


WASHINGTON -- The United States and allies launched airstrikes against Sunni
militants in Syria early Tuesday, unleashing a torrent of cruise missiles and
precision-guided bombs from the air and sea on the militants' de facto capital
of Raqqa and along the porous Iraq border.

American fighter jets and armed Predator and Reaper drones, flying alongside
warplanes from several Arab allies, struck a broad array of targets in territory
controlled by the militants, known as the Islamic State. American defense
officials said the targets included weapons supplies, depots, barracks and
buildings the militants use for command and control. Tomahawk cruise missiles
were fired from United States Navy ships in the region.

The strikes are a major turning point in President Obama's war against the
Islamic State and open up a risky new stage of the American military campaign.
Until now, the administration had bombed Islamic State targets only in Iraq, and
had suggested it would be weeks if not months before the start of a bombing
campaign against Islamic State targets in Syria.

Bahrain, Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates took part in
the strikes, American officials said, although the Arab governments were not
expected to announce their participation until later Tuesday. The new
coalition's makeup is significant because the United States was able to recruit
Sunni governments to take action against the Sunni militants of the Islamic
State. The operation also unites the squabbling states of the Persian Gulf.

The strikes came less than two weeks after Mr. Obama announced in an address to
the nation that he was authorizing an expansion of the military campaign against
the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

Unlike American strikes in Iraq over the past month, which have been small-bore
bombings of mostly individual Islamic State targets -- patrol boats and trucks
-- the salvo on Tuesday in Syria was the beginning of what was expected to be a
sustained, hourslong bombardment at targets in the militant headquarters in
Raqqa and on the border.

The strikes began after years of debate within the Obama administration about
whether the United States should intervene militarily or should avoid another
entanglement in a complex war in the Middle East. But the Islamic State controls
a broad swath of land across both Iraq and Syria.

Defense officials said the goal of the air campaign was to deprive the Islamic
State of the safe havens it enjoys in Syria. The administration's ultimate goal,
as set forth in the address Mr. Obama delivered on Sept. 10, is to recruit a
global coalition to ''degrade and ultimately destroy'' the militants, even as
Mr. Obama warned that ''eradicating a cancer'' like the Islamic State was a
long-term challenge that would put some American troops at risk.

American warplanes had been conducting surveillance flights over Syria for more
than a month in anticipation of airstrikes, but it had been unclear just how
much intelligence the Pentagon had managed to gather about the movements of the
Sunni militant group in Syria. Unlike Iraq, whose airspace is controlled by the
United States, Syria has its own aerial defense system, so American planes have
had to rely on sometimes jamming the country's defenses when crossing into
Syria.

The strikes in Syria occurred without the approval of President Bashar al-Assad
of Syria, whose government, unlike Iraq, did not ask the United States for help
against the Sunni militant group. Mr. Obama has repeatedly called on Mr. Assad
to step down because of chemical weapons attacks and violence against his own
people, and defense officials said Mr. Assad had not been told in advance of the
strikes.

But administration officials acknowledge that American efforts to roll back the
Sunni militant group in Syria cannot help but aid Mr. Assad, whose government is
also a target of the Islamic State.

The United Arab Emirates announced three weeks ago that it was willing to
participate in the campaign against the Islamic State, and administration
officials have also said they expect the Iraqi military to take part in strikes
both in Iraq and Syria. If both nations are in fact participants, the strikes on
Tuesday could mark a rare instance when the Shiite-dominated Iraqi military has
cooperated in a military operation with its Sunni Arab neighbors.

Combined with a French airstrike last week on a logistics depot held by Islamic
State militants in northeastern Iraq, the allied participation in the strikes
allows Mr. Obama to make the case that his plan to target the Islamic State has
international cooperation.

In addition, Saudi Arabia recently agreed to a training facility for moderate
members of the Syrian opposition, whom the United States hopes to train, equip
and send back to Syria to fight both Mr. Assad and Islamic State militants.

On Wednesday, Mr. Obama is expected to speak of the international coalition in
an address to the United Nations General Assembly.

In his Sept. 10 speech to the nation, Mr. Obama drew a distinction between the
military action he was ordering and the two wars begun by his immediate
predecessor, George W. Bush. He likened this campaign to the selective
airstrikes that the United States has carried out for years against suspected
terrorists in Yemen and Somalia, few of which have been made public.

The airstrikes in Syria, so far, come without the benefit of a large ground
force to capitalize on gains they make. While some Syrian opposition groups
fighting the Islamic State militants may be able to move into a few cleared
areas, administration officials acknowledged on Monday that it was doubtful that
the Free Syrian Army, the opposition group most preferred by the United States,
would be able to take control of major sections of Islamic State territory, at
least not until it has been better trained -- which will take place over the
next year.

That could leave the forces of Mr. Assad in perhaps the best position to take
advantage of any American bombardment. An administration official on Monday
acknowledged that that was a worry, but said, ''We don't plan to make it easy
for Assad to reclaim territory.'' He declined to say what methods the United
States would use to prevent the Syrian leader from capitalizing on the American
aerial bombardment.

Although the full scope of the airstrikes was not immediately clear, they
followed an urgent appeal from Hadi al-Bahra, the president of the Syrian
Opposition Coalition, for American military action. He said the United States
needed to act quickly to stop militants from the Islamic State from pressing
their attack against the Kurdish communities near the Syrian border town of
Ayn-al-Arab, as it is known by Arabs, or Kobani, as it is called by the Kurds.

And Representative Eliot L. Engel, a New York Democrat who serves on the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, issued a statement urging ''targeted American
airstrikes'' to protect the Syrian Kurds and prevent a ''potential massacre.''

Obama administration officials asserted that they were having success building
an international coalition to confront the Islamic State, but Laurent Fabius,
the French foreign minister, said on Monday that France would limit its military
operations to Iraq.

''The French president has said we do not have intention to do the same in
Syria, I mean by air,'' Mr. Fabius said in an appearance before the Council on
Foreign Relations in New York, adding that France would support the moderate
Syrian opposition.

''I can confirm that U.S. military and partner nation forces are undertaking
military action against ISIL terrorists in Syria using a mix of fighter, bomber
and Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles,'' said Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon
press secretary, using an alternate name for the Islamic State.

''Given that these operations are ongoing, we are not in a position to provide
additional details at this time,'' Admiral Kirby said in a statement Monday
night in Washington. ''The decision to conduct these strikes was made earlier
today by the U.S. Central Command commander under authorization granted him by
the commander in chief. We will provide more details later as operationally
appropriate.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/23/world/middleeast/us-and-allies-hit-isis-target
s-in-syria.html

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


