                             1455 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Wednesday

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 724 words


9 P.M. (13) VACCINES -- CALLING THE SHOTS In 2000, measles was declared to have
been eliminated in the United States. But in July, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention reported 566 cases so far this year. ''Nova''
investigates the return of diseases preventable by vaccines, among them measles,
mumps and whooping cough, which were largely wiped out in the United States a
generation ago; the science of immunization; and, for the 10 percent of parents
who choose to delay or skip their children's shots, the risks of opting out, to
them and to society. Above, a scene from the program.

7 A.M. (CUNY) BRIANLEHRER.TV In this season opener, Reza Aslan, the author of
''Beyond Fundamentalism: Confronting Religious Extremism in the Age of
Globalization,'' discusses the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

10 A.M. (Fox Business) START-UP NATION Liz Claman reports on the next big things
in technology, live from Greylock Partners in Menlo Park, Calif.

4:30 P.M. (FXX) FORGETTING SARAH MARSHALL (2008) In the first of three comedies
produced by Judd Apatow and directed by Nicholas Stoller, a doughy,
underachieving musician (Jason Segel, left) encounters his ex-girlfriend
(Kristen Bell), the star of a television series, with her new musician lover
(Russell Brand) at a resort in Hawaii. Writing in The Times, A. O. Scott said
that the film's ''overall jollity is streaked with some raw emotions, including
jealousy, heartache and humiliation.'' In ''Get Him to the Greek'' (2010), at
4:30 on E!, Mr. Brand reprises his character from ''Forgetting,'' Aldous Snow,
and Jonah Hill plays a record label drone dispatched to transport him from
London to the Greek, a concert hall in Los Angeles. As played by ''the
brilliantly unpredictable'' Mr. Brand, Snow ''is more than a pop culture museum
piece or a MacGruber-like bit of sketch comedy nonsense,'' Mr. Scott wrote. Mr.
Hill ''makes a fine visual and temperamental foil,'' he added. ''The two of them
are like the Trylon and Perisphere of comedy.'' And in ''The Five-Year
Engagement'' (2012), at 7 on FXX, Mr. Segel and Emily Blunt play Tom, a chef,
and Violet, a psychologist, whose engagement is stalled when she wins a
fellowship, and life begins to intervene -- with matters like another couple's
more pressing wedding, a few funerals and a suspiciously charming professor
(Rhys Ifans) who keeps getting in the way. ''Mr. Segel and Ms. Blunt, to their
great credit, are funny as well as genial, but they are careful here to stake
out a middle ground of safe relatability in the midst of all the zaniness around
them,'' Mr. Scott wrote.

8 P.M. (Discovery) HUSTLING THE HOUSE This three-hour poker-themed programming
block begins by examining the math and science that casinos, lotteries and
bookies use to stack the deck against the players. ''Casino Secrets,'' at 9,
reveals the things casinos do to keep gamblers from leaving. And in
''Underground Poker,'' at 10, the players Phil Laak and Antonio Esfandiari head
to New Orleans to take part in games not open to the public, where high stakes
and danger rule.

9 P.M. (Nat Geo) 9/10: THE FINAL HOURS (2014) In this two-hour documentary, set
against the backdrop of the National September 11 Memorial & Museum, eyewitness
accounts -- from those who worked inside the World Trade Center, as well as some
who came into contact with Mohamed Atta, the ringleader of the terrorist
attacks, during his detour to Portland, Me. -- help piece together the day
before Sept. 11, 2001. Artists who worked on the 91st and 92nd floors of the
North Tower provide visuals.

10 P.M. (VH1) I HEART NICK CARTER Mr. Carter, the former Backstreet Boy and
longtime eligible bachelor, prepares to marry Lauren Kitt, a fitness specialist,
to the dismay of his devoted fans. This new reality series trails the couple,
right, on the way to the altar.

What's Streaming Now

REMEMBERING JOAN RIVERS Segments from ''Jimmy Kimmel Live,'' ''Late Night With
Seth Meyer'' and ''The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,'' as well as an
episode of ''That Show With Joan Rivers,'' pay tribute to Ms. Rivers, who died
on Thursday. (hulu.com)

FOLLOW ME AOL Originals documents the lives of digital celebrities, including
what happens when the camera is turned off. This installment features Megan
Nicole, a singer and YouTube sensation with 2.6 million followers. (aol.com)
KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/10/arts/television/whats-on-tv-wednesday.html

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY TANGLED BANK STUDIOS/GENEPOOL PRODUCTIONS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


