                             1456 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 11, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

What Obama Faces in a Campaign Against ISIS

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Q. AND A.; Pg.

LENGTH: 764 words


President Obama will use a prime-time address on Wednesday evening to explain to
Americans his strategy for confronting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the
Sunni militant group. Here is a look at some of the questions that may be
addressed in the speech.

Q. How is the action President Obama will propose this evening to counter ISIS
different from the counterterrorism campaign against Al Qaeda?

A. Mr. Obama is expected to describe a much broader undertaking that would go
well beyond targeted drone strikes against suspected terrorist leaders, as he
has done against Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan.
This will be a multiphase, multifaceted campaign that involves airstrikes and
ground forces against ISIS, drawing from a broad coalition of partners,
including NATO allies and Arab neighbors of Syria.

Q. Why does the president believe the threat from ISIS warrants a response of
this magnitude?

A. The militants have seized a broad swath of territory in Syria and Iraq,
giving it access to cash, weapons stockpiles and oil reserves. Its effort to
establish an Islamic caliphate threatens to deeply destabilize the region. It
has targeted Americans, beheading two journalists, James Foley and Steven J.
Sotloff. And it is drawing hundreds of foreign fighters from Western Europe and
even the United States, raising fears that they could return to their home
countries and carry out terrorist attacks, though there are questions about how
direct a threat ISIS poses to the United States.

Q. What regional partners are crucial to the effort, and what are the obstacles
to their participation?

A. Mr. Obama is marshaling a coalition that includes Britain, France, Germany,
Italy, Poland, Denmark, Canada, Australia, Jordan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and the
United Arab Emirates. Turkey's involvement is critical because it can provide
military bases and close off transit points for foreign fighters, while Saudi
Arabia is a key source of funding for Syrian rebels. But Turkey fears
jeopardizing 49 Turkish hostages held by ISIS in Iraq, while Saudi Arabia
worries about a backlash from extremists in its own Sunni population.

Q. What options do the United States and its partners have to target ISIS,
beyond airstrikes?

A. The campaign Mr. Obama is set to announce will include military, diplomatic
and even ideological components. It will aim to reinvigorate Syria's moderate
opposition to turn it into a fighting force capable of seizing and holding ISIS
territory, after airstrikes by the United States and its partners. In Iraq, the
goal is to win over disaffected Sunni tribal leaders to fight ISIS -- a strategy
that echoes the Sunni Awakening during the Iraq war, which turned insurgents
into allies. Crucial to that effort is the new government in Iraq and its
success in reaching out to Sunnis. The administration also hopes to counter the
narrative that ISIS has propagated, a difficult task given its deft use of
social media and the allure of jihadi messages in the Arab world.

Q. Does the president plan to seek congressional authorization for military
action, and if not, why not?

A. Mr. Obama has told congressional leaders that he has the authority to order
an expanded military campaign, but that he would welcome some ''buy-in'' from
Congress. Lawmakers are divided about voting on military action, especially
before the midterm elections, with some Democrats complaining of a rush to war.
Senate Democratic leaders are preparing legislation to expressly authorize the
American military to train foreign troops, and while no money would be attached
to the measure, aides said a request for around $500 million might come later
this fall.

Q. Does the battle against ISIS have the potential to reshape traditional
alliances and rivalries in the Middle East?

A. The murderous march of the militants across Syria and Iraq -- its effort to
establish a cross-border caliphate, mass killings, videotaped beheadings and
ethnic cleansing -- has upended the geopolitical landscape in the Middle East
and turned ISIS into a nemesis for virtually every country in the region.
Syria's leader, Bashar al-Assad, whose government helped give ISIS a foothold in
Syria, is now calling for the West to join his nation in a common battle against
ISIS. Iran is backing Shiite militias to hold off the militants in Iraq.
Officials from Iran and Saudi Arabia, Shiite and Sunni archrivals, met recently
to discuss ISIS. It remains uncertain whether these strange partnerships will
survive the immediate threat of the militants and lay the groundwork for a
broader realignment.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/11/world/middleeast/what-obama-faces-in-a-campaig
n-against-isis.html

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Question

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


