                             1494 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Perilous Dependence on Contractors

BYLINE: By ANN HAGEDORN.

Ann Hagedorn is the author, most recently, of ''The Invisible Soldiers: How
America Outsourced Our Security.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 891 words


THE director of the Secret Service has resigned after, among other problems, the
revelation that, in a visit to Atlanta on Sept. 16, President Obama rode in an
elevator with a private security contractor who was carrying a gun and had an
arrest record. The episode raises a crucial question: How thoroughly does the
government vet the private security contractors that an increasing number of
agencies employ?

We live in an era in which our government has become dependent on contractors
for our defense and security. But the speed of that industry's development and
our consumption of its services far surpass the agencies' ability to hold
contractors accountable for the vetting and training of their employees.

These agencies include not only the pillars of our national security
establishment -- the Defense, State and Homeland Security Departments, the
National Security Agency, and the Central Intelligence Agency -- but also the
Agency for International Development, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (which Mr. Obama was visiting last month when he shared that elevator
ride) and many others. They use contractors for jobs that include border patrol,
intelligence gathering, drone operations, militia training and more. The
contractors remain long after the traditional troops withdraw. Most of our
diplomatic security is now contracted out. So is security at many federal
buildings.

And consider this: For every contract with such companies, there may be layers
of subcontractors. For example, in the realm of diplomatic security, some firms
recruit employees in Africa, South Asia and Latin America, sometimes from
war-torn nations with high levels of poverty, such as Namibia, Uganda,
Mozambique and Burundi, to protect our embassies. That wouldn't be a problem if
the companies could ensure the qualifications, training and backgrounds of those
hired -- but they haven't shown they can.

The United States hired a British security firm that then hired local guards to
secure the perimeter and entrance to the diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya.
Those guards, on Sept. 11, 2012, when they were most needed, failed to perform
their duties, resulting in the deaths of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and
three other Americans. The State Department's Accountability Review Board, which
reviewed the Benghazi attack, noted that reliance on the British firm for
security was ''misplaced.'' Quite an understatement.

Earlier this year, the State Department's inspector general released an internal
audit of security contracts at United States Embassies. Of the six examined --
chosen because of a mixture of terrorism threat and location -- none had fully
met the terms for screening private contractors, placing ''embassies and
personnel at risk,'' the audit found. As The Washington Post reported, ''Chief
diplomatic security officers at five of the six were said to have performed
'inadequate oversight' of local guard vetting.'' Yet we rely on such contractors
to provide the first line of defense against an attack.

The lapse in security in Atlanta is only the most recent warning about the need
to ramp up the oversight of government-employed security contractors. It's now
clear that Edward J. Snowden had not been fully vetted before he was hired as an
N.S.A. contractor. And we know that a Defense Department contractor who shot and
killed 12 people at the Washington Navy Yard on Sept. 16, 2013, had obtained a
security clearance despite past shooting-related arrests, eight instances of
misconduct as a Navy reservist, and a history of mental illness.

Our system of checks and balances in government contracting has not adjusted to
the new age of private security. Such an adjustment would entail common
protocols and a single standard for vetting all security contractors, which
would also apply to subcontractors.

Completed background checks would have to be submitted to the contracting body
in each agency for review. And there would have to be a clause in the contract
stating that, until background screenings meeting the established standards were
complete, the work could not begin.

In addition, there should be limits to the layers of subcontracting. Without a
better system for proper vetting and effective oversight, it would seem that the
private security we have come to depend on yields only more insecurity -- such
as a situation in which an armed contractor is standing inches from the
president in an elevator in a government building.

On Aug. 31, 2011, after three years of study, the Commission on Wartime
Contracting in Iraq and Afghanistan, appointed by Congress, exposed, in its
final report, unnerving facts about ''overreliance'' on contractors. In noting
the difficulties of vetting and overseeing Afghan security guards, for example,
it told the story of guards huddling in their beds while insurgents attacked the
combat outpost they were hired to guard. ''Delay and denial are not good
options,'' the commission found. ''There will be a next contingency, whether the
crisis takes the form of overseas hostilities or domestic response to a national
emergency like a mass-casualty terror attack or natural disaster.''

The thought of what could have happened in that elevator in Atlanta should
horrify all Americans. If that isn't enough to shake us out of our complacency
toward contractors, what is?

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/03/opinion/a-perilous-dependence-on-contractors.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


