                             1409 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

While Offering Support, Obama Warns That U.S. Won't Be 'Iraqi Air Force'

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR and JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1242 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama said Friday that he was open to supporting a
sustained effort to drive Sunni militants out of Iraq if Iraqi leaders form a
more inclusive government, even as he vowed that the United States had no
intention of ''being the Iraqi air force.''

Mr. Obama spoke as he ordered American fighter pilots back into the skies over
Iraq, a decision that he said he reached after concluding that the United States
needed to protect the Kurdish regions in the north and ''bolster'' an Iraqi
leadership that was panicked in the face of advances by the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria.

The president said he was confident that the Iraqi leaders understand that ''the
cavalry is not coming to the rescue'' with ground forces. But he insisted that
the United States has a ''strategic interest in pushing back'' ISIS, suggesting
a potentially broader mission than the one he described in Thursday's White
House address: to protect American personnel and prevent mass killings of
religious minorities.

''We're not going to let them create some caliphate through Syria and Iraq,''
the president said in an hourlong interview with Thomas L. Friedman, a New York
Times columnist, as American planes and drones began dropping bombs in Iraq.
''But we can only do that if we know that we have got partners on the ground who
are capable of filling the void.''

Lawmakers offered tempered support for the president's actions in Iraq, but he
also drew criticism from Republicans and Democrats for a mission that some
called too limited and others worried would draw the United States more deeply
back into Iraq.

Mr. Obama offered his justifications for his latest use of military force in
Iraq while lamenting the outcome of a similar decision he made to intervene
militarily in Libya in 2011. He defended the desire to help oust the Libyan
dictator, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, with American air power, but he acknowledged
that he had ''underestimated'' the chaos that would follow after American forces
left.

''So that's a lesson that I now apply every time I ask the question, 'Should we
intervene militarily?' '' Mr. Obama said. ''Do we have an answer the day
after?''

In the case of the current fighting in Iraq, he suggested that the outcome would
be different than chaos in Libya because efforts to form a government that could
help rebuild Iraqi society are moving forward, albeit haltingly.

''They've now elected a president, they've elected a speaker of the house,'' Mr.
Obama said. ''The final step is to elect a prime minister and to allow that
prime minister to form a government.'' He added that Iraqis are ''recognizing
that they have to make accommodations in order to hold the country together.''

A day before leaving for a two-week vacation with his family on Martha's
Vineyard, Mr. Obama discussed many of the most vexing problems that his
administration is confronting on the world stage.

In the Middle East, where fighting began Friday morning as a 72-hour cease-fire
between Israel and Hamas expired, Mr. Obama said that neither Israel's prime
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, known as Bibi, nor the Palestinian Authority's
president, Mahmoud Abbas, have the political will to come to terms on a lasting
peace agreement.

''In some ways Bibi's too strong, in some ways Abbas is too weak to bring them
together and make the kind of bold decisions that a Sadat or a Begin or a Rabin
were willing to make,'' Mr. Obama said, referring to Anwar el-Sadat, the former
president of Egypt, and Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Rabin, two previous Israeli
prime ministers.

The president said his own ability to broker a peace deal was limited by the
lack of desire on the part of Israeli and Palestinian leaders. ''You can lead
folks to water, they've got to drink,'' Mr. Obama said. ''And so far at least,
they haven't been willing.''

The president rejected criticism that the military advances by ISIS in Iraq
could have been prevented if he had been willing months ago to provide heavy
armaments to the Syrian rebels who were fighting against ISIS and the forces of
President Bashar al-Assad in that country.

''It's always been a fantasy,'' he said, ''this idea that we could provide some
light arms or even more sophisticated arms to what was essentially an opposition
made up of former doctors, farmers, pharmacists and so forth.''

Mr. Obama, hinting at some strain from the summer's international crises, said
the prospects for a diplomatic agreement that would prevent President Vladimir
V. Putin of Russia from invading Ukraine were real, but dimming.

''A deal should be possible,'' Mr. Obama said. However, he added, ''we are at a
dangerous time, in part because the position of the separatists has weakened. I
think Putin does not want to lose face, and so the window for arriving at that
compromise continues to narrow.''

''He could invade,'' Mr. Obama said.

On Iran, the president said the chance that American efforts to strike a deal on
nuclear weapons is ''a little less than 50-50,'' in part because some Islamic
leaders may fear such a pact would loosen their grip on power.

''That may prevent us from getting a deal done,'' Mr. Obama said. ''It is there
to be had. Whether ultimately Iran can seize that opportunity -- we will have to
wait and see, but it is not for lack of trying on our part.''

Some of the criticism of Mr. Obama's Iraq announcement came from his own party.
Democrats and the antiwar groups that make up a crucial part of their political
base said they were concerned about ''mission creep,'' cautioning that their
opposition to committing ground forces in Iraq was resolute.

''I hope and I have to believe the president when he said that it is limited and
strictly for the purpose of protecting U.S. personnel and a humanitarian mission
to prevent genocide,'' Representative Barbara Lee, a California Democrat who is
one of the party's leading antiwar voices on Capitol Hill, said in an interview.
''My concern is for mission creep and escalation into a larger military
conflict. The American people don't have the appetite for sending combat troops
and engaging in another war in Iraq.''

At the same time, some Republicans suggested that the president had acted too
slowly and timidly to confront ISIS, and now was moving too cautiously against
the group.

''If this is the beginning of a real effort to push back ISIS and destroy them,
then I definitely support that,'' said Representative Adam Kinzinger, Republican
of Illinois, an Air Force veteran and Air National Guardsman who sits on the
Foreign Affairs Committee. ''Unfortunately, he did not have the intensity to
come out and say that we have to destroy them. I think the president is
frightened of re-engaging in Iraq, and I don't think he really knows how to sell
the reality of re-engaging to the American people.''

Senator Saxby Chambliss, a Georgia Republican on the Armed Services and
Intelligence Committees, said he told Mr. Obama last week that he did not
believe he was acting aggressively enough to counter the threat from ISIS.

''It's important that we do carry out some strong military missions inside of
Iraq,'' he said. He added that it was important to let ISIS ''know we're here in
support of our people, and we are not Maliki's air force, but we are going to
protect the Iraqi people,'' referring to Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, the prime
minister of Iraq. ''His advisers were glad to know that there are some of us out
there who are willing to stand behind the president.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/world/middleeast/while-offering-support-obama-
warns-that-us-wont-be-iraqi-air-force.html

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama said on Friday that Iraq's leaders must form an
inclusive government in order to pull the country together. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
JACQUELYN MARTIN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


