                             1499 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Within Her Sights

BYLINE: By TERRY CASTLE.

Terry Castle is the Walter A. Haas professor in the humanities at Stanford
University. Her most recent book is ''The Professor and Other Writings.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2430 words


THE ASSASSINATION OF MARGARET THATCHERStories


By Hilary Mantel242 pp. A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt & Company. $27.

Reading through Hilary Mantel's vastly entertaining new collection of stories, I
had an experience that, given my day job (literature professor) and age
(implacably advancing), hasn't happened in a while: I ran into an English word I
had never seen before. Simple looking, a mere four letters, the word in question
appears in ''Comma,'' the book's spare and horrifying second tale. Two little
girls have clambered over a wall in order to spy on the residents of a mansion
known simply as the Hathaways' house. Mary, a budding juvenile delinquent and
the older and bossier of the pair, has told her companion, the 8-year-old
narrator, Kitty, that something frightful and mysterious dwells in the house: a
pale lumpen creature ''wrapped in a blanket,'' ''something you couldn't put a
name to.'' It might be human (''It's got arms''), but all Mary can say for sure
is that it's awful and shaped like a ''comma.'' While they hide in the bushes,
breathlessly hoping for some glimpse of the creature -- it's a parched midsummer
day -- Kitty notices ''that in the beds of this garden the roses were already
scorched into heavy brown blebs on the stalk.''


Now before every botanist, pulmonary specialist or lactating mother reading this
review sends me an email telling me what a bleb is, I should say that, courtesy
of the O.E.D., I already know: ''A blister or small swelling on the skin; also a
similar swelling on plants.'' The word is old, seemingly Anglo Saxon-derived
(though the O.E.D.'s first printed reference is from 1607), and related to
''blob,'' ''blubber,'' ''bladder,'' ''bubble'' and the aforementioned
''blister.'' Today it appears mainly in scientific and medical contexts. Cell
biologists define a bleb as an ''irregular bulge'' or protuberance in a cell's
plasma membrane; lung doctors speak of ''pulmonary blebs,'' or little air
pockets, dangerous if ruptured. Blebs can be filled with fluid, as is the case
with those blebs (sometimes mistaken for ''nipple blisters'') associated with
breast-feeding: small cysts that cause discomfort and impede the easy flow of
milk.

Whatever the context, there's no doubt something slightly queasy-making, yet
also tempting, about blebs. Noticing a bleb on one's own body -- some unlovely
boil, cyst, pimple or other purulent ''outpouching'' (Wikipedia's term) -- it
may be difficult to resist doing exactly what one is always told not to: namely,
squeeze it to kingdom come. A terrible sickness came over my soul. Countless
amateur YouTube videos -- link upon link of what can only be called dermatology
porn -- attest to the tiny yet volcanic pleasure to be gained in such fashion.

Why does Mantel use the word? No doubt because she knows blebs are a bit
primitive and nasty. They bring out something furtive in us. In ''Comma,'' the
festering ''brown blebs'' noticed by Kitty are part of Mantel's evolving
landscape of dread, a morbid emblem of decomposition and bloat but also
evocative, ideographically and thematically, of that putatively monstrous and
blob-like ''something'' residing at the Hathaways' house. Like a kind of weird
pictogram, the rose bleb reiterates the blob's supposed comma shape: the comma
being a sac-like, plugged-up number 9 -- a bleb, as it were, on a stalk. And
indeed, as Mary (''greedy and lost, both at once'') and her sidekick stare
intently, a nice-looking lady suddenly emerges from the house, pushing an
''inert bundle'' on ''a long chair on wheels.'' She places chair and bundle in a
warmish patch of sun, coos tenderly in the bundle's direction, fluffs and lifts
its shawl. And thus illuminated in wan sunlight is the comma-thing's face:
namely, no face at all, or what Kitty describes later as only a ''negotiating
position for a face,'' some ''loosely imagined notion of a face,'' bulb-like and
inchoate, ''like God's when he was trying to form us.'' A divinely-­authored
bleb, of sorts.

You know you're in the hands of a master storyteller when, as here, some curious
yet minor verbal oddity, some seeming rhetorical blip, turns out to be so
cunningly related to a story's metaphoric unfolding. True, there's much more to
''Comma'' than I've let on: Mantel's subtle depiction of the juvenile narrator's
relationship with sexy, wayward Mary; a couple of brilliant scenes involving the
girls' mothers; the chilling punctuation joke with which the story concludes.
But, as with Edgar Allan Poe's trademark tarns-- those dark stagnant bodies of
water mentioned in ''The Fall of the House of Usher'' and so many other Poe
tales -- the brown, lolling blebs of the Hathaways' house might stand as an
emblem of Mantel's distinctive expertise: her ability to amplify mood and
meaning through an eerie ramification of terms, her fine-tuned sensitivity (at
times almost occult) to things sleek and dark and off-kilter. Yes, the images
she deploys have a fairy-tale rightness about them in the moment (not that this
makes them any less creepy), but they also have their roles to play,
ineluctably, in some larger and unusually mordant verbal fantasia.

Of course, Mantel's charmed powers of suggestion won't be news to fans of her
longer fiction, especially readers of her best-selling, Man Booker Prize-winning
historical novels set in Tudor England, ''Wolf Hall'' and ''Bring Up the
Bodies.'' Over the past decade or two, Mantel has made a name for herself -- no
other way to put it -- as one of the indispensable writers of fiction in
English. (Even the creakier royals have twigged on it: In the U.K., Mantel is
officially Dame Hilary now, having been granted birthday honors earlier this
year.)

Likewise, Mantel has assumed an esteemed place in what might be called a great
tradition of modern British female storytelling, an ardor-filled, bluestocking
lineage extending from Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield in the early part
of the 20th century through Elizabeth Bowen, Sylvia Townsend Warner, Elizabeth
Taylor, Iris Murdoch, Edna O'Brien, Barbara Pym, Penelope Fitzgerald, Muriel
Spark, Elizabeth Jane Howard, Doris Lessing, Beryl Bainbridge and many others in
subsequent decades, all the way to such gifted living practitioners (again, to
name only a few) as A. S. Byatt, Ruth Rendell, Maureen Duffy, Ali Smith, Jane
Gardam, Emma Donoghue, Jeanette Winterson and Zadie Smith. Second thought:
Despite having just done so, does one really want to organize artistic
affinities by sex? The Anglo-Irish writer William Trevor is another prose
master, of short fiction especially, with whom Mantel might be robustly
compared, both authors being more than happy to gratify the reader with
occasional frissons of the truly surreal and sociopathic.

But Mantel's short stories have their own special tang and quidditas. Even as
one appreciates the suave authorial style -- light, pared-down, technically
scintillating, like the Olympic gymnast who nails her landing every time -- one
has the sense too that Mantel is working with some fairly edgy and complex
private material in these contemporary fables. She pursues a host of
''difficult'' (though admittedly sometimes just peculiar) topics: misogyny,
culture shock, adultery of different kinds, accidental infanticide (while on
holiday), unwholesome yet hilarious female-female work relationships, a fatal
case of anorexia, the ''Waiting for Godot''-like perils of being an author on a
provincial book tour, dead yet intrusive fathers and, in the disturbing title
story, the assassination of historical figures one had always assumed were not
assassinated. Despite the phalanx of themes, however, one can't help feeling
that Mantel's imaginative world is all of a piece.

How so? Mantel's artful use of various classic storytelling gambits no doubt
reinforces one's sense of this all-of-a-pieceness: her Brontë-esque preference
for knowing, if not cynical, first-person female narrators (who can nonetheless
turn out to be catastrophically naïve or even delusional); the crisp, slyly
burnished, often droll ''Britishness'' of the narrative idiom; and the author's
abiding curiosity about what might be called the crises of bourgeois sociability
-- disturbed and/or misfiring relationships between hosts and guests. Unexpected
meetings and domestic matchups are a favorite fictional jumping-off point. More
than one tale hinges on the action of a solitary but possibly foolhardy woman
who, hearing the doorbell, invites the strange man she discovers outside to come
into her flat. And, yes, she will learn, soon enough, to rue her hospitality.

Plot -- in the ordinary sense -- is frequently subordinated to dialogue in
Mantel: In fact, as in an Ivy Compton-Burnett novel, the dialogue seems almost
to become the plot. Two ill-assorted characters -- again, usually a man and
woman who have never met before -- bicker with each other from within some new
and unanticipated intimacy. However obscurely, both seem to want something from
the other. Yet the male figure does little but boast and prevaricate and subtly
threaten; the woman seems mostly alienated, a bit mad even, and only becomes
more so. (It's not clear, by the way, that eros ever has anything to do with
these Beckett-like exchanges.) Conversations thus peter out into muffled strings
of cliché and nonsense; loony-bin theories go unchallenged; and, by the story's
end, one fears the worst. Dialogue itself can be suborned, sometimes by death.
In ''The Long QT'' -- in which a wife comes unexpectedly into her kitchen during
a noisy party to find her husband in a clinch with a buxom and brainless woman
named Lorraine (''It's sad to be called after a quiche'') -- instant personal
extinction is simply a matter of walking from one room into another.

But, most important, all of Mantel's stories share a similar design on the
reader. One gets the feeling she wants both to frighten us (at times more than a
little) and make us laugh. She likes to take us for an eerie spin and then leave
us, to grimace and be gay, by the side of a road somewhere. She's like an
old-fashioned spirit-medium of sorts: a brusque, mischievous, Madame Arcati-like
purveyor of uncanny moments. She transports us somewhere else. And she seems to
be having great fun with it too. Ubiquitous indeed are her spooky little fillips
of what-have-you that mess with your head.

In turn, after a few stories, you begin to sense it's coming, like a sort of
literary Singularity: some unfamiliar word or bizarrely weighted phrase (''heavy
brown blebs''); a maddeningly opaque piece of dialogue; an absurd but
nonetheless sinister item of fictional décor (the boiler man's mate is carrying
a telescopic rifle). You pull up sharp to see what's what, but at that point
it's already Game Over. She's got you. Without your really noticing how it
happened, your attention has been smoothly locked in. You've become a drone
fixed on a target. Critical skepticism be damned: You will be reading this story
to the end.

Which is not to say that in any individual story the''bleb moment'' -- for so
I'm now, alas, officially dubbing this point of readerly surrender -- will be
the same for everyone. What the ''bleb'' is, where exactly it occurs, will
depend to some extent on a reader's own psychological idiosyncrasies: what one
knows and assumes about language, how one calibrates one's sense of what's
''real'' in daily life, but, above all, the degree of one's unconscious
susceptibility to verbal suggestion, kinetic and sensory. Ultimately it will
depend on how one likes best to be captured by another human being.

Like any other unconscious symptom, the detail in question will usually be
fairly embarrassing. What does it say about me (I know it must say something)
that while perusing Mantel's first story, ''Sorry to Disturb'' -- about a
neurotic Englishwoman living, courtesy of her husband's job posting, as a
virtual recluse in a stifling, marble-staircased apartment in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia -- I had my first ''bleb moment'' of the book precisely when the narrator
describes her habit of wandering daily about her funereal apartment, as if in a
fugue state, with a can of insecticide in her hand? (''Sometimes I sprayed it as
I walked, and it fell about me like bright mists, veils.'') By the time I'd
gotten to the ''bright mists'' -- an image at once rhapsodic and wacky -- it was
as if I could smell the story. Everything had turned sweet and choky and malign.
And, yes, to my no doubt depraved sensorium, also spookily irresistible.

For American readers, not every mote of Mantel magic may transfix in equal
measure. In ''Harley Street'' -- a perverse little tale in which a dykey (and
bonkers) medical receptionist torments a moron-girl phlebotomist named Bettina
-- much of the atmosphere of comic claustrophobia depends on our grasping
everything about English society signified by the title. Not only the literal
reference to that genteel north London thoroughfare where high-end doctors and
specialists have discreetly catered to ailing members of the British upper
classes since the 19th century. (Harley Street has had a rich symbolic presence
-- as sociological concept -- in British storytelling from James and Woolf to
the recent film ''The King's Speech.'')

And in the title story, a chilling, fable-like ''counterfactual'' set in 1983 --
in which a sniper plans to assassinate Margaret Thatcher from a window as she
leaves a private hospital where she's just had eye surgery (the real Thatcher
did have exactly such surgery in 1983, but died of natural causes in 2013) -- it
will be hard for younger non-Brits to work out why references to Thatcher's
''handbag'' can still sound so noirishly hilarious, or why the nameless
assassin's contemptuous mention of the way the Iron Lady ''toddles'' about in
public should so immediately and ghoulishly conjure the lady, in all her steely,
handbag-gripping, lower-middle-class glory.

Yet, fortunately, Mantel provides more than enough ''bleb moments'' to go
around. If putrid outpouchings and blasted rosebuds don't get you, surely the
perfumed insecticides of Saudi Arabia will. If Margaret Thatcher, handbag-bleb
or no, fails to seduce, a bit of (quiche) Lorraine might suffice. Mantel is such
a funny and intelligent and generously untethered writer that part of what one's
praise must mean is that if you're intelligent and quirky enough to take the
book up at all -- and anyone reading to this point most likely will be -- she's
got quirks enough of her own to match you, if not raise you 10. Confirmed
blebophiles will already be feeling ravished.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/books/review/the-assassination-of-margaret-tha
tcher-by-hilary-mantel.html

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTO (BR1)
 Hilary Mantel (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREW TESTA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BR22)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


