                             1472 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

In One Park, Chants Extol a Full Moon as Thefts Empty a Bike Shed

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WILSON.

Twitter: @mwilsonnyt

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; CRIME SCENE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 749 words


A friend's email to Andrew Kluger arrived on a cloudy afternoon two Mondays ago.

''Andrew, you have to come out of your apartment,'' it read. ''We're having a
sound bath in honor of the full moon.''

Excited, Mr. Kluger, 26, a photographer and actor, hurried to the appointed
location: Havemeyer Park in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, across Kent Avenue from the
old Domino Sugar refinery. Specifically, he approached a patch of grass at the
east end of the park, where there sat a tall, white tepee. He and about 20
others took off their shoes, stooped and entered the small opening, he recalled
this week. Some brought tools for the sound bath, including a didgeridoo and a
Tibetan singing bowl, to accompany the chants.

The sun set. Meanwhile that night, one or more other people went to the park
with their own tools, including bolt cutters or a crowbar. The person or group
made off with 17 mountain bikes stored at the Brooklyn Bike Park, inside
Havemeyer Park.

Much has been said about the transformation of Williamsburg, and the bumping-up
that takes place between the old and the new. And to that chorus, add the events
of that night. It is quite possible that meditative chanting and the drones of a
didgeridoo from inside a tepee may have drowned out the banging and clanging of
the bicycle thieves.

The dirt bike park opened in 2013 and operates on a shoestring. A $5 donation is
suggested at the gate. More lucrative is the rental service, in which bicycles
stored in a cargo container behind the tiny office go for $5 to $15, depending
on the age group of the rider. The park's main feature is its pump track --
rings of hills and berms and twisting ''rollers.''

''Brooklyn Bike Park is Brooklyn's first legal, off-road riding opportunity,''
said Christopher Trombley, 31, its founder. It is also, for many children, the
setting for a milestone.

''So many kids have learned to ride their bikes here and overcome that fear,''
said Carrie Salter, 56, a volunteer in another corner of Havemeyer Park.

The bike park is technically closed on Mondays, but it is open to friends of
those who work there, like Giovanni Bailey, 19 -- Gio to his friends. Mr. Bailey
said about four of his friends were biking on the pump track that Monday, Sept.
8, and promised to lock the gate on their way out at 8 p.m.

In hindsight, ''they might have left it open,'' he said this week. Either way,
the gate was unlocked on Tuesday at noon, when Mr. Bailey showed up to open the
bike park. He thought a co-worker had arrived before him, until he noticed the
door to the storage container. The padlock had been broken.

''Turns out the lock was actually a cheap lock,'' Mr. Trombley said. ''It broke
at the seam when they pried on it.''

The locker had been jammed with bikes -- children's sizes as well as the adult
Cannondale, GT and Giant models. Almost all the adult bikes were gone. Mr.
Bailey called the police, and officers came and took a report and said they
would review neighborhood video. There have been no updates in the case.

But Mr. Bailey also works as a security guard at the construction site across
the street, where the Domino Sugar refinery is being torn down for apartments.
He had access to a camera that more or less pointed at the bike park. He watched
the night's feed.

Shortly past 8 p.m., after his friends had left the park, a group of ''over
seven guys'' stopped on the nearby corner for a minute, then left. That is all
Mr. Bailey saw; the video was too dark to tell when the container was broken
into, he said.

After those who had been in the tepee found out about the theft, they realized
it might have occurred during their ceremony, which lasted a couple of hours.

''Theft and self-reliance and acquisition,'' said Mr. Kluger, who helped build
the park, offended that this crime occurred so close to what he called the
openness of the sound bath.

''You start to fall asleep and wake up to see someone playing a Tibetan prayer
bowl over your heart,'' he said. ''This is the energy.''

The thefts have dampened the big finale to the summer and to the park itself.
The park's lease with Two Trees Management Company, the developer building
luxury housing on the site, ends Sept. 28, Mr. Trombley said. The berms of the
pump track will be flattened. The bike park plans to move directly across the
street with a five-year lease.

There are several large locks on the storage container now, but with only two
responses to a call for bike donations, not much inside to lock up.

Email: crimescene@nytimes.com

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/20/nyregion/in-brooklyn-park-chants-extol-full-mo
on-as-thefts-empty-bike-shed.html

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Giovanni Bailey, 19, at the Brooklyn Bike Park in Havemeyer
Park in Williamsburg, where 17 mountain bikes were stolen from a storage
container this month. At left, the lock that was broken in the crime.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY VICTOR J. BLUE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


