                             1469 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 19, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Faces Tough Struggle on Ground to Oust ISIS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, ERIC SCHMITT and HELENE COOPER; Mark Mazzetti and
Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1358 words


WASHINGTON -- The American air campaign to thwart the advance of fighters from
the Islamic State has been the easy part of President Obama's strategy in Iraq
and Syria. Soon begins the next and much harder phase: rolling back their gains
in Mosul, Falluja and other populated areas, which will require American
advisers to train and coordinate airstrikes with Iraqi forces.

Pentagon officials are more willing than their counterparts at the White House
to acknowledge that this will almost certainly require American Special
Operations forces on the ground to call in airstrikes and provide tactical
advice to Iraqi troops. ''There is no one in this building who does not know
that clearing out the cities will be much harder,'' a senior Defense Department
official said in an interview. ''That's when the rubber is going to meet the
road.''

Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, this week
described this phase as ''extraordinarily complex.''

Urban warfare in Iraq has been challenging for the United States, which had 70
troops killed in the second battle of Falluja in 2004 and fought hard to regain
control of cities like Mosul, Baquba and Baghdad. So it will be even harder for
the Iraqis, who have so far proved ineffective in combating the Islamic State,
also known as ISIS or ISIL.

Military officials say they plan to use Iraqi security forces, Kurdish fighters
and local Sunnis -- whom they hope to turn against the militants -- to roll back
the Islamic State's gains. They see the Sunnis as playing a similar role to what
played out in the Sunni awakening during the surge in Iraq.

Assembling those ground forces, however, will take time. General Dempsey said
that of the 50 Iraqi brigades whose readiness the United States had closely
examined, 26 ''were assessed to be reputable partners,'' with adequate equipment
and leadership, to be loyal to the government and not overly sectarian.

But many of the Iraqi units will require training and re-equipping before they
are ready to begin a major counteroffensive.

The United States is trying to institutionalize the Sunni tribal awakening by
establishing new national guard units that it would have a crucial role in
training and equipping. The idea is to avoid the need to send a largely Shiite
army to Sunni areas and to win the allegiance of local Sunnis. In their attempt
to seize urban areas from the Islamic State, the Iraqis' firepower will be
limited. On Saturday, Iraq's new prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said that the
Iraqi military would not use artillery or carry out airstrikes in populated
areas -- an effort to reduce the risk of civilian casualties and avoid
alienating the Sunni population.

A senior State Department official said Sunday that the Iraqi air force's
''targeting is not nearly as precise as ours, and they've made some real
mistakes.''

''So that's why Prime Minister Abadi yesterday announced that even in populated
areas in which ISIL has control, we are not going to do airstrikes or
artillery-type stuff because it could harm the civilians,'' the official said.

It falls, then, to the United States and other allied nations to conduct the
airstrikes, which will need to be carefully coordinated.

In the past week, the offensive strikes that Mr. Obama promised have started
slowly, targeting a few scattered Sunni militant positions -- a truck here, a
small boat on the Euphrates there, an artillery position somewhere else -- in
what is known in the military as ''plinking.''

American military advisers are already working closely with Iraqi battalions in
the field and have not limited themselves to staying in Iraqi brigade
headquarters, American officials said. But so far none have been used to call in
airstrikes.

The operation to take back the Mosul Dam, in which fewer than 200 Iraqi
Counterterrorism Service commandos played the critical role, along with Kurdish
fighters, posed a particular challenge.

Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, the head of the Central Command, had recommended
deploying American military advisers to coordinate airstrikes in support of
Iraqi and Kurdish forces who had never worked together before and indeed spoke
different languages.

Given Mr. Obama's reluctance to put American advisers alongside Iraqi combat
troops, a workaround was arranged, General Dempsey noted Tuesday in testimony at
a Senate hearing. He said that the Kurds would pass targeting information on
Islamic State positions to an operations center in Erbil manned by Iraqi and
American troops, and they, in turn, would pass the information on to American
aircraft. It was a bit of a Rube Goldberg command structure, but it worked.

But this arrangement, as General Dempsey signaled, is unlikely to be sufficient
for the next, more challenging phase of rolling back the Islamic State's gains
in Iraqi cities.

In fact, General Austin said that air controllers would be needed. ''He shares
my view that there will be circumstances when we think that'll be necessary, but
we haven't encountered one yet,'' General Dempsey said of General Austin.

But the White House made clear on Wednesday that requests to use the advisers to
call in airstrikes to provide tactical advice on the battlefield to Iraqi units
would need to be approved by the president on a case-by-case basis.

In weighing such requests, the White House may have to choose between the
increased risk to American personnel and the danger that without the use of
advisers on the battlefield, the counteroffensive may stall.

The Iraq war provided a telling example of what can happen when the Iraqis
operate largely on their own. In March 2008, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki
decided to mount an operation to retake Basra called ''Charge of the Knights.''

The Iraqi military and the Shiite militias fought to a bloody stalemate until
the United States dispatched FA-18 jets, AC-130 gunships and Predator drones.

To help the Iraqis' Basra campaign, American commanders also arranged for three
rifle platoons from the 82nd Airborne to team with Iraqi battalions so they
could call in airstrikes and back up the Iraqis. An Iraqi battalion sent from
Anbar Province in the West deployed with its Marine advisers and also had
success.

But even with American help, the counteroffensive against the Islamic State may
confront an enemy that is rapidly adapting to the American airstrikes by hiding
equipment and troops under trees and tarps, and eschewing many electronic
communications that American intelligence services can intercept.

''They're beginning to adapt now,'' General Dempsey told the Senate Armed
Services Committee on Tuesday.

And this is just the Iraqi part of the campaign. Attacking forces of the Islamic
State in Syria will come later, but first the United States will have to train
the Syrian rebels who will fight the militants on the ground.

General Dempsey said this week that Pentagon planners estimated that it would
take eight to 12 months to train the first 5,400 soldiers; the goal is to train
about 5,000 a year, Pentagon officials said.

But those numbers would be only the beginning of the forces the Pentagon
believes will be necessary. General Dempsey said that American planners
estimated that 12,000 personnel would be needed to control liberated areas in
Syria and restore the border with Iraq.

The Central Intelligence Agency recently estimated that the Islamic State had
20,000 to 31,500 fighters, two-thirds of them based in Syria. The advance of the
militants through Iraq led to the larger estimate.

David R. Shedd, acting director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, said at a
conference in Washington on Thursday that it was ''very difficult to measure the
size and capability of the truly committed.''

But some seasoned military officials have questioned whether the strategy that
Mr. Obama and his advisers have developed will be sufficient to defeat the
Islamic State.

''Unfortunately, the strategy in many ways will be made up on the fly,'' said
Gen. James N. Mattis, who retired from the Marine Corps and is a former head of
Central Command. ''It would be better if clearly defined political end states
were objectively and persuasively conveyed at the outset.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/19/world/middleeast/us-faces-tough-struggle-on-gr
ound-to-oust-isis.html

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


