                             1465 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Porpoise Is Ensnared by Criminals and Nets

BYLINE: By ELISABETH MALKIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; SAN FELIPE JOURNAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1193 words


SAN FELIPE, Mexico -- It is a rare moment when scientists can point to an animal
at the edge of extinction and predict when it might disappear forever. But it is
happening here, under the golden waters of the desert-rimmed sea, where a small
porpoise has almost vanished.

Nobody imagined that the end would approach so quickly. What changed was the
appearance of a new threat to the snub-nosed porpoise known as the vaquita:
organized crime.

The vaquita, a shy marine mammal, is simply collateral damage as poachers here
sweep up another endangered species, a giant fish called the totoaba, to please
consumers in China. The vaquitas become entangled and die in the nets set for
totoaba.

Like the Chinese demand for other rare animal parts, including shark fins, the
market for totoaba is driven by customers who pay generously, in this case, for
the totoaba's swim bladder. Dried and served in soup, it is believed to have
medicinal qualities.

With each kilogram of swim bladder fetching as much as $10,000 here, its sale is
more lucrative than that of marijuana.

The effect of the totoaba poaching on the vaquita came as a shock to
conservationists. A study released in July concluded that half of the
population, which inhabits the northern reaches of the Gulf of California, had
been killed in two years, leaving just 97 vaquitas.

The numbers prompted a group of Mexican and international vaquita experts to
issue a dramatic warning. Without drastic steps to save the world's smallest
marine mammal, the group said, it would disappear within four years.

''It's definitely the last call for this species,'' said Barbara Taylor, a
marine mammal expert who is part of the scientists' group, the International
Committee for the Recovery of the Vaquita.

The only way to restore the vaquita, the experts said, would be to shut down the
illegal totoaba trade and impose severe new restrictions on the shrimp fisheries
here when the season begins on Saturday.

''We're encouraging them to reinvent the northern gulf,'' said Dr. Taylor, a
scientist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. ''I don't
trivialize how difficult it will be. These guys making millions of dollars
trafficking in endangered species are not going to go quietly.''

Nor will the local shrimp fishermen.

''They are more interested in the vaquita than in human beings,'' Raúl
Gutiérrez, a fisherman in this town on the west side of the gulf, said of the
conservationists.

Until now, the shrimp fishermen have been the focus of the effort to protect the
vaquita in the northern Gulf of California. Their long gillnets sway like
curtains in the current and have been lethal to the porpoise.

Mexican officials say they are taking the committee's recommendations to heart.
Eight navy speedboats are scheduled for delivery in the northern gulf over the
next few weeks, and more are expected next year. The government will start
aerial monitoring with two light planes and eventually drones, said Rafael
Pacchiano Alamán, an under secretary with the Mexican Environment Ministry.

But it may be the fishermen, not the poachers, who feel the rule of law first.
Mr. Pacchiano said the authorities would also start enforcing regulations on the
length of fishing nets: 200 meters, or about 220 yards. Fishermen acknowledge
that they typically set them five times as long.

The prospect of new limits on how and where shrimp can be caught has caused
anxiety in the gulf's northern fishing villages.

Carlos Alberto Tirado, the leader of one of the fishing federations in the small
town of El Golfo de Santa Clara, on the northeastern tip of the gulf, said that
scientists' recommendation to ban all gillnets across a wide area of the
northern gulf would wipe out the industry.

''They deal with conservation, but they do not deal with how the communities
will remain communities,'' he said. ''They would become ghost towns.''

Officials acknowledge that measures to save the vaquita will hurt the fishermen.
''It's a big dilemma,'' said Juan José Guerra Abud, Mexico's environment
secretary. ''But without doubt, the objective is to preserve it. We are looking
for what kind of stimulus, what kind of support we can give to compensate.''

Conservationists argue that there is a way for fishermen to continue working
without harming the vaquita, by switching to baglike trawl nets that do not
snare the porpoise.

But Antonio García Orozco, a fisherman who has been working with environmental
groups on the trawl net's design, said it could not work when miles of gillnets
are stretched out across the fishing grounds. ''We need time and space to
demonstrate that we can get 100 percent'' of the catch.

The government had planned to phase in the new nets by 2016. But even the
fishermen who made the switch voluntarily say they cannot provide for their
families.

''We are considered the heroes of the vaquita because we were the first to
change,'' said Javier Valverde, 66, one of the few fishermen to have seen the
elusive animal. ''But we are losing a lot.''

The jolt of urgency now comes after the government has already spent about $55
million since 2007 to protect the vaquita.

It began paying compensation to fishermen for the loss of fishing grounds after
an area of 1,260 square kilometers, or 486 square miles, was declared off-limits
as a vaquita refuge in 2005. There was another subsidy to change to trawl nets.
Then there was a payout to encourage the fishermen to switch to tourism, but few
could make it work.

Still, there was progress. The population decline fell to 4.5 percent a year by
2010, about half of what it was in earlier years.

The totoaba trade reversed that, speeding up the loss to 18.5 percent a year.

The authorities on both sides of the Mexican-United States border are just
beginning to get a glimpse of how totoaba smuggling works. Last year, after
officials at the Calexico border crossing in California found 27 totoaba
bladders hidden in Song Shen Zhen's car, they searched his house and discovered
214 more laid out under whirring fans -- a haul worth more than $3.6 million on
the Asian black market, the authorities said.

Then came the June murder in El Golfo de Santa Clara of Samuel Gallardo Castro,
a prosperous fisherman whom Mexican military authorities had linked to drug
trafficking. A suspected hit man suggested that Mr. Gallardo was shot over an
unpaid totoaba debt.

The distinction between legal fishermen and totoaba poachers is fuzzier than
many here would like to admit. Indebted fishermen may find it hard to resist the
temptation to solve their problems by catching one totoaba -- and then another.

As they wait for the promised government action to materialize, many fishermen
are skeptical it will do much good.

''Every year it's the same,'' José Luis Romero said. The promise is, '' 'This
time, really, we will put security in place.' They go out one day, two days, and
that's it.''

Mr. Romero, with a bushy gray beard, cuts an eccentric figure in this town of
cowboy boots and pickup trucks. He is different in another way. He believes that
the vaquita is worth saving.

''It would be a shame if it were lost through our negligence,'' he said, ''ours,
the fishermen.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/15/world/americas/a-vaquita-is-ensnared-by-crimin
als-and-nets.html

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: José Luis Romero, above, a fisherman in San Felipe, said it
would be a shame to see the vaquita, a snub-nosed porpoise,  become extinct.
Mexico will limit the size of fishing  nets and crack down on poachers to try to
save the species. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ADRIANA ZEHBRAUSKAS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


