                             1423 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Retaking of Iraqi Dam, Evidence of American Impact

BYLINE: By AZAM AHMED

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 882 words


MOSUL DAM, Iraq -- The two bodies lay festering in the midday sun on Tuesday,
some of the only remnants of the Sunni militant force that until Monday night
controlled the strategically important Mosul Dam.

Around them was the evidence of not just a fierce battle but also a different
sort of fight: buildings reduced to rubble; cars churned into twisted metal;
mammoth craters gouged from the road.

All bore testament to the deadly effect American airstrikes were having on the
militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, who until this month
were marauding over northern Iraq with little resistance and who two weeks ago
seized control of the dam.

It was not until President Obama authorized airstrikes by the United States
military on Aug. 7 that the Sunni fighters' advance was halted. Two days of
concerted air assaults starting Sunday around the dam then paved the way for
Iraqi and Kurdish forces to reclaim the site.

On Tuesday, Kurdish military officials gave reporters a tour of the dam, to
showcase Monday night's victory and offer journalists a look at the facility.
The dam itself, backed by a turquoise lake and surrounded by dun-colored
mountains, was in fine condition, with little evidence of damage either from the
fighting or from two weeks in militant hands.

But about an hour into the visit, gunshots erupted from the western edge of the
dam complex, as militants who were dug into the side of a neighboring mountain
harassed a convoy of vehicles making its way up a hill to a secondary dam. A
minor gunfight ensued, with the government laying down the majority of the fire
from mounted machine guns and artillery. The hum of American aircraft -- it was
not clear what sort -- was audible, though there were no airstrikes.

After an hour of sporadic fire, the confrontation ended, and the convoy resumed
its trip. The hundreds of Kurdish pesh merga fighters arrayed along the dam,
proudly posing for photos and videos, scarcely moved. It was almost exclusively
troops with the Iraqi Special Forces, at the head of the convoy, who engaged
with the militants.

The pesh merga have received the majority of the credit for retaking the dam.
But the Iraqi Special Forces troops who worked alongside them, who were created
in the image of their American counterparts, have gotten far less attention.
Known as the Golden Force, fighters interviewed Tuesday said they came from
Baghdad and were called into the fight several days ago.

One Special Forces group, stationed by a cluster of homes close to the site's
power plant, said they were the first to enter the area after a series of
airstrikes Monday afternoon. A cheery banner over the road passing by the
enclave read ''Tourist City in Mosul Dam.''

Muhammad Karim, one of the soldiers, said that when they arrived at the first
abandoned militant checkpoint, they discovered a woman, naked and bound, who had
been repeatedly raped. Farther into the neighborhood, the Iraqi forces
discovered another woman in the same state.

''ISIS are bad people,'' he said, standing beside a demolished compound that
hugged the road. ''They are raping girls.''

Stories of women kidnapped by the militants have filtered through various
minority communities, but Mr. Karim's firsthand account, corroborated by
colleagues interviewed separately, seemed to confirm the troubling rumors.

After the women were turned over to the pesh merga fighters, the Special Forces
began to clear the area, they said. The movement of the forces was coordinated
with American air support, with bombs unleashed whenever the fighters met stiff
resistance.

Several compounds bore the marks of airstrikes, their walls collapsed and
blackened. A large armored personnel carrier sat belly up, its body little more
than strands of metal connected to a frame. The force of the blasts tore trees
in two, spreading a blanket of branches and needles over a sloping road leading
into the community.

The airstrikes were directed with what seemed a high degree of accuracy. Single
homes were leveled, while neighboring ones stood in good order, exhibiting only
the scars of shrapnel. A few hundred yards from the entrance to the
neighborhood, a pair of Special Forces soldiers came across the bodies of the
two militants, some of the only ones the Sunni fighters had been unable to
reclaim.

Until recently, the militants enjoyed relatively free rein in northern Iraq and
northern Syria, moving freely with vehicles and weapons seized from the Iraqi
military units that had crumbled in the first days of the attack on Mosul and
surrounding areas. But with the Americans now engaged, their freedom of movement
has been sharply curtailed.

''When I came here three weeks ago, they were moving fast and easy with armored
vehicles,'' said Gen. Mansour Barzani, the commander of the ground forces who
reclaimed the dam. ''Now, they don't dare to move anymore.''

The next step for the Iraqi and Kurdish forces remains unclear, though
skirmishes between Iraqi forces and militants were reported Tuesday in Tikrit, a
militant-controlled city about midway between Mosul and Baghdad. While the dam
is under government control again, the brief skirmish on Tuesday along the edge
of the complex demonstrated the tenacity of the militants, even in areas
ostensibly under the control of the Kurds.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/20/world/middleeast/in-retaking-of-iraqi-dam-evid
ence-of-american-impact.html

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kurdish pesh merga fighters on Tuesday at the Mosul Dam, which
they and Iraqi Special Forces troops regained Monday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A6)  GRAPHICS: Strikes in Northern Iraq:
American fighter jets and drones have attacked 68 targets in northern Iraq since
last week,  according to the U.S. Central Command.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


