                             1441 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Losing Our Touch

BYLINE: By RICHARD KEARNEY

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; OPINIONATOR; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1351 words


Are we losing our senses? In our increasingly virtual world, are we losing touch
with the sense of touch itself? And if so, so what?

I recently had occasion to pose these questions to students in a college class I
teach on eros -- ''from Plato to today.'' Not surprisingly, the topic of
physical contact and sex came up, and the conversation turned very much to
''today.'' A number of the students said that they regularly messaged online
before having ''real contact'' with partners, perhaps using online dating and
mating services like Match.com, OkCupid, SpeedDate.com and Tinder. They shared
messaging acronyms that signaled their level of willingness to have sex, and
under what conditions. They admitted to enjoying the relative anonymity of the
one-off ''hook up,'' whose consummation required no preliminary close-quarters
courtship rites or flirtation ceremonies, no culinary seduction, no caress,
nothing -- apart from the eventual ''blind rut,'' as James Joyce put it --
requiring the presence of a functioning, sensitive body.

We noted the rather obvious paradox: The ostensible immediacy of sexual contact
was in fact mediated digitally. And it was also noted that what is often thought
of as a ''materialist'' culture was arguably the most ''immaterialist'' culture
imaginable -- vicarious, by proxy, and often voyeuristic.

Is today's virtual dater and mater something like an updated version of Plato's
Gyges, who could see everything at a distance but was touched by nothing? Are we
perhaps entering an age of ''excarnation,'' where we obsess about the body in
increasingly disembodied ways? For if incarnation is the image become flesh,
excarnation is flesh become image. Incarnation invests flesh; excarnation
divests it.

In perhaps the first great works of human psychology, the ''De Anima,''
Aristotle pronounced touch the most universal of the senses. Even when we are
asleep we are susceptible to changes in temperature and noise. Our bodies are
always ''on.'' And touch is the most intelligent sense, Aristotle explained,
because it is the most sensitive. When we touch someone or something we are
exposed to what we touch. We are responsive to others because we are constantly
in touch with them.

''Touch knows differences,'' Aristotle insisted. It is the source of our most
basic power to discriminate. The thin-skinned person is sensitive and
intelligent; the thick-skinned, coarse and ignorant. Think of Odysseus and the
Cyclops, Jacob and Esau. The power of touch. Even the Buddha, when challenged by
Mara to reveal his authority, simply touches the ground. Our first intelligence
is sensory refinement. And this primal sensibility is also what places us at
risk in the world, exposing us to adventure and discovery.

Aristotle was challenging the dominant prejudice of his time, one he himself
embraced in earlier works. The Platonic doctrine of the Academy held that sight
was the highest sense, because it is the most distant and mediated; hence most
theoretical, holding things at bay, mastering meaning from above. Touch, by
contrast, was deemed the lowest sense because it is ostensibly immediate and
thus subject to intrusions and pressures from the material world. Against this,
Aristotle made his radical counterclaim that touch did indeed have a medium,
namely ''flesh.'' And he insisted that flesh was not just some material organ
but a complex mediating membrane that accounts for our primary sensings and
evaluations.

Tactility is not blind immediacy -- not merely sensorial but cognitive, too.
Savoring is wisdom; in Latin, wisdom is ''sapientia,'' from ''sapere,'' to
taste. These carnal senses make us human by keeping us in touch with things, by
responding to people's pain -- as when the disguised Odysseus (whose name can be
translated as ''bearer of pain,''), returning to Ithaca, is recognized by his
nursemaid, Eurycleia, at the touch of his childhood scar.

But Aristotle did not win this battle of ideas. The Platonists prevailed and the
Western universe became a system governed by ''the soul's eye.'' Sight came to
dominate the hierarchy of the senses, and was quickly deemed the appropriate
ally of theoretical ideas. Western philosophy thus sprang from a dualism between
the intellectual senses, crowned by sight, and the lower ''animal'' senses,
stigmatized by touch. And Western theology -- though heralding the Christian
message of Incarnation (''word made flesh'') -- all too often confirmed the
injurious dichotomy with its anti-carnal doctrines; prompting Nietzsche's
verdict that Christianity was ''Platonism for the people'' and ''gave Eros
poison to drink.'' Thus opto-centrism prevailed for over 2,000 years,
culminating in our contemporary culture of digital simulation and spectacle. The
eye continues to rule in what Roland Barthes once called our ''civilization of
the image.'' The world is no longer our oyster, but our screen.

For all the fascination with bodies, our current technology is arguably
exacerbating our carnal alienation. While offering us enormous freedoms of
fantasy and encounter, digital eros may also be removing us further from the
flesh.

Pornography, for example, is now an industry worth tens of billions of dollars
worldwide. Seen by some as a progressive sign of post-60s sexual liberation,
pornography is, paradoxically, a twin of Puritanism. Both display an alienation
from flesh -- one replacing it with the virtuous, the other with the virtual.
Each is out of touch with the body.

THIS movement toward privatization and virtuality is explored in Spike Jonze's
recent movie ''Her,'' where a man falls in love with his operating system, which
names itself Samantha. He can think of nothing else and becomes insanely jealous
when he discovers that his virtual lover, Samantha, is also flirting with
thousands of other subscribers. Eventually, Samantha feels so bad for him that
she decides to supplement her digital persona with a real body by sending a
surrogate lover. But the plan fails miserably -- while the man touches the
embodied lover he hears the virtual signals of Samantha in his ears and cannot
bridge the gap. The split between digital absence and carnal presence is
unbearable. Something is missing: love in the flesh.

The move toward excarnation is apparent in what is becoming more and more a
fleshless society. In medicine, ''bedside manner'' and hand on pulse has ceded
to the anonymous technologies of imaging in diagnosis and treatment. In war,
hand-to-hand combat has been replaced by ''targeted killing'' via
remote-controlled drones. If contemporary warfare renders us invulnerable to
those who cannot touch us, can we make peace without a hand to shake? (Think of
Mandela-de Klerk or Begin-Sadat).

Moreover, certain cyber engineers now envisage implanting transmission codes in
brains so that we will not have to move a finger -- or come into contact with
another human being -- to get what we want. The touch screen replaces touch
itself. The cosmos shrinks to a private monitor; each viewer a disembodied self
unto itself.

Full humanity requires the ability to sense and be sensed in turn: the power, as
Shakespeare said, to ''feel what wretches feel'' -- or, one might also add, what
artists, cooks, musicians and lovers feel. We need to find our way in a tactile
world again. We need to return from head to foot, from brain to fingertip, from
iCloud to earth. To close the distance, so that eros is more about proximity
than proxy. So that soul becomes flesh, where it belongs. Such a move, I submit,
would radically alter our ''sense'' of sex in our digital civilization. It would
enhance the role of empathy, vulnerability and sensitivity in the art of carnal
love, and ideally, in all of human relations. Because to love or be loved truly
is to be able to say, ''I have been touched.''

Richard Kearney is a philosophy professor at Boston College whose books include
''The Wake of Imagination'' and the forthcoming ''Carnal Hermeneutics.''

This is an essay from The Stone, a philosophy series at nytimes.com
/opinionator.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/08/30/losing-our-touch/

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JESSE DRAXLER)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed; Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


