                             1433 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 26, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Making of a Disaster

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN.

David Brooks and Joe Nocera are off today.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 800 words


LONDON -- Almost 13 years after 9/11, a jihadi organization with a murderous
anti-Western ideology controls territory in Iraq and Syria, which are closer to
Europe and the United States than Afghanistan is. It commands resources and
camps and even a Syrian military base. It spreads its propaganda through social
media. It has set the West on edge through the recorded beheading of the
American journalist James Foley -- with the promise of more to come.

What went wrong? The United States and its allies did not go to war to eradicate
Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan only to face -- after the expenditure of so much
blood and treasure -- a more proximate terrorist threat with a Qaeda-like
ideology. The ''war on terror,'' it seems, produced only a metastasized variety
of terror.

More than 500, and perhaps as many as 800, British Muslims have headed for Syria
and Iraq to enlist in the jihadi ranks. In France, that number stands at about
900. Two adolescent girls, 15 and 17, were detained last week in Paris and face
charges of conspiring with a terrorist organization. The ideological appeal of
the likes of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria is intact. It may be
increasing, despite efforts to build an interfaith dialogue, reach out to
moderate Islam, and pre-empt radicalization.

''One minute you are trying to pay bills, the next you're running around Syria
with a machine gun,'' said Ghaffar Hussain, the managing director of the
Quilliam Foundation, a British research group that seeks to tackle religious
extremism. ''Many young British Muslims are confused about their identity, and
they buy into a narrow framework that can explain events. Jihadists hand them a
simplistic narrative of good versus evil. They give them camaraderie and
certainty. ISIS makes them feel part of a grand struggle.''

A large part of Western failure has been the inability to counter the attraction
of such extremism. Perhaps racked with historical guilt, European nations with
populations from former colonies often seem unable to celebrate their values of
freedom, democracy and the rule of law. Meanwhile, in the Arab world the central
hope of the Arab Spring has been dashed: that more open and representative
societies would reduce the frustration that leads to extremism.

President Obama shunned the phrase ''war on terror'' to distance himself from
the policies of President George W. Bush. But in reality he chose to pursue the
struggle by other military means. He stepped up drone attacks on several fronts.
His most conspicuous success was the killing of Osama bin Laden in 2011.

The curtain, it seemed, had fallen on America's post-9/11 trauma. Then, a little
over three years after Bin Laden's death, ISIS overran the Iraqi city of Mosul
and the world woke up to the radicalization through the festering Syrian war of
another generation of Muslims; youths drawn to the slaughter of infidels (as
well as Shiite Muslims) and the far-fetched notion of recreating an Islamic
caliphate under Shariah law. When a hooded ISIS henchman with a British accent
beheaded Foley last week, the new threat acquired urgency at last.

The list of American errors is long: Bush's ill-conceived and bungled war in
Iraq; a failure to deal with the fact that two allies, Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan, have been major sources and funders of violent Sunni extremism; an
inability to seize opportunity in Egypt, home to nearly a quarter of the world's
Arabs, and so demonstrate that Arab societies can evolve out of the radicalizing
confrontation of dictatorship and Islamism; a prolonged spate of dithering over
the Syrian war during which Obama declared three years ago that ''the time has
come for President Assad to step aside'' without having any plan to achieve
that; a lack of resolve in Syria that saw Obama set a red line on the use of
chemical weapons only to back away from military force when chemical weapons
were used; an inability to see that no one loves an Arab vacuum like jihadi
extremists, and a bloody vacuum was precisely what Obama allowed Syria to
become; and inattention, until it was too late, to festering sectarian conflict
in a broken Iraqi society left to its fate by a complete American withdrawal.

The chicken that came home to roost from the Syrian debacle is called ISIS. It
is not Al Qaeda. But, as the journalist Patrick Cockburn has noted, Al Qaeda
''is an idea rather than an organization, and this has long been the case.''

ISIS grew through American weakness -- the setting of objectives and red lines
in Syria that proved vacuous. But the deepest American and Western defeat has
been ideological. As Hussain said, ''If you don't have a concerted strategy to
undermine their narrative, their values, their worldview, you are not going to
succeed. Everyone in society has to take on the challenge.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/26/opinion/roger-cohen-the-making-of-a-disaster.h
tml

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


