                             1403 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Remains Found at Ukraine Crash Site

BYLINE: By ANDREW E. KRAMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 472 words


DONETSK, Ukraine -- International experts examining the crash site of Malaysia
Airlines Flight 17 in eastern Ukraine on Saturday found the remains of victims
overlooked by local emergency personnel who first searched the debris two weeks
ago.

The team of Dutch and Australian police officers and forensic experts, which
gained access to the site for only the second time since the crash, has divided
the 14-square-mile site into small grids and intends to painstakingly search
each one.

A spokeswoman for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which
negotiated access to the crash site for the team with the Ukrainian separatists
and the government, confirmed that searchers found human remains on Saturday.

They also recovered remains on Friday, their first full day at the site after
fighting between rebels and government forces blocked access for nearly a week.
International monitors estimate that about 80 bodies remain unaccounted for.
Representatives of the Dutch-led recovery mission have declined to elaborate on
what they are searching for, or how the bodies were passed over in the initial
search.

About 80 experts reached the site on Saturday, accompanied by monitors from the
security organization. The Dutch and Australian team is now based in
government-held territory, having relocated on Friday from the separatist
capital, Donetsk, after the Ukrainian military asserted it had surrounded the
city. The crash site remains under rebel control.

The fighting has now reached the outskirts of Donetsk, where separatists have
dug trenches into parks and the landscaped medians of major streets. On
Saturday, artillery shells fell in at least one outlying district.

Also on Saturday, the Ukrainian military reported that a separatist unit
attacked a border guard post near the town of Vasilevka, about 35 miles south of
Donetsk, by advancing across the border from Russia. The Ukrainian border guard
service said the attackers were beaten back and retreated to Russia.

The border service said another crossing point at Dolzhansk, in the Luhansk
region of eastern Ukraine, came under artillery bombardment from Russian
territory. Soldiers at the location said they saw a drone aircraft, used to help
pinpoint artillery fire, flying overhead. It arrived from the Russian side of
the border, according to the border service. The Russian government has denied
firing into Ukraine from its territory.

In Russia, a spokesman for the border department of the Federal Security Service
said artillery shells from Ukraine had exploded in the country's Rostov region.
Craters from nine rounds were found in a field near the village of
Mityakinskaya, a spokesman for the border department, Vasily Malayev, told the
Interfax news agency.

The rounds appear to have been fired overnight Friday, he said, and no one was
injured.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/03/world/europe/more-remains-found-at-ukraine-cra
sh-site.html

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


