                             1462 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Close to Deal, Rebels Fight Yemeni Troops

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 324 words


SANA, Yemen -- Yemeni troops clashed on Saturday with Shiite rebels who have
been demonstrating here in the capital for weeks to demand the resignation of
the government, throwing into question a deal to end the standoff and raising
fears of a wider conflict.

The clashes broke out in a northwestern district of Sana near a state television
building when troops stopped a rebel truck loaded with weapons, military
officials said. They said that there was no word on casualties and that the army
had secured the area. They spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were
not authorized to speak to the news media.

The flare-up came as the Shiite rebel group known as the Houthis was said to
have been close to signing a deal reached through an international mediator.

According to top government officials, the deal includes the appointment of a
new prime minister and the further restoration of fuel subsidies. The crisis was
set off by the government's decision to cut the subsidies in late July as part
of an austerity plan. Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the Arab world.

The government officials said the Houthis insisted on signing the deal in their
stronghold in the northern city of Saada, while the president wants to sign it
in the capital.

The Houthis are rapidly emerging as one of the most potent armed groups in the
country. They waged a six-year rebellion that ended in 2010 with a cease-fire
deal, and for months they have been battling and defeating Sunni armed tribesmen
in the north. The Houthis control the northern province of Saada and have a
strong presence in cities near the border with Saudi Arabia.

Yemen is also grappling with a potent affiliate of Al Qaeda that operates mainly
in the south and east, as well as an increasingly assertive southern separatist
movement. The United States has long provided aid to Yemen's counterterrorism
forces and regularly carries out drone strikes aimed at Qaeda militants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/14/world/middleeast/yemen.html

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Followers of the Houthi rebel group attended Friday prayers
during a rally in Sana, the capital. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED AL-SAYAGHI/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


