                             1406 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dreamed-Of Music, Undreamed-Of Spaces

BYLINE: By NATE CHINEN.

Critics for The Times play the role of curator.

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; IMAGINE THIS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1102 words


Twenty-five years ago, when I was in junior high, my father produced a jazz
festival on the North Shore of Oahu. It lasted only a few years, well received
and well attended, but not what you'd call a financial success.

For me it was an incalculable gift, because of the up-close exposure to artists
like the pianist McCoy Tyner, the trumpeter Freddie Hubbard and the saxophonist
Branford Marsalis, none of them regulars in our corner of the world. I listened,
watched and lurked -- catching the musicians warming up, talking shop, busting
chops.

I remember Charlie Haden lumbering over with his bass after closing the first
festival with Herbie Hancock. ''Hey, man,'' he said. ''Is there any place to get
a hamburger around here?'' It was after midnight. We were in a pasture on a
remote stretch of island coastline. My dad recommended room service.

Festivals have played an outsize role in my musical education since well before
I began to think of myself as a critic. (I also have some working history with
the producer George Wein, whose pioneering Newport Jazz Festival celebrated its
60th anniversary last weekend.) Along the way, I've compiled a mental catalog of
things that worked or didn't. And I've seen the level of organization that goes
into a good festival, which must be the reason I've never been tempted to start
one.

But given the chance to dwell in possibility, to design a festival with no risk
to my solvency or sanity, I couldn't rightly resist. I began by thinking
broadly, about the what, where and why of the thing.

Most music festivals fall into one of two camps. The Field of Dreams camp -- as
in, ''If you build it, they will come,'' a willful misremembering of the movie
line -- involves a transient, sprawling oasis with the logistic tangle of a
metropolis. Think of Coachella, Bonnaroo and, in a modest way, my father's brief
venture.

The second camp -- call it Choose Your Own Adventure -- is more of an urban
entitlement: a string of otherwise unrelated shows, using existing
infrastructure, often with à la carte ticketing. We see a lot of these in New
York; the groundbreaking example was a George Wein production, the Newport Jazz
Festival-New York, birthed in 1972 and put to rest, lacking a title sponsor and
a driving purpose, several years ago.

Recently, I've taken note of a third camp, more site-specific and curatorial
than either of the others. Basilica Soundscape, in a former factory in Hudson,
N.Y., fits the bill. I'm looking forward to its second edition, on Sept. 12 and
13, with a lineup including Deafheaven, Julia Holter and Swans.

One of my closest friends, Mark Christman, runs Ars Nova Workshop, an
avant-garde presenting organization in Philadelphia. This spring he produced the
New Paths Festival, a textbook embodiment of the form. Its most tantalizing
event had Milford Graves, the visionary drummer and herbalist, playing a solo
recital in a barn on the grounds of Bartram's Garden, the nation's oldest
botanic garden.

My ideal festival would borrow choice elements from all three camps. What I
found myself thinking about was a celebration of the crucial but often unseen
hubs of cultural production in New York, reaching across artistic disciplines:
Not the concert hall but the rehearsal space. Not the gallery but the studio.

Pair these nonstandard rooms with the right musicians, creating work inspired by
their settings, and you might have something. I'll call it the Engine Room Fest.

Start with the Steinway Piano Factory, in Astoria, Queens. You can take a guided
tour by appointment, but it's uncommon to hear music performed on the factory
floor. I'd like to see a deconstructed solo recital, in stages, at different
manufacturing stations. Sticking to Steinway artists, I'd pick two classical
pianists with a feel for the physicality of the instrument: Emanuel Ax and
Jeremy Denk. Then the same for jazz: Geri Allen and Vijay Iyer.

Also in Queens is Silvercup Studios, the crown jewel of our film and television
industry. One of its hangar-like shooting stages could accommodate a bigger
show, featuring artists of cinematic resonance. I could see Lana Del Rey on the
bill, along with Kanye West, who had her sing at his wedding. The opener: a full
orchestral set by RZA, the producer, rapper and soundtrack savant who has
dabbled in directing.

Not knowing where to begin with artists' studios, I reached out to another good
friend, Carolina A. Miranda, a staff writer at The Los Angeles Times and the
mastermind of its ''Culture: High & Low'' blog. She lived for 11 years in
Brooklyn and brought a gimlet-eyed enthusiasm to her art criticism on WNYC.

She sent an email with nine suggestions, of which I picked two. The collagist
and painter Fred Tomaselli, whose newest series, ''The Times,'' features
whimsically altered front pages of The New York Times, has a Bushwick studio
that could host an acoustic show. I'm thinking of the guitarist Bill Orcutt, the
trumpeter Arve Henriksen and the country-folk singer Laura Cantrell, who once
had Mr. Tomaselli design an album cover.

My other favorite suggestion: the headquarters of a business like Art Crating,
in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. Showing a perfect grasp of the Engine Room ethos,
Carolina observed that ''so much art is about these unseen systems that support
it: crating, conservation, curation.'' I'd go with a hair-trigger instrumental
unit like Dawn of Midi, a process-mad indie-rocker like St. Vincent and a heavy
drone band like Ensemble Pearl.

Finally, dance. I thought about the stately Alvin Ailey and Mark Morris dance
centers, each of which has a resident company with a history of musical
collaboration. But I wanted something less identified with a singular
choreographic vision, which led me to the Peridance Capezio Center, housed in a
1904 Beaux-Arts building near Union Square. There's a resident ensemble there,
too -- Peridance Contemporary Dance Company, celebrating its 30th anniversary
this year -- but the center is just as widely recognized for its open classes
and workshops. Its main studio, a brick-walled, high-ceilinged space, would suit
a showcase for Lil Buck, the ambassador of jookin, a Memphis street dance. He
has collaborated with Yo-Yo Ma, the genre-fluid cellist, and Janelle Monáe, the
hyperkinetic R&B singer.

So let's enlist those two, along with the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, another of
Lil Buck's proponents, and the pianist Jason Moran, for whom interdisciplinary
art is practically a given. I'd open the evening with a jookin class and close
it with a dance party.

And I count at least a half-dozen totally solid burger joints that should be
open after the gig.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/07/arts/music/new-york-studios-and-factories-as-c
oncert-halls.html

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A piano factory, dance studios, an art moving company:
evocative locales for a quirky music festival of the mind. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID
PLUNKERT) (C1)
Stars of an imaginary festival: From left, Lana Del Rey for a Silvercup Studios
show
Bill Orcutt for a Brooklyn art studio concert
Wynton Marsalis for an event at Peridance, near Union Square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY
CHAD BATKA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
MIKE BELLEME FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (C2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


