                             1490 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Man Arrested in Midtown Hotel Burglary After Tackle and Chase by Swedish Guest

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN MUELLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 446 words


The drunk burglar slipped into a 10th-floor hotel room unnoticed, toting half a
cup of cold coffee as he pilfered a wallet, a watch and a phone from the
nightstand.

As the burglar went about his work on Tuesday, Viktor Lofgren slept soundly,
buffered by headphones from not just the drone of 7:30 a.m. Midtown traffic, but
also the rustling just a few feet away.

It might have been hours before a tourist more prone to jet lag realized that he
had been a theft victim. But Mr. Lofgren was a hardy if soft-spoken business
traveler from Sweden, ready to rally against the city's perils just seven hours
after his plane had touched down.

Finally awakened by the rummaging, Mr. Lofgren leapt out of bed and jumped on
the intruder, he recalled. He was not dissuaded, he said, when the man, raising
that paltry cup of coffee, claimed to be delivering room service.

''My body was pumping with adrenaline,'' Mr. Lofgren, 24, said. ''I was so
scared.''

The intruder wriggled clumsily away, dropping at least some of the stolen
possessions, before fleeing downstairs in the Wingate by Wyndham Hotel with Mr.
Lofgren at his heels, the police said. A hotel manager took over the chase in
the lobby, driving the man a few strides down West 35th Street until he ran into
an office building near Seventh Avenue.

The suspect eluded teams of police officers and their dogs for over four hours.
Police officials had the building evacuated to help with the search, and he was
caught just after noon and identified by Mr. Lofgren and his roommate, who had
awakened when Mr. Lofgren jumped on the man. ''I was relieved,'' Mr. Lofgren
said.

The suspect, identified by the police as Josue Alicea, 32, was charged with
burglary, criminal possession of stolen property and criminal possession of a
controlled substance.

But Mr. Lofgren's initiation as a spectacle standing in the midst of a bored New
York crowd was just beginning. He waited unnoticed in a gray sweatshirt and a
Yankees cap, but soon construction workers in hard hats beckoned to him from
nearby scaffolding and office workers asked for a handshake. ''But you still
love New York, right?'' pleaded Izela Minero, 41, who was waiting to go to work
in the building where Mr. Smith was found.

Boos swelled from the sidewalk when the suspect was wheeled into an ambulance on
a stretcher, an oxygen mask on his face. He was taken to Bellevue Hospital
Center because he was drunk, the police said.

A swarm of cameramen surrounded Mr. Lofgren, forcing him into a retreat as he
retraced his assailant's steps. He walked through glass hotel doors marked,
''Breathe Well.''

A woman carrying a briefcase yelled after him: ''I would be clearing out of
there.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/nyregion/man-arrested-in-midtown-hotel-burglar
y-after-tackle-and-chase-by-swedish-guest.html

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A handcuffed burglary suspect was put into an ambulance on West
35th Street after being chased into an office building. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRED R.
CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


