                             1446 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hamas Emerges Buoyant Despite Bloodshed and Devastation in Gaza

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN; Fares Akram contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1367 words


BEIT HANOUN, Gaza Strip -- Ismail Haniya, the top Hamas leader in Gaza, worked
the crowd in what used to be the Boura neighborhood of this battered northern
border town, kissing the cheeks of elders and the foreheads of masked fighters.
He waved at the women standing in front of makeshift huts next to the homes
flattened in Israeli attacks, as children watched from atop concrete piles where
green Hamas flags were planted as though on conquered lands.

''These buildings were the gates to the victory,'' Mr. Haniya told one resident
during the tour Tuesday afternoon.

More than a week after an Egyptian-brokered cease-fire agreement halted 50 days
of fighting between Israel and Palestinian militants in Gaza, little has changed
on the ground. Electricity is still scarce, residents have to line up to collect
clean water, and there is no word when the promised materials for reconstruction
might arrive, in what quantities and under whose supervision.

But Hamas, the militant Islamist faction that ruled Gaza for seven years and led
the battle against Israel, has already handed out more than $40 million in
$2,000 payments to each family whose home was hit, according to Mousa Abu
Marzook, a Hamas official based in Cairo who accompanied Mr. Haniya on the tour.
Having given up official control of Gaza's ministries in June to a new
Palestinian government that has yet to take hold here -- a picture of Mr.
Haniya, a former prime minister, still hangs in the office of the education
chief -- Hamas paradoxically seems to be politically in its strongest position
in years.

Polls show an unprecedented spike in popular support because of the war without,
so far, people blaming Hamas for the devastation left behind. Leaders spent the
last days doing victory laps, meeting with families of the fallen and touring
the wreckage. In separate interviews, they repeatedly shrugged off questions
about what happens next, saying ''let's wait and see'' as if in a refrain.

''This is the responsibility of Mahmoud Abbas because now he is responsible for
the government,'' said Mahmoud al-Zahar, referring to the president of the
Palestinian Authority and leader of the rival Fatah faction. ''We are not
responsible.''

Ziad el-Zaza, the former deputy prime minister and finance minister, said Hamas
''would not be blamed because Hamas leaders were in the front lines and they
suffered losses'' -- his own four-story house was leveled -- and because ''those
who offered relief to the people are also Hamas, those who go and comfort people
are Hamas.''

Hamas remains relatively isolated in the region, its stores of rockets have been
badly depleted, and the cease-fire failed to meet its repeated demands for a
full lifting of Israeli restrictions on travel and trade, so the honeymoon may
not last. The more time that passes without real change in Gaza's conditions,
analysts said, the more residents are likely to blame Hamas for the 2,100 lives
lost and the vast destruction across the coastal territory.

''The enemies of Hamas are stupid enough to take part of the burden off Hamas,''
said Omar Shaban, a Gaza-based economist and former political candidate. ''I'm
independent. I'm not Hamas; I'm not Fatah. Now I'm 100 percent it's Abbas who is
at fault. He didn't come to Gaza. I didn't hear anything from him.''

Even the Gaza-based minister of public works expressed frustration with Mr.
Abbas after a meeting on Wednesday in the destroyed neighborhood of Shejaiya.

''Hamas is functioning; they gave the people $2,000,'' complained the minister,
Mofeed M. Al Hassina. ''The money gives you the power, gives you everything.
They're stronger than us as a government.''

Israel insists that Hamas was hit hard, that it destroyed more than 30 tunnels
that penetrated Israel, and that Gaza militias retain at most 3,000 rockets, a
third of what they started the summer with. Airstrikes killed three top Hamas
commanders along with hundreds of fighters, though the fate of Mohammed Deif,
the head of Hamas's Qassam Brigades, remains unknown. (Mr. Abu Marzook and Mr.
Zahar both said they had met with him but offered no proof that he is alive.)

Mr. Haniya's niece was killed and his home destroyed. Mr. Zahar was taking
meetings under a tree next to a stack of furniture recovered from his bombed-out
house.

Hamas, founded in 1987 as the Palestinian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood and
considered a terrorist group by the United States and Europe, reconciled in
April with Mr. Abbas's Palestine Liberation Organization out of what many
experts saw as desperation. The movement had lost crucial political and economic
backing from Iran, Syria and, especially, Egypt after the ousting of President
Mohamed Morsi, a former Brotherhood leader, last summer. Its government
employees had not been paid in months.

But it stunned Israel and the world with its military muscle, killing 65 Israeli
soldiers and landing a rocket close enough to Ben-Gurion International Airport
to halt most flights for 36 hours.

''Something strategic happened in this battle,'' Mr. Abu Marzook said. ''It
caused the Palestinians to feel that there is a possibility to make victory over
Israelis with their own force, not by the Arabs' help. Those who had the
intention to neutralize Hamas, either in its political influence inside
Palestine or on the level of the region, they did not achieve what they want.
Many of them will rethink how to deal with Hamas.''

In a poll conducted last week, the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey
Research found the largest shift in favor of Hamas since 2006, when it won
legislative elections. Nearly 80 percent of the 1,270 people surveyed said Hamas
had won the war, and a majority of 53 percent now see armed confrontation as the
best path to a Palestinian state.

''When the strong doesn't make victory, he is defeated, and when the weak is not
defeated, then he won,'' said Hamza Ismail Abu Shanab, an analyst and the son of
a senior Hamas member killed by Israel in 2003.

The poll, which has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage
points, found for the first time in eight years that Mr. Haniya would defeat Mr.
Abbas in a presidential election, with even stronger support in the West Bank
than in Gaza.

Mr. Abbas was careful to praise the ''Palestinian resistance'' during the
fighting, but since the cease-fire, according to Arab news reports, he has
criticized Hamas for prolonging the hostilities and running a shadow government
in Gaza and accused it of plotting a coup against him in the West Bank. Hamas
leaders in Gaza were dismissive of Mr. Abbas and his new diplomatic initiative
demanding a three-year deadline for ending Israel's occupation, renewing doubts
about the durability of their reconciliation.

''It was not a surprise, it's not a program, it's not a project,'' Mr. Zaza
said. ''It's a process of postponing everything for another three years.''

Mr. Haniya, 51, left his prime minister's post when the new government took
over, but still has its trappings. He toured Beit Hanoun in a motorcade, two
green pickups loaded with armed fighters among a dozen vehicles trailing his
white Pajero jeep, whose windshield flashed red and blue police lights.

He walked arm in arm with Mr. Abu Marzook into Boura, where the Beit Hanoun
mayor pointed out the border with Israel and spoke of taking over the town of
Sderot beyond it. When some residents called out, ''This is a disaster area,''
or ''We need water,'' they were shushed by neighbors.

On Al Owda Street, young men snapped pictures on their smartphones as Mr. Haniya
held up two fingers in a victory sign. After visiting the Hamad family, six
members of which were killed in a drone strike, he emerged with his arm draped
across the shoulder of 11-year-old Amir, calling Israel's assault ''the new
Naziism'' and challenging Washington's support for Israel's ''right to defend
itself.''

''This is defense?'' he demanded of a reporter. ''Do you see it in his eyes? He
lost his parents and his two uncles and his grandmother.''

Earlier, Mr. Haniya thanked Sadiya Nasser, whose son and two grandsons were
among slain Qassam fighters, for her sacrifice. Ms. Nasser thanked him, saying,
''We hope the next victory will be in Jerusalem.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/04/world/middleeast/israel-gaza-hamas-fatah-.html

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Members of the Qassam Brigades in Beit Hanoun on Tuesday. Over
a week after an Egypt-brokered cease-fire agreement, little has changed on the
ground. (A5)
 Ismail Haniya and Mousa Abu Marzook, top Hamas officials, toured Beit Hanoun on
Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WISSAM NASSAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


