                             1445 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 3, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Airstrike in Somalia by U.S. Forces Targets Shabab Leader

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN and HELENE COOPER; Jeffrey Gettleman reported from
Nairobi, and Helene Cooper from Washington. Mohamed Ibrahim contributed
reporting from Mogadishu, Somalia, and Eric Schmitt from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1361 words


NAIROBI, Kenya -- For nearly a decade, the United States has been trying to
fight the Somali Islamist group known as the Shabab, using everything from its
African allies and economic sanctions to American missile strikes and commando
raids.

On Tuesday, Pentagon officials announced that they had conducted American
airstrikes to go after the leader of the Shabab directly, striking at the heart
of a militant group that has allied itself with Al Qaeda and terrorized the
region for years.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said military officials were
trying to assess whether the Shabab leader, Ahmed Abdi Godane, had been killed
in the strikes, which took place on Monday on an encampment and a vehicle south
of Mogadishu, the capital. The attack was carried out by Special Operations
forces using both manned and unmanned aircraft, launched, Admiral Kirby said,
based on ''actionable'' intelligence that Mr. Godane was at the encampment.

The American warplanes dropped a number of Hellfire missiles and precision
bombs. Defense officials said they believed that both the encampment and the
vehicle had been destroyed, and that the militants there had been killed. But
they were still trying to determine the fate of Mr. Godane.

''We certainly believe that we hit what we were aiming at,'' Admiral Kirby said
during a news briefing. He said that the United States would ''continue to use
all the tools at our disposal'' to ''dismantle Al Shabab and other terrorist
groups.''

One American official in Nairobi said that ''we're 80 percent sure'' Mr. Godane
was killed in the strike. Still, militants in places like Yemen and Pakistan
have been thought to be killed in drone strikes just like this one, only to
resurface weeks or months later, crowing about having survived American attempts
to kill them.

The airstrikes came nearly a year after a Navy SEAL team attempted a pre-dawn
raid on another senior Shabab leader, Abdikadir Mohamed Abdikadir, who uses the
nom de guerre Ikrimah. But the SEAL team was forced to withdraw, and the Shabab
quickly tried to use the clash as a propaganda tool, boasting that their
fighters had beaten back the Navy SEALs famed for killing Osama bin Laden.

Admiral Kirby said that no American combat troops were on the ground calling in
the airstrikes on Monday. ''All I would tell you is we continue to work with
partners in Somalia and in the region, but I won't get any more specific than
that,'' he said.

Mr. Godane has been the driving force behind turning what was once a poor,
obscure local militant group in a country many had forgotten into one of the
most fearsome Qaeda franchises in the world. At the height of its power, the
Shabab, under Mr. Godane's merciless leadership, controlled more square miles of
territory than just about any other Qaeda offshoot.

Mr. Godane, thought to be around 40 years old, has been one of the most wanted
figures in Africa, widely believed to have orchestrated countless attacks on
civilians, including the massacre of dozens of shoppers at a mall in Nairobi
last year. He has presided over a reign of terror inside Somalia for several
years, organizing the stoning of teenage girls and crude public amputations, all
part of an effort to place Somalia under a harsh interpretation of Islamic rule.

During Somalia's famine in 2011, when more than 200,000 people died, Mr. Godane
gave the orders to block food supplies from reaching starving people. His masked
fighters even diverted rivers from famished farmers. Mr. Godane has also taken
the Shabab's violence international by organizing suicide attacks in Kenya and
Uganda.

The Shabab leader is one of a number of terror suspects whom the military has
standing orders to strike if the opportunity presents itself, administration
officials said. President Obama has already authorized such strikes.

''This is not one of those cases where a permission slip is needed,'' a senior
administration official said on Tuesday.

American commandos have winnowed down the leadership of the Shabab, killing
other leaders in airstrikes over the years, while thousands of African Union
troops have pushed the group out of the capital, Mogadishu, and many of its
strongholds.

The Shabab are not nearly as powerful as they once were, when they controlled
vast areas of southern Somalia and nearly overran the government. But they still
control some towns and villages, and in recent days, they have stepped up
assassinations of Somali officials in Mogadishu.

Even if Mr. Godane was killed, some Somalia analysts said the terror threat in
East Africa would remain.

''The U.S. has been so focused on Somalia, they took their eye off their ball,''
said Bronwyn Bruton, deputy director of the Ansari Africa Center of the Atlantic
Council in Washington. ''The real threat isn't Somalia itself. It's the
regionalization of Al Qaeda in East Africa, which has already been happening.''

She mentioned recent attacks in Uganda and Kenya, two countries with important
and growing economies where many Westerners live, compared with Somalia, where
there are scant few.

Still, American counterterrorism and intelligence officials greeted news of the
airstrike with cautious optimism.

''If true, this will be a huge blow to Shabab, especially if Godane's inner
circle was wiped out in the strike,'' said Rudolph Atallah, a former director of
African counterterrorism policy for the Pentagon. ''We've been after Godane for
a long time. Having him out of the picture,'' he said, would give Somalia
''breathing room to make positive strides on all fronts.''

The caution Pentagon officials were exercising on Tuesday about whether Mr.
Godane had been killed underscored the social media war that the United States
has waged with media-savvy terror networks. ''The last thing anyone here wants
is to declare victory and then have this guy pop on Twitter bragging that he's
alive,'' one administration official said.

The United States has tried a number of ways to rein in the militant Islamist
movement in Somalia. In 2006, when radical Islamist militants began taking over
local courts in Somalia, the Central Intelligence Agency teamed up with a
coterie of notorious Somali warlords, bringing them bags of money. But the
effort quickly backfired, and the Islamists ran the warlords out of the capital.

Then the United States helped Ethiopia invade Somalia by providing classified
intelligence and even coordinating airstrikes, with the hope that the Ethiopians
could crush the Islamists. Instead, the Shabab flourished, becoming a lionized
guerrilla army.

Since then, the United States has increasingly deputized the battle, turning to
several African partners, as the Pentagon calls them, and bankrolling a large
and expensive African Union peacekeeping mission that has dislodged the Shabab
from Mogadishu and many of their strongholds. The United States has also helped
pay for several former mercenaries to work as military advisers to the African
troops.

At the same time, the United States has taken an opportunistic counterterrorism
approach, inserting few ground troops into Somalia but occasionally striking at
specific Shabab leaders or terrorist suspects. Several have been killed,
including Aden Ayro, Sheikh Muhyadin Omar and Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan.

According to a recent book on the Shabab written by Stig Jarle Hansen, a
professor in Norway, Mr. Godane was once a star pupil, winning scholarships to
study economics outside Somalia, though soon enough he abandoned the classroom,
traveling to Afghanistan and then falling into jihadist circles. In the early
2000s, he returned to Somalia, where, according to the local authorities, he
helped plan the murder of several aid workers.

If Mr. Godane is dead, it could affect the split inside the Shabab between the
Somali nationalist wing, which has more local ambitions, and the more die-hard
jihadists who want to spread terror through the region and the world.

''If Godane's gone, maybe the Shabab will take a nap for a couple months,'' said
one former Somali security official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
''But they've recruited so many young people. Maybe Al Qaeda has a plan for who
will be next.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/world/africa/us-airstrike-in-somalia-targets-s
habab-leader.html

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   A Shabab fighter near Mogadishu in 2012. It was unclear
whether the group's leader had died. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


