                             155 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Purchase of Drone Maker, Google Sees a Fleet of Satellites

BYLINE: By NICK BILTON

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; BITS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 406 words


Google is reaching for the sky.

On Monday, the company said that it had purchased Titan Aerospace, a maker of
high-altitude drone satellites, which Google says will be used to take photos of
the earth and to connect people to the Internet.

''Titan Aerospace and Google share a profound optimism about the potential for
technology to improve the world,'' a Google spokesman said in a statement.
Atmospheric satellites ''could help bring Internet access to millions of people,
and help solve other problems, including disaster relief and environmental
damage like deforestation.''

The news was first reported by The Wall Street Journal. Terms of the deal were
not disclosed.

While Google's goals may sound lofty, Google may share them with a competitor:
Facebook, which recently bought Ascenta, a British company that makes a similar
type of drone. Earlier reports said that Facebook was in talks to buy Titan
Aerospace.

The Titan Aerospace drones are notable because they are solar-powered and can
fly for several years, according to the company's website.

Drones that can remain aloft for long periods of time could be used to
constantly update images of the earth, which Google could put to use in its Maps
platform.

Both Google and Facebook are also competing to deliver Internet access to people
who live in places that are too difficult to reach with wires and other
traditional means of accessing the Internet. While satellites can deliver
Internet access to sparsely populated areas, the cost of using satellite data
connections can be very high. Drones, in comparison, will be able to reach those
customers at a much lower cost.

The Titan Aerospace drones are unique because they are solar-powered and can fly
for several years, according to the company's website.

Drones that can fly for long periods of time without having to land could be
used to offer constant updates of images of the earth, allowing a company like
Google to update the photos in its maps platform.

Both Google and Facebook are also competing to try and connect more people to
the Internet that live in places that are too difficult to reach with
traditional wires and traditional Internet solutions. While satellites can
deliver the Internet to sparsely populated areas, the cost can be very high to
use data connections. Drones, in comparison, will be able to do it at a much
lower cost.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/04/14/google-buys-high-altitude-drone
-maker/

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A rendering of a Titan Aerospace Solara 50 drone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
TITAN AEROSPACE)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


