                             1502 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 7, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Explosion Around Military Site Jolts Tehran, and 2 Are Missing

BYLINE: By THOMAS ERDBRINK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 396 words


TEHRAN -- A mysterious explosion at or near an important military complex rocked
the Iranian capital on Sunday, lighting up the skies over the city.

Iranian official sources denied the explosion had taken place at the complex,
the expansive Parchin military site east of the city, where international
monitors suspect Iran once tested triggers for potential nuclear weapons. But
the enormous orange flash that illuminated Tehran around 11:15 p.m. local time
clearly came from that direction, several witnesses said.

Officials at Iran's Defense Industries Organization, though also denying that
the explosion took place at Parchin, confirmed that two people were missing
after ''an ordinary fire'' caused by ''chemical reactions of flammable
material'' at an unspecified production unit, according to the semiofficial
Iranian Students' News Agency. There was no word on the location of the fire.

Witnesses in the east of Tehran said that windows had been shattered in the
vicinity of the military complex and that all trees in a hundred-yard radius of
two villages, Changi and Hammamak, had been burned. The villages are on the
outskirts of the military site.

Inspectors with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the monitoring arm of
the United Nations, were given access to Parchin in 2005, but they have since
been refused follow-up inspections. The agency is still seeking access to the
site, where it suspects Iran of having conducted high-explosive experiments
related to nuclear weapon research. Iran has denied this and says the site is
part of its regular military program and is therefore off limits to inspections.

Built during the reign of Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, the site -- partly buried
in the Barjamali hills -- was traditionally used as a munitions storage facility
but is now also used for the production of missile engines and drones.

From roughly 2010 until 2012, Iran was plagued by a series of mysterious
explosions and occurrences involving critical gas pipeline infrastructure and
military sites. In 2011 a huge explosion west of Tehran killed 17 people,
including the head of the Revolutionary Guards' missile program.

While officials say most of the disasters have been accidents, representatives
of President Hassan Rouhani's government have in the past accused Western powers
and Israel of a campaign to sabotage Iran's nuclear and missile programs.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/07/world/middleeast/two-in-tehran-are-missing-aft
er-explosion-near-military-complex.html

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


