                             1528 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 26, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dark Visions

BYLINE: By N. K. JEMISIN.

N. K. Jemisin is the author of the Inheritance trilogy and, most recently, ''The
Shadowed Sun.'' Her new novel, ''The Fifth Season,'' will be published next
year.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY;
Pg. 18

LENGTH: 2402 words


There's a moment early in Robert Jackson Bennett's CITY OF STAIRS (Broadway,
paper, $15) when one of its lead characters loses an otherwise mundane suspect
during a chase through the streets of a city. The suspect runs along a chasm --
yes, in the middle of a dense neighborhood -- then leaps off a rooftop. Although
his pursuer searches for the body, it gradually becomes clear the man has
vanished not through trickery but through divine intervention.

Until this point, Bennett's novel is an interesting but not especially riveting
exploration of fallen empire and political intrigue. The city of Bulikov was
once the seat of a superpower spanning the Continent, which went on to conquer
the rest of the world. Bulikov's weapon was its Divinities: literal, incarnate
gods who wielded phenomenal power on the Continent's behalf. When Bulikov's
Divinities were killed, however, the oppressed rose against their oppressors,
and now Bulikov has become a resentful colony to one of its former vassal
states, Saypur. The people of the Continent suffered much in this reversal --
and so, generations later, when the Saypuri master spy Shara Thivani arrives in
the city to investigate a murder, she finds a hotbed of colonial politics and
historico-religious echoes, all set against a memorably surreal urbanscape.

That urbanscape is the best part of this essentially set-piece novel, and it's
what makes the whole thing worth reading. The book is labeled epic fantasy, but
there's no hint of staid European medievalism in its pages, and its root
cultures are (refreshingly) secondary-world variants of czarist Russia and
Mughal India. Bulikov is an ancient city trying to reinvent itself amid the
ruins of its past, and it is very much a character in its own right. The city
teems with leftover magic, warped and decaying from its heyday: walls that
aren't quite real, endless twisting stairways to nowhere, shifting monuments to
forgotten heroes. Bulikov is old, and it is mad, in multiple senses of the word.
Despite its current squalor, it remembers the glory days, and wants that glory
again -- but old glory recreated, or new, modern glory? All of the novel's
characters seek to answer this question in their own ways.

The espionage and police-procedural components are the story's least
interesting, which is frustrating because they make up its bulk. Thivani is
another weak point. Her back story is enlivened by her lifelong friendship and
rivalry with Vohannes Votrov, a dissolute Continental aristocrat, and by her
more enigmatic relationship with Sigrud, the Viking-like barbarian who works,
and kills, for her -- but while these side characters make her more interesting
by their reflected quirkiness, Thivani herself never quite leaps off the page.
She is instead a cipher, evading the reader's eyes and wits as she delves into
the city's deeply strange secrets.

Those secrets are more than interesting enough to carry the tale all by
themselves, however, so readers seeking a truly refreshing fantasy milieu should
travel to Bulikov, and welcome its conquest.

It's puzzling, at first, that Peyton Marshall's GOODHOUSE (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $26), set in a dystopian America, isn't being marketed as a young adult
novel. After all, it focuses on the travails of a teenage boy trying to find his
place in society, and it contains any number of metaphors for a young person's
struggle against oppressive parental authority. The author's pedigree partly
explains the book's classification as mainstream fiction: A graduate of the Iowa
Writers' Workshop, Marshall has an impressive list of mainstream short story
credits. Yet the average reader isn't likely to care about her education, and
the book is stock Hollywood bait. Why not position it where it can gain the
largest possible audience and maybe a movie deal?

It's soon evident that ''Goodhouse'' is perhaps too stock; there's nothing
particularly new here. In the late 21st century, America attempts to solve its
crime problem proactively by claiming all boys bearing certain genetic markers
as wards of the state, to be raised in benevolent ''Goodhouse'' facilities. In
reality -- à la ''The Maze Runner,'' à la ''Incarceron'' -- the boys are de
facto prisoners and guinea pigs. James, the protagonist, is a generic teenage
boy whose only distinction lies in his having been raised in a better Goodhouse;
the system has tried to make him tabula rasa and for the most part succeeded.
There's a bit of daring in Marshall's choice to set her dystopia in what's
essentially a Christian theocracy -- unusual for Y.A. novels these days, if
common in adult fiction like ''The Handmaid's Tale'' -- but that's it for
breaking the mold. Marshall's theocracy is rampant with unethical medical
experimentation and questionable genetics-based social engineering, in the
manner of Scott Westerfeld's ''Uglies,'' Lois Lowry's ''The Giver'' and Veronica
Roth's ''Divergent.'' The degree of violent action rivals ''The Hunger Games.''

For anyone raised on a steady diet of dystopian Y.A. fiction, in other words,
there's nothing fresh here. Yet the novel has one saving grace: It's
magnificently written. Marshall evocatively captures James's confusion as he
tries to reconcile his institutionalized worldview with the contradictions and
grotesqueries of normal society. When he's drugged and thrown into a ''Lord of
the Flies"-style hellhole, Marshall depicts James's dissociation and flashbacks
to an earlier trauma in a powerful, blurring stream of consciousness:

''And the violins were sawing away and we were all sweating in the little church
and then we were on fire, choking, clawing at each other. And there was that
breath on the back of my neck: The white-haired man had found me and was going
to open the back of my head. He was checking his gun. What was taking him so
long?''

Sadly, the beauty of the writing isn't quite enough to redeem a clunky plot.
James meets a manic pixie dream girl who's possibly more of a sociopath than he
is; he faces enemies inside and outside the Goodhouse who are virtually
mustache-twirling caricatures; and no one seems to question the extremely
questionable science that justifies the Goodhouse boys' imprisonment. (Girls,
apparently, can't be genetically predisposed to criminality, so they aren't
tested. The book is full of implausible whoppers like this.) It's probably for
the best, then, that the book is aimed at an audience that might find more value
in its style than its substance.

Octavia Leander, the heroine of Beth Cato's THE CLOCKWORK DAGGER (Harper
Voyager/­HarperCollins, paper, $14.99), is a medician -- one of a rare cadre of
healers who use herbalism, religious faith and a spot of blood sacrifice to
enact miraculous cures of everything from illness to trauma. In the war-torn
land of Caskentia, a gift like this is extremely valuable, so it's no surprise
that Octavia rapidly becomes the focus of a complex and malevolent plot. Since
this is the first book of a projected series, odds are readers will have to wait
to see the full extent of the conspiracy, but the story here is complete in
itself.

Octavia's character growth is the hook for this secondary-world Victorian
fantasy (only lightly flavored with steampunk, despite the ''clockwork'' in the
title). Initially she's many kinds of cliché: intrepid, dangerously naïve for a
woman who's grown up with war and privation, more devoted to her faith than
others of her order and more powerful because of it. Her competence is the first
clue that she's anything more than an ingénue in distress, but over the course
of the novel, as her tragic back story is revealed and she faces stunning
betrayals, she leaves the clichés behind. Unfortunately Alonzo -- her love
interest, and the Clockwork Dagger of the title -- is less frame-breaking.
Apparently the only man of color named or noted in Caskentia, he bears an
unavoidable whiff of tokenism and fetishization. Though he turns out to be an
intriguing character in his own right, it's tough to get past his role as the
exotic interracial romance object -- a device that has become frustratingly
commonplace in this kind of neo-Victorian tale.

More refreshing is the world Cato weaves. Caskentia is at war with a land called
the Waste, in a conflict that has lasted so long and with such atrocities on
both sides that there's no clear ''good guy,'' and no visible path to peace.
There are more systems of magic at work here than just the medician's art, and
many of those arts have been turned to nefarious purposes, as with any weapon in
war. Octavia's horrified realization that she is such a weapon, at least in the
eyes of those who would wield her, forms the emotional core of the book.

There's a lot of fascinating world-building here and, despite the problems, a
delightful ­espionage-inflected adventure.

All the usual accouterments of a William Gibson novel are visible in his
posthuman high-­concept time-travel caper, THE PERIPHERAL (Putnam, $28.95),
except for the fact that it's a time-travel caper. Not that this is immediately
apparent, as Gibson lavishes space on describing the book's world before delving
into the plot or lingering on the key players. Granted, that world is a glory to
behold, mixing the baroquely unfamiliar with the mundane made absurd: murderous
plastics-recycling mutants with a twisted aesthetic; a futuristic version of the
Westboro Baptist Church; ''Michikoids,'' cute anime-inspired fembots that sprout
additional eyes and limbs to commit assassinations, then go back to cleaning
house; and more -- all the conceptual razzle-dazzle that Gibson fans have come
to expect.

The difficulty this poses for newcomers, who might wish for a little less gosh
wow and a little more get on with the story, is academic. The story starts in
medias res; readers must adapt on their own or fall by the wayside. Gibson's
prose is as powerful as ever, packing a shovelful of world-building into each
sentence, and eventually -- like, 20-something chapters in eventually -- the
reader will be rewarded with an engaging narrative. The story, when it arrives,
concerns a young woman named Flynne, who lives somewhere in the American South,
sometime in the foreseeable future. Life is pretty much the same for the rural
poor in this future as it is now, and the only real economy in Flynne's small
town is centered on the drug trade. Flynne scrapes out a living by hunting down
bugs in virtual software, so she's happy to get another possible gig from her
brother, a former Marine with a lingering disability from his time in haptic
recon (think drone surveillance, futurized). The job is supposed to be simple;
in true caper fashion, it isn't. Soon Flynne finds herself embroiled in an
utterly bizarre plot involving a future timeline and the peripherals of the
title, which are exactly what they sound like: tools meant to facilitate
human-computer interaction. These just happen to be human-based (but drastically
modified) biomechanoids that can be interfaced with and run remotely.

Flynne isn't an engaging enough protagonist to keep readers' attention, but the
world she discovers and the events swirling around her are more than enough to
make up for this. Gibson fans will be absolutely thrilled. Other readers might
wish to visit some of his earlier works instead of onboarding with this one.

''Ancillary Justice,'' the first novel in Ann Leckie's far-future posthuman
space opera series, recently became the first novel to win the ''triple crown''
of the genre (the Hugo, Nebula and Arthur C. Clarke awards), but not without
controversy. The central question is whether the story's structural gimmick --
the protagonist's tendency to refer to all people as ''she'' regardless of
actual gender or even humanity -- is sufficiently mind-blowing as to merit all
the accolades. It isn't a gimmick, though; it's a coup. Rather than seriously
entertain the endless, if stupid, debate on whether women have a place in
stories of the future, Leckie's book does the literary equivalent of rolling its
eyes and walking out of the room. Her refusal to waste energy on stupidity
forces her audience to do the same: A few pages into the first novel, the reader
gives up trying to guess each character's actual gender, and just accepts that
this will be a story full of interesting women doing awesome things.

The second book of the series, ANCILLARY SWORD (Orbit, paper, $16), continues
this assumption-altering tradition. Breq, the vengeful artificial intelligence
who spent the first novel hunting down her maker, Lord of the Radch Anaander
Mianaai, has now become Breq Mianaai, after forging an alliance with part of her
old enemy to help fight the other parts. To that end, Anaander gives her a ship
and crew of her own, and sends her to the Athoek system, one of many worlds
''civilized'' by the Radchaai at the point of a gun. Breq immediately realizes
something is wrong in the system, though all looks well on the surface. She must
gain a greater understanding of the Athoeki in order to root out the
revolutionaries, spies and alien vanguards among them -- which is difficult, as
the quintessentially inhuman Breq has trouble understanding even the most basic
aspects of how human beings think and function.

This is the most powerful element of the story. Where the first novel explored
the consequences of a human transcending individuality (namely Anaander Mianaai,
whose thousands of minds have split and brought the Radchaai to civil war), here
we see the consequences of a many-minded entity being reduced to simple
humanity. Throughout the novel, even as she struggles to unify her crew and the
Athoeki, Breq shows the strain of her tremendous loss. In the process, Leckie
thumbs her nose again at science fiction tradition, which abounds with disabled
people being made whole by technology, and with nonhumans inexplicably yearning
for humanity. The technology of the Radchaai is miraculous, but it cannot repair
identity. And why would any entity with a truly nonhuman identity ever crave
humanity? Where Leckie poked holes in sexist thought in the last book, here she
attacks the self-absorption of science fiction itself. After all, is the genre
truly meant to explore new ways of thinking? Or should it just endlessly stroke
the egos of its assumed audience? Leckie once again makes it delightfully clear
that one of these questions is just too stupid to be worth her time.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/books/review/robert-jackson-bennetts-city-of-s
tairs-and-more.html

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (BR19) DRAWING (DRAWING BY FRANCESCO FRANCAVILLA)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


