                             1578 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 6, 2014 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

Conservation lessons

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 317 words


In their Feb. 2 op-ed, "Breaking the link between elephants and terrorists,"
Johan Bergenas and Monica Medina argued that militarizing the effort to protect
elephants would help the fight against poaching. Conservation groups, which have
had to work hard to win the trust of governments and local communities, would do
well to be wary.

Poaching, like the drug trade and human trafficking, is best combated by law
enforcement, asset tracking, demand reduction and public education - not by
drones, weaponization of the elephants' habitat or a vague new front in the war
on terror.

Ken Conca, Ellicott City

l

I was with Natalie Jacewicz through most of her Feb. 2 Local Opinions commentary
["Bao Bao may be the big ticket, but what about the salamander next door?"], but
then she made a hasty detour from the larger questions facing zoos today.

How do zoos define conservation? Currently, it seems they have a narrow
definition: preserving species. Presenting examples of species in exhibits that
seek to mimic native ecosystems is a nice idea, but how will zoos motivate
people to actually do something to save those animals where they should be
living - in the wild?

Zoos tells us they are creating an "insurance population" of certain animals
(elephants, for one) in case they go extinct in the wild. But conservation
happens where animals live. It means preserving ecosystems and all their
inhabitants. It involves politics, economics, environmental concerns, the growth
of human population. It's a daunting challenge, and it needs all the champions
it can get.

Zoos tell us they are doing what they can, but the actual amount they spend on
conservation is a drop in the bucket compared with their marketing budgets. If
zoos truly want to save animals, they must join the battle where it is actually
happening - in Africa and Asia.

Until then, the only thing zoos are saving is themselves.

Amy Mayers, Washington

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


