                             1545 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 3, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

Family Filmgoer reviews '47 Ronin,' 'Grudge Match' and more

BYLINE: Jane Horwitz

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T25

LENGTH: 868 words

10 and older

and older

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (PG). Kids 10 and older, especially if they can
enjoy quieter films, will find great pleasure in Ben Stiller's gentle update of
James Thurber's classic story. Stiller's Walter Mitty is a 40-something drone in
Life Magazine's New York office. His co-workers chuckle at his tendency to zone
out. He adores a new employee but can't summon the nerve to ask her out.
Instead, he imagines himself as an action hero, rescuing her and sweeping her
off her feet. Word comes down that Life is downsizing, and it is Walter's job to
provide the negative for the final print cover, sent in and specified by
photographer Sean O'Connell. But Walter can't find the negative. Desperate, he
decides to go after the notoriously elusive O'Connell.

THE BOTTOM LINE: Walter goes up with an intoxicated helicopter pilot and outruns
a potential volcanic eruption. The script includes mildly crude expressions and
very mild sexual innuendo.

PG-13

13

Grudge Match. The language is too crude and profane for middle-schoolers, but
why would they want to see a movie about a pair of washed-up 60-something boxers
anyway? Sylvester Stallone plays ex-fighter Henry "Razor" Sharp, about to be
laid off from his job in a steel mill. He left the ring 30 years earlier in the
wake of a feud with his boxing nemesis, Billy "The Kid" McDonnen (Robert De
Niro). A sports promoter gets the idea of reuniting the two in a geriatric
grudge match. An encounter between them turns into fisticuffs and goes viral.
Suddenly, the idea looks like a hit.

THE BOTTOM LINE: The script includes a nearly constant barrage of crude
language, midrange profanity and toilet humor, pushing the PG-13 limit. The
S-word gets a good workout and there is plenty of semi-crude sexual slang. The
film includes an implied, nongraphic sexual situation. One character drinks a
lot.

47 Ronin. Very violent, yet showing little gore, this elegant samurai saga based
on a Japanese legend will please many high-schoolers who like old-style martial
arts films. Middle-schoolers with strong stomachs for implied screen violence
may like it, too, but perhaps not in 3-D. Kai, a gifted fighter living in a
mythical version of 19th-century Japan, cannot be a samurai because of his
outcast status. He is in love with Mika, daughter of Lord Asano, but the two
cannot be together. When the Shogun visits their district, he's accompanied by
power-hungry Lord Kira. A shape-shifting witch in league with Kira causes an
incident that offends the Shogun, who is led to believe that Asano, his host, is
responsible. The Shogun requires Asano to commit suicide as punishment and dubs
the lord's samurai outcasts, or ronin. Asano's loyal second-in-command, Lord
Oishi, vows secretly that he and the other ronin will avenge their lord's unfair
death. Oishi asks Kai to join the ronin to exact an ingeniously staged revenge.

THE BOTTOM LINE: We see samurai warriors run through with swords. Others, in
addition to Lord Asano, are condemned to commit ritual suicide using daggers.
Little of the suicide scenes actually appear on camera, but they are strongly
implied. There are also two implied beheadings. Kai fights a bull-like monster
and a dragon.

The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug. The middle installment of Peter Jackson's
three-film adaptation of J.R.R. Tolkien's "The Hobbit" is too violent for many
preteens. The gentle hobbit Bilbo Baggins continues his journey with the wizard
Gandalf and the dwarfs, led by Thorin Oakenshield, to reclaim the dwarfs'
kingdom of Erebor from the fearsome dragon Smaug. Attacked by monstrous orcs and
their flying wolflike creatures, the odd band of brothers gets help from a
bad-tempered "skin-changer" who morphs from bear to giant man and back; are
nearly killed by enormous spiders; and are rescued and then imprisoned by
warrior elves. Inside the mountain, Bilbo must sneak past the sleeping Smaug and
retrieve the treasured Arkenstone for Thorin.

The bottom line: In battle scenes, several orcs are beheaded by dwarfs and
elves. Other characters are shot with arrows, mostly bloodlessly. Smaug breathes
fire and can fly, catching some characters on his jaws. There is brief implied
nudity and a mild instance of comic sexual innuendo.

R

Her. Filmmaker Spike Jonze has created a memorable fable about a future in which
emotions and technology merge, but it is too sexually explicit and profane to
recommend for anyone younger than 17. Theodore lives in Los Angeles in the
"slight future." Lonely and sad because he's going through a divorce, he works
as a letter-writer for people who can't express their feelings in words.
Theodore decides to buy a much-hyped new operating system for all of his
devices. The OS can talk, and he chooses a female voice. "Samantha" logs on as a
witty, fun, brainy personality, and Theodore falls in love with her.

The bottom line: The film includes a couple of very steamy, and at times even
explicit, phone and/or virtual sexual situations, as well as a couple that are
live and in-person. The script features occasional very strong profanity and
graphic sexual discussions.

goingoutguide@washpost.com

Horwitz is a freelance writer. Read her previous reviews at On Parenting.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


