                             1544 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 31, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 353 words


Drone test sites picked Teams from states, including Virginia, will examine
aspects of integrating the aircraft into U.S. airspace. A3

Fears in South Sudan Anti-government forces prepared to attack a key town,
officials said. (Also, a briefing on the crisis.) A6

THE REGION

Maryland legislatorswill consider a bill that would reduce the time - from years
to days - that debt collectors have to take homeowners to court for leftover
debt on foreclosed homes. B1

Three of four casinosin Maryland can sell alcohol around the clock, unlike bars
elsewhere in the state. Some taverns say that's an unfair advantage. B1

Prince George's policetracked down and arrested a 22-year-old District Heights
man in connection with a weekend slaying, using a description the victim
provided before he died at a hospital. B2

A Montgomery police officergave CPR to a9-day-old baby who had stopped
breathing. B2

Arlington architects,reluctant to demolish a 1926 Sears kit house, are giving it
away - but only if the taker moves it. B1

Maryland's new quotason rockfish, set to take effect Wednesday, have prompted
controversy. B4

THE WORLD

Egypt's government detained four journalists working for the Qatar-based Al
Jazeera English news channel, accusing them of links to the banned Muslim
Brotherhood. A7

Israel freed more Palestinian prisoners as part of an effort to restart peace
talks, but the move upset victims' families and other Israelis. A7

Iranian conservativesspoke out against engagement with the West. A7

THE NATION

Jan. 1 outstrips every other heavy-drinking holiday for the percentage of
fatalities - 54 percent - blamed on drunken driving. B1

The teen who fatally shot a fellow student at a Colorado high school this month
entered through a door that was supposed to be locked but had been propped open,
a sheriff said. A3

THE ECONOMY

Facebook's strongest growthin the past year came from seniors, a survey found.
A2

Daimler's electric carsare coming with a synthetic vroom to thwart the risks of
silence. A10

Wells Fargo will pay a net $541 million to Fannie Mae to settle claims over
defective home loans issued before the financial crisis. A10

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


