                             1594 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              March 7, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

A front-row seat to history

BYLINE: Michael O'Sullivan

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T42

LENGTH: 513 words


Yehuda Avner - a speechwriter, diplomat and political adviser under Israeli
prime ministers Levi Eshkol, Golda Meir, Yitzhak Rabin, Menachem Begin and
Shimon Peres - had such a front-row seat to history that he had to write a book
about it. Titled "The Prime Ministers," his 2010 memoir has now been made into
two films, the first of which, subtitled "The Pioneers," began hitting theaters
this year.

It deals mainly with Eshkol's and Meir's years in office and Rabin's service as
U.S. ambassador. The second installment, subtitled "Soldiers and Peacemakers,"
is expected to be released later this year.

Listening to Avner narrate "Pioneers," it's easy to imagine why anyone would
think the book would make a natural movie. Avner is a gifted, if slightly
florid, raconteur, and "The Pioneers" is framed by his silver-tongued
reminiscences. One can imagine sitting in a room with him for hours - maybe even
days, as in the case of the filmmakers - and being regaled with dramatic stories
of the Six Day War and the Yom Kippur War and listening to him name-check
President Lyndon B. Johnson, Israeli politician Abba Eban, Austrian Chancellor
Bruno Kreisky and a host of other significant 20th-century figures.

The historical narrative of "The Prime Ministers: The Pioneers" may be an
intimate and  personal one, but it offers many insights into the religious and
geopolitical causes of today's continuing Arab-Israeli conflict. It's a gift to
be able to pick the brain of someone who remembers so far back.

Now in his 80s, Avner still seems sharp as he quotes dialogue that happened
decades ago and rarely qualifies them with "to the best of my recollection."
This is, perhaps, less surprising when you consider that he was originally
brought into government as a translator and note-taker for the powerful.

But what makes a good yarn and possibly an important book does not necessarily
make for a consistently great or engaging movie.

"The Prime Ministers: The Pioneers" is hampered by a static structure that
relies too heavily on a single voice, even one as interesting as Avner's.

Alternating between shots of him talking and archival film footage and
photographic stills, the film manages only occasionally to break the monotony by
dramatic - if slightly goofy - readings by famous actors. Leonard Nimoy plays
Eshkol; Sandra Bullock, Meir. Michael Douglas and Christoph Waltz chime in as
Rabin and Begin, but their contributions come across as a bit stiff and do
little to alleviate the tonal drone that bogs down what is otherwise a
fascinating examination of Israel's roots.

The Jerusalem Post has called Avner's book "the ultimate insider's account," and
that certainly fits with the movie, too. The characterization, unfortunately, is
a double-edged sword. "The Prime Ministers: The Pioneers" is filled with tasty
nuggets of personal and political history that few others were privy to. But
they're presented in such a bland stew that they eventually grow tedious.

michael.osullivan@washpost.com

Unrated. At the AMC Hoffman Center. Contains nothing objectionable. 115 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


