                             1510 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 13, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kurdish Rebels Assail Turkish Inaction on ISIS as Peril to Peace Talks

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE and TIM ARANGO; Kirk Semple reported from Endza, and Tim
Arango from Istanbul. Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Caykara, Turkey,
Ceylan Yeginsu from London, and Kamil Kakol from Sulaimaniya, Iraq.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1443 words


ENDZA, Iraq -- As jihadist fighters of the Islamic State lay siege to the
Kurdish town of Kobani in Syria, the implications of the battle have resonated
deeply among residents in this part of the Qandil Mountains in northeastern
Iraq, hundreds of miles and a country away.

In this region, beneath craggy peaks near the Iranian border, is the
headquarters of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or P.K.K., which has been fighting
a guerrilla war against the Turkish state for three decades, a fight that has
claimed more than 30,000 lives. Members of the group, along with fighters from
an offshoot rebel army in Syria, have been at the heart of the Kurdish
resistance in Kobani.

P.K.K. commanders say their halting, nine-year-old peace process with the
Turkish government and, indeed, the future of the region, will turn on the
battle for Kobani and on Turkey's response. If Turkey does not help the
embattled Kurdish forces in Kobani, the commanders say, they will break off
peace talks and resume their guerrilla war within Turkey, plunging yet another
country in the region into armed conflict.

''Negotiations cannot go on in an environment where they want to create a
massacre in Kobani,'' Cemil Bayik, a founder and leader of the P.K.K., said in a
recent interview in a secret location in this area of the Qandil range. ''We
cannot bargain for settlement on the blood of Kobani.''

''We will mobilize the guerrillas,'' he vowed.

Despite increased pressure from the United States and pleas from outgunned
Kurdish fighters in Kobani, Turkey has refused to deploy its military against
the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, or to open the border to allow
reinforcements, weapons and supplies to reach the town.

In a shift, though, Turkey will allow American and coalition troops to use its
bases, including a key installation within 100 miles of the Syrian border, for
operations against the Islamic State, Defense Department officials said Sunday.
On Sunday, Kurdish officials said their fighters in Kobani had been able to fend
off a two-day assault by Islamic State fighters on the center of town. Coalition
airstrikes had destroyed a convoy on its way to support the jihadist fighters,
according to Idris Nassan, a spokesman for the Kobani resistance, who said the
Kurds had been able to ''manage'' the latest assault. But without more extensive
airstrikes and supplies of weapons and ammunition, he added, ''Maybe tomorrow
the situation will change again.''

Turkey's reluctance stems in part from its desire not to do anything that might
strengthen the Kurdish populist movement in the region. The defense of Kobani is
being led by the People's Protection Units, or Y.P.G., an affiliate of the
P.K.K., which is officially listed as a terrorist organization by the United
States and the European Union. In addition, Syrian Kurds have been trying to
establish an autonomous region on the border, which Turkey wants to prevent.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey has insisted that fighting the
government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria should take precedence over
fighting the Islamic State. And he holds the P.K.K. in such contempt that he
recently equated the rebel group with the Islamic State.

''The P.K.K. and ISIS are the same for Turkey,'' he told reporters. ''It is
wrong to view them differently. We need to deal with them jointly.''

According to analysts, Mr. Erdogan is calculating that if the Islamic State
fighters overrun Kobani, the Kurdish defeat will not scuttle Turkey's peace
process with the P.K.K. But to the commanders of the P.K.K., Turkey's refusal to
act amounts to complicity with the Islamic State.

Turkey, Mr. Bayik said, ''wants to use ISIL in order to inflict some blows on
the Kurdish movement and to prevent the Kurdish people in Syrian Kurdistan to
gain their rights.'' He sat at a plastic table in an olive-drab tent beneath the
boughs of a towering walnut tree that provided cover from surveillance drones as
well as the sun.

''Turkey wants to victimize the Kurds,'' he said. P.K.K. officials requested
that the precise location of the interview not be revealed.

Turkey's posture has spurred violent protests that have left more than 30 people
dead across the country.

''The peace process is over,'' a Kurdish protester said during a demonstration
in Istanbul last week. He refused to give his name out of fear of being
persecuted by the authorities. Standing near burning barricades and tires, and
engulfed in clouds of tear gas, he said, ''There can be no peace while ignoring
Kobani.''

Mr. Erdogan's strategy also carries considerable risks both to his domestic
political standing and his legacy.

He owes his rise to power in part to the support of Kurds, which he has
cultivated by taking a more conciliatory approach to Kurdish nationalism,
developing closer ties with Iraq's Kurdistan regional government and helping to
secure more rights for Kurds, including laws that allowed the use of the Kurdish
language in schools and the media and the use of Kurdish names for certain
towns.

''It seemed they were making historic progress,'' said Francis J. Ricciardone
Jr., who until recently was the United States ambassador to Turkey and is now
the director of the Atlantic Council's Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East.
The progress in Kurdish cultural and language rights, he said, ''were things I
never expected to see in my lifetime.''

Mr. Erdogan, who was prime minister from 2003 to 2014 and became president in
August, is now seeking to alter the Constitution to gain more executive powers,
an effort that analysts say will require the support of Kurdish parties.

Yet his position on Kobani is quickly costing him Kurdish backing, analysts say,
while also helping to unify the Kurdish population around the world.

''Kobani became one battle for everybody,'' said Hiwa Osman, a Kurdish political
analyst who was an adviser to Jalal Talabani, the former Iraqi president. ''This
is a matter between good versus evil. For Turkey to be on the other side, by
omission, positions all the Kurds in one camp. And this camp will not be
friendly to Turkey.''

On Sunday, leaders of the two main political parties in Iraq's semiautonomous
Kurdistan region said at a news conference that they had sent weapons and
humanitarian aid to Kobani.

They did not say when the shipments were sent or whether they had arrived
safely, but officials in Kobani said they never received weapons or ammunition
from the Kurdistan authorities.

In late September, however, a convoy of at least 15 trucks with posters
indicating that they had come from Kurdistan crossed the border from Suruc,
Turkey, into Kobani. Kurdish activists from Kobani said at the time that the
trucks contained aid for refugees in Turkey and Syria.

While Mr. Erdogan's standing has plunged among Kurds, the Kurdish fighters'
reputation has soared. In the Kurdistan region, the P.K.K. has enjoyed
remarkably broad public support in recent months in light of its battlefield
successes against the Islamic State militants.

In the initial months of the Islamic State assault on northern Iraq, the
P.K.K.'s performance stood in contrast to that of the Iraqi military, which
wilted in the face of the Islamic State sweep, and of the pesh merga, Iraqi
Kurdistan's army, which suffered demoralizing setbacks before regaining its
footing with the support of American airstrikes.

P.K.K. units are widely credited with engineering the rescue of thousands of
Yazidis who were trapped on Mount Sinjar and facing annihilation. P.K.K.
fighters established an evacuation corridor from the summit of the mountain,
where the Yazidis had languished for days. The P.K.K. also rushed to the aid of
the pesh merga after Islamic State fighters threatened the Kurdish capital,
Erbil, by overrunning Makhmur, a nearby Kurdish town.

''Had we not intervened, there would've been a great massacre,'' Mr. Bayik said.
The Kurdish government, he said, ''would've lost face.''

Many Kurds have called on the United States and the European Union to reassess
their classification of the P.K.K. as a terrorist organization -- a rebuke of
Mr. Erdogan and Turkey.

''Officially they are on the terrorist list,'' Brig. Gen. Helgurd Hikmet Mela
Ali, a spokesman for the pesh merga, said in a recent interview. ''But if you
want my personal opinion, not official: It's clear now and it's very obvious who
the terrorists are. ISIS or P.K.K.?''

After the counterattack that recaptured Makhmur, Massoud Barzani, the president
of the Kurdistan regional government, whose political party has had a bitter
relationship with the P.K.K., rewarded its fighters with a visit.

''We have the same destiny,'' Mr. Barzani told the guerrillas.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/13/world/middleeast/kurdish-rebels-assail-turkish
-inaction-on-isis-as-peril-to-peace-talks.html

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Cemil Bayik, a founder of the  Kurdistan Workers' Party, or
P.K.K., which has been fighting  a guerrilla war against  Turkey for three
decades. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN DENTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)  MAP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


