                             1508 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 11, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Added to High School Pressure: the Expectations That Follow a Peace Laureate

BYLINE: By JODI KANTOR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 954 words


Though Malala Yousafzai is 17, she does not use Facebook or even a mobile phone
lest she lose focus on her studies. She spent her summer vacation flying to
Nigeria to campaign for the release of girls kidnapped by the extremist Islamist
group Boko Haram, but also worrying about her grades, which recently took a
worrisome dip. She confronted President Obama about American drone policy in a
meeting last year, but finds it difficult to befriend her fellow students in
Birmingham, England.

''I want to have fun, but I don't quite know how,'' she wrote in the edition of
her autobiography for young readers.

On Friday, Ms. Yousafzai became the youngest winner of the Nobel Peace Prize --
grouped in the same pantheon as the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mother
Teresa, and yet still a student at Edgbaston High School for Girls, where she
was summoned out of her chemistry class to hear the news.

Ms. Yousafzai began campaigning for girls' education at the age of 11, three
years before she was shot by the Taliban. She was so young that some observers
questioned how well equipped a child of that age could be to put her own safety
on the line and commit to a life of activism. The prize she received on Friday
validates what she has taken on, but also underscores the disproportionate
expectations that trail her: Can she truly influence the culture of her home
country of Pakistan, which she cannot even visit because of threats to her
safety, and where many revile her as a tool of the West? Ms. Yousafzai may be an
Anne Frank-like figure who defied terror, showed extraordinary courage and
inspires hope, but how much can one teenager accomplish?

''Can she actually create systemic change at this young age? Can she create a
movement? Because she doesn't have that kind of infrastructure in Pakistan at
the moment,'' said Vishakha Desai, a professor of international relations at
Columbia, said in a telephone interview.

In one half of Ms. Yousafzai's dual life, she is the center of an international
advocacy operation for girls' education that now involves a nonprofit
organization, two best-selling books, and activities that stretch from Pakistan
to Jordan to Kenya. She criticizes not just the Taliban, but also the culture of
Pakistan, in which women are rarely granted the same rights and opportunities as
men. She has become one of the world's most prominent faces of moderate Islam,
saying in a recent interview that she tried wearing a burqa when she was younger
but gave it up: ''I realized that it just took away my freedom, and that's why I
stopped wearing it.''

When she met with Mr. Obama last year, she critiqued American military action in
her home region. ''Instead of soldiers, send books. Instead of sending weapons,
send pens,'' as she later put it. (Asked how he responded, she gave a knowing
look. ''He's a politician,'' she said.)

In the other, lesser-known half of Ms. Yousafzai's life, she lives in a neat
brick house near the hospital in Birmingham where she convalesced after being
shot by the Taliban in 2012. She has largely recovered, but in her memoir and a
recent interview, she spoke of longing for home and straining to fit in to her
new environs. She spends hours on Skype each week with a childhood friend in
Pakistan, catching up on girls' education efforts in the Swat Valley but also
hometown gossip.

When she first moved to England, she found the clothing on other women so skimpy
that she wondered if there was a national fabric shortage. She wears a standard
British uniform to school each day -- green sweater, striped shirt, tights --
but adds a longer skirt and a headscarf for modesty. She still goes to therapy
sessions to regain the use of her facial muscles, she wrote in her book, and
tries not to dwell on the operations she may need in the future. She has grown
to love cupcakes, but does not hide the fact that she and her family find
England cold and isolating.

''We are just a few feet away from the next house, but for all we know of our
neighbor it might as well be a mile,'' she wrote of her new life.

''It's odd to be so well known but to be lonely at the same time,'' she added.

And yet in an interview last August, Ms. Yousafzai exuded an almost ascetic
sense of higher purpose, saying that she rarely watches television and deleted
the Candy Crush game from her iPad to forestall a growing addiction. She allows
herself to take selfies, she said, but only if they are employed for higher
purposes: ''We have to use it to highlight the issues that children all over the
world are facing, so to highlight the issues girls are facing in Afghanistan or
Pakistan or India,'' she said. As a child in Pakistan, she had access to only a
handful of books, she said, but one was a biography of Dr. King, giving her an
early sense of what one activist could accomplish.

Albert Schweitzer won the Nobel Peace Prize after a lifetime of medical and
humanitarian work, and Aung Sang Suu Kyi won it after decades of human rights
protest in Myanmar, but Ms. Yousafzai is so young that her future path still
seems unclear. She often says that she wants to become a leader in Pakistan like
another of her heroes, Benazir Bhutto, the first female prime minister of
Pakistan, assassinated in 2007. That aspiration gives chills to Ms. Yousafzai's
admirers, who worry about her continued safety.

Ever the education crusader, Ms. Yousafzai says she is focused on attending
university. She would like to study at Oxford, followed perhaps by graduate
school in the United States.

In a brief speech in Birmingham on Friday, she called the prize ''an
encouragement for me to go forward and believe in myself.''

She added one stipulation, though: ''It's not going to help me in my tests and
exams.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/11/world/asia/malala-yousafzai-youngest-nobel-pea
ce-prize-winner-adds-to-her-achievements-and-expectations.html

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Malala Yousafzai at the United Nations last year. At 17, Ms.
Yousafzai, is the youngest recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


