                             1517 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 18, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Snowden Film Tests Hollywood Obama Backers

BYLINE: By MICHAEL CIEPLY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1095 words


LOS ANGELES -- Early in Laura Poitras's documentary ''Citizenfour,'' Edward J.
Snowden, who exposed vast electronic surveillance by the United States
government, tells what pushed him to go public.

''As I saw the promise of the Obama administration betrayed, and walked away
from,'' says Mr. Snowden, referring to drone strikes and invasive monitoring by
the National Security Agency, ''it really hardened me to action.''

But do some of President Obama's staunch Hollywood supporters share his
sentiment?

Her provocative, and deeply admiring, look at Mr. Snowden -- which had its
premiere at the New York Film Festival on Oct. 10 -- arrived here this week amid
high hopes, intense curiosity and more than a few raised eyebrows over its sharp
critique of Mr. Obama, a president who has enjoyed strong support in the movie
world.

The intrigue is especially pitched because several of the companies behind
''Citizenfour'' -- which takes issue with Mr. Obama's expansion of Bush-era
surveillance, and his administration's attempt to prosecute Mr. Snowden for
espionage -- are led by some of the president's close political allies.

They include Harvey Weinstein, the Weinstein Company's co-chairman, as well as
Jeff Skoll, the founder of Participant Media, and Richard Plepler, the chief
executive of HBO, who all have been major contributors to Mr. Obama's political
campaigns.

''Citizenfour'' has already landed high on the handicappers' lists of prospects
for a documentary features Oscar. The film also promises to jolt the award
season with a dose of real-world politics, as happened in 2012, when Steven
Spielberg's ''Lincoln,'' Kathryn Bigelow's ''Zero Dark Thirty'' and Ben
Affleck's ''Argo,'' the year's best picture, converged on Washington, with
screenings, receptions and a Congressional uproar over the portrayal of torture
by Americans in Ms. Bigelow's film, which was about the hunting down of Osama
bin Laden.

The role that Mr. Weinstein, whose Radius-TWC unit is backing the film (and
distributed last year's Oscar-winning documentary ''Twenty Feet From Stardom''),
will play in promoting ''Citizenfour'' remains unclear. In the past, he has not
shied from using his association with Mr. Obama to promote issues-oriented
movies. These include the biopic ''Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom,'' which had a
much-publicized White House screening last year, and the documentary ''Bully,''
which was screened for Mr. Obama in 2012, just minutes after he announced his
support for a pair of anti-bullying bills.

Also in 2012, Mr. Weinstein arranged a high-profile Washington showing of his
''SEAL Team Six: The Raid on Osama bin Laden,'' raising complaints that its
flattering portrayal of Mr. Obama -- who was edited into the film before its
election-week premiere -- amounted to a campaign stunt.

On Tuesday, it was the Radius-TWC co-presidents, Jason Janego and Tom Quinn, and
not Mr. Weinstein, who played host as Ms. Poitras introduced ''Citizenfour'' to
film buffs and some potential Oscar voters at the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art.

''The film is certainly about the danger of N.S.A. surveillance, but it's also
really about courage,'' Ms. Poitras said. (The movie's title comes from Mr.
Snowden's self-designated code name when he began communicating with Ms.
Poitras.)

In a later phone interview, Mr. Quinn and Mr. Janego said they had exercised
considerable autonomy in acquiring rights to ''Citizenfour'' after Mr. Quinn
visited Ms. Poitras to discuss the unfinished film at her home in Berlin. Both
stressed that Mr. Weinstein and his brother, Bob, co-chairmen of the parent
company, were not a driving force in the decision to distribute the film, which
is to open on Friday in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Washington.

''We did not see the actual film until very late in the process,'' Mr. Quinn
added.

Promotional screenings and talks are likely among the tech crowd in San
Francisco and among political types in Washington, but scheduling has been
hampered by that late delivery, he said.

The potential power in ''Citizenfour'' lies less in its revelations -- though
its ending points to the existence of another, as yet unidentified,
government-surveillance whistle-blower -- than in its intimacy and attempt to
make narrative sense of the disclosures by Mr. Snowden, a former N.S.A.
contractor.

At the film's core are startlingly close encounters with Mr. Snowden, shot
during eight days in a Hong Kong hotel room in 2013, as he began revealing
secrets of the N.S.A. to the journalists Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, and
wrestled with the implications of his leaks. At one point, in nearly silent
pantomime, he reshapes his beard and restyles his hair, preparing to slip from
the hotel and eventually seek refuge in Russia.

The footage of Mr. Snowden is framed against shots of Mr. Obama and members of
his administration, first denying the existence of domestic surveillance, then
promising a review of programs, and finally insisting on Mr. Snowden's
prosecution.

In the Oscar race for best documentary, ''Citizenfour'' is likely to find itself
up against some less volatile documentaries. Among those are ''Red Army,'' about
Soviet hockey stars; ''Life Itself,'' about the film critic Roger Ebert; and
''Tales of the Grim Sleeper,'' about the predations of a serial killer in South
Los Angeles.

But ''Citizenfour'' recalls a different political dynamic, in 2004, when Mr.
Weinstein introduced Michael Moore's anti-Bush ''Fahrenheit 9/11'' at the
Beverly Hills headquarters of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
with a personal tribute to Mr. Moore. The two received a roaring ovation from
like-minded Academy members.

But ''Fahrenheit 9/11'' won no Oscars. It was ruled out of the race when Mr.
Moore chose to air it on pay-per-view television shortly before the presidential
election.

This time around, though, some key voices are quieter.

Mr. Plepler, whose top documentary executive, Sheila Nevins, is an executive
producer of ''Citizenfour,'' has not yet seen the movie, an HBO spokesman said.
Mr. Skoll, through a Participant Media spokeswoman, declined to comment when
asked whether he had concerns about the film's view of Mr. Obama. In an email,
referring to Mr. Quinn and Mr. Janego, of Radius-TWC, Mr. Weinstein said: ''This
is Tom and Jason's show. They have autonomy, and it's all their call.''

Mr. Janego, on Wednesday, asserted that Ms. Poitras's cinéma vérité approach
leaves a comfort zone for both those who support Mr. Snowden and those who find
his actions offensive. ''You're left to make up your own mind,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/movies/snowden-film-tests-hollywood-obama-back
ers-.html

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Edward J. Snowden, left, and the journalist Glenn Greenwald in
''Citizenfour.'' (C1)
   Edward J. Snowden in ''Citizenfour,'' a documentary critical of  President
Obama, yet with ties to supporters of the president. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RADIUS-TWC)
(C4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


