                             1504 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 7, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Actions Taken, or Not

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1571 words


WORTHY FIGHTSBy Leon Panetta with Jim Newton

Illustrated. 498 pages. Penguin Press. $36.

The most interesting news in former Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta's memoir,
''Worthy Fights,'' concerns his disagreements with the Obama White House over
Syria, Iraq and the budget crisis -- disagreements that have been outlined in
recent interviews and in testimony before Congress. Still, Mr. Panetta
elaborates on such subjects here, and these passages -- in what is otherwise an
often opaque and evasive book -- shed light on the distressing events now
unfolding in the Middle East as the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, rolls
through large sections of Syria and Iraq. They also illuminate decisions made by
the Obama administration, which, in the view of Mr. Panetta and many military
observers, contributed to (or at least failed to help inhibit) these sobering
developments.

In ''Worthy Fights,'' Mr. Panetta reminds us that two years ago, he -- along
with David H. Petraeus, then the director of the Central Intelligence Agency,
and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton -- supported a plan to arm
moderate Syrian rebels. In an interview last month with ''60 Minutes,'' Mr.
Panetta said he thought that such a plan ''would've helped. And I think in part,
we pay the price for not doing that in what we see happening with ISIS'' today.

Here, he writes: ''If we don't prevent these Sunni extremists from taking over
large swaths of territory in the Middle East, it will be only a matter of time
before they turn their sights on us.''

Mr. Panetta also writes that he advocated leaving a small American force to help
preserve ''the fragile stability'' that was ''barely holding'' Iraq together in
2011. This position was shared by members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
military commanders in the region, he writes. But ''the president's team at the
White House pushed back.''

Those ''on our side of the debate,'' Mr. Panetta goes on, ''viewed the White
House as so eager to rid itself of Iraq that it was willing to withdraw rather
than lock in arrangements that would preserve our influence and interests.'' And
''without the president's active advocacy,'' he says, a deal failed to emerge
with Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, then the Iraqi prime minister, to keep a modest
number of American troops there.

To this day, Mr. Panetta says he believes ''that a small, focused U.S. troop
presence in Iraq could have effectively advised the Iraqi military on how to
deal with Al Qaeda's resurgence and the sectarian violence that has engulfed the
country.'' Instead, the last American troops left in December 2011, and at the
start of this year, trucks flying the black flag of Al Qaeda rolled into Falluja
and Ramadi, where American soldiers fought and died in some of the war's
bloodiest battles.

It is in these sections of the book, dealing with Iraq, Syria and presidential
leadership (or its lack), that Mr. Panetta is most plain-spoken and impassioned.
In other chapters, he writes more as the genial congressman he was for 16 years,
dispensing a mix of reminiscence and spin, as well as boilerplate accounts of
his work toward a balanced budget as director of the Office of Management and
Budget and as Bill Clinton's chief of staff. From 2009 through mid-2011, he
served as the Obama administration's first C.I.A. director, overseeing the
American operation that led to the death of Osama bin Laden.

In this book, Mr. Panetta skims over crucial Defense Department issues,
including systemic problems in veterans' hospitals, and a military stretched
thin during two long wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. He is even more evasive when
it comes to discussing the C.I.A., often rationalizing or sidestepping troubling
questions about the agency's use of ''enhanced interrogation'' during the Bush
years and its growing reliance, under President Obama, on drone warfare and
targeted killings.

Having once accused the Bush administration of turning the country into ''a
nation of armchair torturers,'' Mr. Panetta -- who had little background in
intelligence or military affairs -- was initially greeted with suspicion by the
agency when he arrived. But, as Mark Mazzetti, a national security correspondent
for The New York Times wrote in his incisive book, ''The Way of the Knife,'' Mr.
Panetta quickly ''became a C.I.A. champion, beloved by many at Langley but
criticized by others who said that, like so many C.I.A. directors before him, he
had been co-opted by the agency's clandestine branch.''

Though President Obama overruled him, Mr. Panetta argued against declassifying
and releasing internal memos detailing the early Bush-era interrogation methods
that he had once publicly condemned.

In ''Worthy Fights,'' Mr. Panetta writes that ''it seemed wrong to me to ask a
public servant to take a risk for his country and assure him that it was both
legal and approved, then, years later, to suggest that he had done something
wrong.'' He also takes issue with critics who have questioned the utility of
what he calls ''unsavory techniques,'' asserting that ''harsh interrogation did
cause some prisoners to yield to their captors and produced leads that helped
our government understand Al Qaeda's organization, methods and leadership.''

In this book's pages, there is no substantial exploration of the intelligence
lapses that contributed to the Obama administration's failure to anticipate the
Arab Spring or understand its fallout in Egypt, Libya and Syria.

Nor is there any real analysis of why the White House seems to have been caught
off guard by the Islamic State's swift advance and the collapse of the Iraqi
Army. These developments took place after Mr. Panetta left government, but
readers cannot help wishing he had weighed in here on the debate over whether
this was primarily a problem with intelligence or a problem with policy-making
in the White House.

While he neglects such important matters in ''Worthy Fights,'' Mr. Panetta does
take time to argue that James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national
intelligence -- who misled a congressional hearing when he said that the
National Security Agency was not gathering data on millions of Americans --
''may be the perfect person to serve'' in that ''difficult position,'' praising
him as ''deft and scrupulous.''

When it comes to the Obama administration's proclivity for trying to centralize
decision-making in the White House, Mr. Panetta echoes observations made by
journalists (like James Mann, the author of ''The Obamians'') and other
administration insiders, like his predecessor at the Pentagon, Robert M. Gates
(in his candid memoir, ''Duty'').

Here, Mr. Panetta writes that the centralization of authority in the White House
meant that cabinet members and agency heads ''were rarely encouraged to take
their own initiative or lobby for priorities,'' and senior officials ''who knew
the most about certain subjects were excluded from important public debates,
skewing the conversation in ways that sometimes did the administration's
policies a disservice.''

It was believed ''among those close to him,'' Mr. Panetta adds, that the
president had not found his ''time as a senator very rewarding'' and tended ''to
be disdainful of Congress generally.'' Mr. Panetta says he never ''witnessed
that disdain directly, but I did pick up evidence of it within his senior
staff.''

Mr. Panetta also has some sharp things to say about Mr. Obama's presidential
leadership, rebuking him for his policy flip-flops on Syria. First, Mr. Panetta
notes, Mr. Obama indicated he was leaning toward limited military action after
concluding that President Bashar al-Assad's forces had unleashed a devastating
chemical attack against their own people (action that Mr. Obama had earlier
warned was a ''red line''); then he backed off, ''agreeing to submit the matter
to Congress,'' which was, ''as he well knew, an almost certain way to scotch any
action.''

In Mr. Panetta's view, this was ''a blow to American credibility,'' sending
''the wrong message to the world'': ''The power of the United States rests on
its word, and clear signals are important both to deter adventurism and to
reassure allies that we can be counted on.''

Echoing a complaint frequently heard within the Beltway, Mr. Panetta also
laments what he regards as the president's sometimes passive or disengaged
approach to governing. He argues that Mr. Obama's failure to lead Congress out
of the sequester standoff is a prime example of his ''reticence to engage his
opponents and rally support for his cause.'' At times, Mr. Panetta writes, Mr.
Obama ''avoids the battle, complains and misses opportunities,'' giving ''his
opponents room to shape the contours of his presidency.''

As for the bin Laden raid, Mr. Panetta's description not only lacks the visceral
detail and immediacy of ''No Easy Day'' -- a firsthand account of the raid by
Matt Bissonnette (a.k.a. Mark Owen), a member of the SEAL team that took down
the Qaeda leader -- but also declines to give us a palpable sense of what was
going on during the raid at Langley and the White House.

Mr. Panetta does, however, have a favorite joke, which he says he never had a
chance to deliver before in public: ''Looking back on my career, I've been a
Republican, a congressman, and White House chief of staff, and a defense
secretary. Come to think of it, I've done everything that Dick Cheney has done.
Except the guy I made sure got shot in the face was Osama bin Laden.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/07/books/worthy-fights-by-leon-e-panetta.html

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


