                             157 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Arrested After Drone Flies Close to a Police Helicopter

BYLINE: By ALAN FEUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 522 words


Two men were arrested after a small drone flying near the George Washington
Bridge came within 800 feet of a police helicopter, officials said on Tuesday.

Wilkins Mendoza, 34, and Remy Castro, 23, both of Manhattan, have been charged
with reckless endangerment.

On Monday shortly after midnight, the pilot of the New York Police Department
helicopter notified officers at the 34th Precinct that an unmanned aircraft had
gotten in the way as he flew near the bridge. The pilot said the drone then
landed on a vehicle parked on the ground nearby. When the officers reported to
the scene, they arrested two men found in possession of two drones and two
remote controls.

Under a law passed in 2012, the Federal Aviation Administration has until next
year to promulgate official rules for what are known as unmanned aircraft
systems. But according to recently published guidelines from the agency, rules
that govern the flight of conventional aircraft also apply to unmanned aircraft.
The rules prohibit ''any conduct that endangers individuals and property on the
surface, other aircraft, or otherwise endangers the safe operation of other
aircraft in the National Airspace System.''

The F.A.A. does permit model airplanes used for recreation to fly at altitudes
of less than 400 feet so long as the planes stay within sight of their pilots
and do not interfere with manned airplanes. At the time, the drone was flying at
2,000 feet, according to the agency. If hobbyists fly their craft within five
miles of an airport, they are required to notify air-traffic-control officials.

Even now, a day after the helicopter pilot reported encountering the drone, the
police said they remained uncertain about whether the unmanned aircraft was
above, below, behind or in front of the helicopter.

The positions of the two aircraft in relation to each other are an important
factor in determining how dangerous the situation was, said Daniel B.
Schwarzbach, the executive director of the Airborne Law Enforcement Association.

Mr. Schwarzbach said the riskiest place for the drone to be was in front of the
helicopter, which could easily cover 800 feet in a matter of seconds. It was
also dangerous for the drone to be above the helicopter, he said, adding that
800 feet was ''not a lot of separation.''

''We support the use of this technology, but we support its responsible use,''
Mr. Schwarzbach said. ''Just go onto YouTube and you'll see tons of examples of
people using these things irresponsibly: flying at altitudes of more than 400
feet or flying over bridges.''

The police did not describe the aircraft used in the incident near the George
Washington Bridge. But small, light drones equipped with high-definition cameras
are available for as little as $300, said Christopher Wong, the executive
director of the Engelberg Center on Innovation Law and Policy at New York
University, which hosted a conference on civilian drones last year.

''There are real tangible benefits to having unmanned aircraft,'' Mr. Wong said,
''but what happened this week is a clear reminder that we've got a long way to
go in balancing innovation with safety and privacy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/09/nyregion/two-men-arrested-after-drone
-flies-near-new-york-police-helicopter.html

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


