                             1521 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 21, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Architect's Big Parisian Moment

BYLINE: By JOSEPH GIOVANNINI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1391 words


PARIS -- In a cultural twofer that makes it Frank Gehry week here, the Louis
Vuitton Foundation, a private cultural center and contemporary-art museum
designed by Mr. Gehry, had its official inaugural ceremony on Monday, attended
by the French president, François Hollande. At the same time, the Pompidou
Center across town is giving Mr. Gehry, based in Los Angeles, a major career
retrospective.

The Pompidou exhibition, ''Frank Gehry,'' establishes a narrative arc for a
career that effectively started with small-scale, experimental wood-frame
studios and houses in Southern California and culminates in the Vuitton
Foundation in the Bois de Boulogne, which some critics have called one of the
most technologically sophisticated, artistically motivated buildings of his
oeuvre. A 126,000-square-foot, $135 million structure that formally opens to the
public next Monday, it promises to add a major contemporary monument to Paris's
long list of historic architecture.

At the end of the ceremony, President Hollande described the building as a
''cathedral of light'' that was ''a miracle of intelligence, creativity and
technology.''

Mr. Gehry's moment in Paris comes after his Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial in
Washington was approved last week, following a bruising five-year process in
which Mr. Gehry's design went through more than 15 committees and commissions
and many adjustments. In Paris, after settling concerns about building in a
park, he needed the approval of only one client, Bernard Arnault, chairman and
chief executive of the luxury goods conglomerate LVMH, whose foundation owns the
new building.

''The guy knew what he wanted, and he wanted a building that would be different
than anything else anybody had ever seen,'' said Mr. Gehry, interviewed over
coffee on Monday in his hotel off the Champs Élysées.

Mr. Arnault hired Mr. Gehry, he has said, after seeing his Guggenheim Museum in
Bilbao, Spain, a spectacle of fluid forms that reshaped that city's derelict
waterfront while enclosing classical white galleries inside. At Vuitton, Mr.
Gehry builds on the Bilbao precedent, creating a more complex structure clad in
glass rather than titanium.

Visitors encounter what looks like a Cubist sailboat, with glass sails and
spinnakers rising above the tree line and billowing simultaneously fore, aft,
port and starboard. The building appears to glide over a cascade of water
lapping down a stepped embankment below its cantilevered prow. The two-story
structure has 11 galleries, a voluminous auditorium and multilevel roof terraces
for events and art installations.

The site is next to the Jardin d'Acclimatation, a 19th-century children's park
and zoo at the north edge of the Romantically landscaped Bois de Boulogne. The
architect had to build within the square footage and two-story volume of a
bowling alley that previously stood here; anything higher had to be glass. Mr.
Arnault's program for the Foundation, whose stated mission is to stimulate
artistic creation, called for a museum with galleries for permanent and
temporary exhibitions, and a concert hall.

Mr. Gehry said, ''We talked to him about the site, and it was clear that it had
to be something that fits into a garden, something in the tradition of a
19th-century glass pavilion or conservatory.''

Unlike his compatriot I. M. Pei, who placed the glass Pyramid at the Louvre to
acknowledge the long axis of the Champs Élysées, Mr. Gehry ignored France's
geometric traditions. ''The clouds of glass respond to nature's geometry, to the
park's English landscaping,'' he said of the Bois de Boulogne. ''Nature's
apparent disorder has its own order.''

In trying to create a spirited adult version of the Jardin d'Acclimatation's
fantasy buildings, Mr. Gehry said he was ''very moved by the park, which
reminded me of Proust's Paris.'' He added: ''I read him over and over again, and
I realized it was a pretty emotional site for everybody. It brought tears to my
eyes.''

He had two mandates: respecting the park and garden and satisfying the
requirements for the galleries.

''Once we had the big, basic premise that there was a solid piece for the
galleries, which we started to call the icebergs, and then the glass sails for
the garden, we started to work them independently,'' Mr. Gehry said. ''Merging
the two would not work, because you couldn't have curvy galleries, and you can't
hang paintings on glass.'' The diaphanous sails, supported on an acrobatic
armature of wood and steel, project outside the iceberg.

The glass structure takes its place in a long Parisian tradition dating from the
13th-century Gothic Sainte-Chapelle on the Île de la Cité, with its tall walls
of stained glass, and the 19th-century Grand Palais, an exhibition hall whose
glass vaults echo the vast public spaces of Rome. The Foundation's fragmented,
multidirectional forms recall the Cubism of Braque and Picasso. The mission
statement of the Foundation acknowledges 20th-century Modern art movements as a
basis of the contemporary art it champions.

Visitors enter a tall hall from which angled staircases and meandering paths
lead to the galleries and to a roofscape of outdoor terraces enclosed by the
glass sails. Between the iceberg and the sailboat, accordion spaces expand and
contract, alternately intimate and grand, in what Mr. Gehry called ''a chaotic
dance.'' The white galleries, some with tall ceilings that act as chimneys of
light, are ''a refuge,'' said Edwin Chan, a former design partner in the Gehry
firm, who worked with Mr. Gehry and the main project architect, Laurence Tighe.
One opens to the sky.

Frédéric Migayrou, the deputy director of the Pompidou, organized the full
retrospective and a smaller boutique show of Mr. Gehry's development drawings
that will be on view at the Foundation. ''This building doesn't reveal itself at
once, but over many encounters,'' he said. ''It's a provocation for the viewer;
you have to be part of it, as with an artwork where you make your own
experience.''

Claude Parent, France's 91-year-old éminence grise in architecture whose work in
the 1950s and '60s anticipated deconstructivism, said that when he first saw the
Foundation building, ''I was seized by an emotion so strong that it seemed to
come from something other than architecture.'' He called Mr. Gehry's design ''an
act of unbridled imagination.''

Others describe the building less favorably. The architecture critic of The
Guardian, Rohan Moore, known for his Spartan architectural attitudes, wrote
dismissively, ''Everything that is good about the Fondation could have been
achieved, and better, without the sails.'' Denis Lafay, writing in the online
financial newspaper La Tribune, did not criticize the architecture but called
the building the ostentatious result of an oligarch's commodifying of artistic
creation to burnish his own brand.

At the Foundation, Mr. Migayrou's immersive show, ''Voyage of Creation,''
explains the building, with large-screen videos filmed from overhead cranes and
drones that flew over and through the building.

''I wanted to give a dynamic view of the building, and the films put the
building into movement,'' he said in an interview. The show includes many
conceptual and development models, along with the seminal sketches Mr. Gehry
drew on the long flight back to Los Angeles after he and Mr. Arnault first met
to discuss the project.

In the Pompidou retrospective, Mr. Migayrou includes little-known urban designs
for housing projects and town plans, evidence of an urban-planning expertise
that he said had informed the organization of all of Mr. Gehry's architectural
work. The exhibition also features a wall of previously unexhibited photographs
by Mr. Gehry, who gravitated to raw moments in the cityscape, like cement
plants, that his eye made beautiful.

''He was photographing the city, the spaces between places,'' Mr. Migayrou said.

He also chose models and original drawings to show the evolution of Mr. Gehry's
ideas leading up to the Vuitton Foundation. Other shows, Mr. Migayrou said,
''have portrayed Gehry's buildings as an object, a shape.''

''I tried to do the reverse,'' he said, ''going through all the works to define
the evolution of the language, the continuities, the idea of dynamic movement,
how he opens form so that they interact with the city and provoke the movement
of the body around the building.''

URL:

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Louis Vuitton Foundation, designed by Frank Gehry in the
Bois de Boulogne in western Paris. It features glass sails that project from an
''iceberg'' that houses 11 art galleries. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BENOIT TESSIER/REUTERS)
(C1)
 An installation of 43 mirrored columns called ''Inside the Horizon,'' by Olafur
Eliasson, lines a walkway around a pool in the ''grotto'' of the Vuitton
Foundation museum in Paris. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IWAN BAAN) (C2)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


