                             1556 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 12, 2014 Sunday
                                Regional Edition

The muddled search for a GOP leader

BYLINE: Dan Balz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 1201 words


The bridge scandal that has engulfed New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has also
brought more disruption to the already-muddled early stages of the Republican
Party's search for a 2016 presidential nominee. Republicans appear headed for
the most wide-open and unpredictable nomination campaign in decades.

Their prospective field of candidates is mostly untested on the national stage,
and a number of them spent the past year generating questions about their
readiness rather than burnishing their credentials. Christie is just the latest.

But that's not the only reason the coming GOP campaign is likely to be neither
tidy nor predictable. A power struggle is underway between the party's
establishment and insurgent wings - the business elite and the populist tea
party factions. No one is certain what the balance of power in the party will be
when the primaries and caucuses begin.

The GOP's nomination process threatens to be more disorderly this cycle because
customs and traditions that have informally governed it in past years seem to be
out the window this time.

For starters, there is no experienced heir apparent with an inside track, no
dominant figure who has paid dues over many years. Anyone who doubts that
Republicans have been a hierarchical institution need only look back at past
nomination contests.

Mitt Romney may not have been the darling of the entire Republican Party when he
began his quest for the nomination in 2012, but he was as close as the party had
to the kind of next-in-line candidate who had so often prevailed in previous
contests. The same held true in 2008 for John McCain, even though many
conservatives distrusted him.

George W. Bush, the son of a former president and the consensus choice of his
fellow governors, was a predictable and almost certain nominee in 2000 - despite
an unexpectedly fierce challenge from McCain. Robert Dole had earned his place
as the party's heir apparent when he won the nomination in 1996. George H.W.
Bush's service as Ronald Reagan's vice president was enough for him to prevail
in a crowded and competitive 1988 nomination battle.

No such scenario exists today.

After his reelection in November, Christie became the closest thing to a genuine
2016 front-runner for the Republican nomination, at least among the party
establishment and elite donors. His victory margin in a blue state and his
strong numbers in the Hispanic community were interpreted as evidence that he
could help Republicans capture territory that has eluded them in the past two
presidential campaigns.

Now, he is struggling to prove that the qualities that made him so attractive to
so many Republicans - blunt talk and tough leadership - have not created a
climate of fear and retribution inside his administration that may have led to
the bridge scandal.

Perhaps Christie will reclaim his standing as the darling of the GOP
establishment. But even if he gets through this controversy, he will still have
to overcome doubts and distrust on the right.

In past campaigns, prior experience running for president often gave candidates
a boost. That does not appear to be the case this time.

Texas Gov. Rick Perry and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, who sought
the nomination in 2012 and who might run again, are struggling to be seen as
serious competitors in 2016. Mike Huckabee, the former Arkansas governor who ran
in 2008 and won a number of contests, will have to convince people that he is
serious about doing so in 2016, despite some expressed interest.

Perry had one of the more memorable lines about 2012: "It was the weakest
Republican field in history, and they kicked my butt." As the party looked past
Romney's defeat toward the 2016 campaign, Republicans anticipated a much
stronger field. But the past year was not so kind to some of these potentially
bright stars.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) was on the cover of Time magazine soon after Romney's
defeat, seen as the party's savior, the candidate who could appeal to the tea
party and the establishment and also win over Hispanic voters.

Today, he is working to reestablish his credentials after a year in which he ran
into opposition from the right for supporting comprehensive immigration reform
and delivered a State of the Union response that was remembered more for a swig
of water than the content of his remarks.

On the day the Christie story exploded last week, Rubio gave a substantive
speech on poverty. The Christie controversy knocked him out of the news, but
Republicans paying attention concluded that Rubio had had a good day to start
the year.

The ebb and flow of events brought attention to other prospective candidates.
Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) became a favorite of tea party activists for his 21-hour
marathon on the Senate floor attacking the Affordable Care Act. The subsequent
partial shutdown of government that he helped engineer resulted in damage to his
party. Whether he is more than the leader of a faction of the GOP is the next
chapter.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) staged a filibuster to draw attention to President
Obama's drone policy. Paul, who has his eye on 2016, has spent the year trying
to win greater acceptance within the party for his libertarian philosophy and to
show that he has potentially broader appeal to voters than his father, former
representative Ron Paul.

The party has a group of governors with presidential ambitions: Scott Walker of
Wisconsin, Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, possibly John Kasich of Ohio and Rick
Snyder of Michigan, and perhaps others. Walker, Kasich and Snyder have to get
through reelection campaigns this year, and they remain largely unknown
nationally. Many have potential, but that potential is unrealized for now.

Jeb Bush, the former Florida governor, intrigues many Republicans and worries
some Democrats. Whether he will run is an open question, and whether he can
excite his party is another. James Carville, the Democratic strategist, told CNN
the other day that Bush could be a beneficiary of Christie's fall.

Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.), the party's 2012 vice-presidential nominee, also has
people guessing: Does he want to be president or stay in the House? Ryan no
doubt elevated himself by producing a bipartisan budget agreement at the end of
last year, but that is hardly a definitive development this far away from the
real competition.

If the prospective field of candidates leaves so many unanswered questions, so,
too, does the Republican Party's unsettled state. No one can be certain at this
point where the center of gravity will be when the candidates begin to announce
a year from now.

The tea party flexed its muscles during the government shutdown. The
establishment has vowed to fight back. Will 2016 be the year that tea party
conservatives finally get a nominee of their liking? If so, will that candidate
be acceptable to a general-election audience? A series of Senate primaries
pitting tea party candidates against incumbent Republicans will help to clarify
the shape and potential outcome of the GOP's nomination campaign by this time
next year, although perhaps not definitively.

What the past 12 months - and now the past few days - have done, mostly, is to
make things murkier than ever.

dan.balz@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


