                             151 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 26, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Sends Arms To Aid Iraq Fight With Extremists

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting
from Baghdad, Thom Shanker from Washington and an employee of The New York Times
from Mosul, Iraq.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1419 words


WASHINGTON -- The United States is quietly rushing dozens of Hellfire missiles
and low-tech surveillance drones to Iraq to help government forces combat an
explosion of violence by a Qaeda-backed insurgency that is gaining territory in
both western Iraq and neighboring Syria.

The move follows an appeal for help in battling the extremist group by the Iraqi
prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, who met with President Obama in Washington
last month.

But some military experts question whether the patchwork response will be
sufficient to reverse the sharp downturn in security that already led to the
deaths of more than 8,000 Iraqis this year, 952 of them Iraqi security force
members, according to the United Nations, the highest level of violence since
2008.

Al Qaeda's regional affiliate, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, has become a
potent force in northern and western Iraq. Riding in armed convoys, the group
has intimidated towns, assassinated local officials, and in an episode last
week, used suicide bombers and hidden explosives to kill the commander of the
Iraqi Army's Seventh Division and more than a dozen of his officers and soldiers
as they raided a Qaeda training camp near Rutbah.

Bombings on Christmas in Christian areas of Baghdad, which killed more than two
dozen people, bore the hallmarks of a Qaeda operation.

The surge in violence stands in sharp contrast to earlier assurances from senior
Obama administration officials that Iraq was on the right path, despite the
failure of American and Iraqi officials in 2011 to negotiate an agreement for a
limited number of United States forces to remain in Iraq.

In a March 2012 speech, Antony J. Blinken, who is currently Mr. Obama's deputy
national security adviser, asserted that ''Iraq today is less violent'' than
''at any time in recent history.''

In contrast, after a recent spate of especially violent attacks against Iraqi
forces, elected officials and civilians, Jen Psaki, the State Department
spokeswoman, issued a strongly worded statement on Sunday warning that the Qaeda
affiliate is ''seeking to gain control of territory inside the borders of
Iraq.''

Pledging to take steps to strengthen Iraqi forces, Ms. Psaki noted that the
Qaeda affiliate was a ''common enemy of the United States and the Republic of
Iraq, and a threat to the greater Middle East region.''

But the counterterrorism effort the United States is undertaking with Iraq has
its limits.

Iraq's foreign minister has floated the idea of having American-operated, armed
Predator or Reaper drones respond to the expanding militant network. But Mr.
Maliki, who is positioning himself to run for a third term as prime minister and
who is sensitive to nationalist sentiment at home, has not formally requested
such intervention.

The idea of carrying out such drone attacks, which might prompt the question of
whether the Obama administration succeeded in bringing the Iraq war to what the
president has called a ''responsible end,'' also appears to have no support in
the White House.

''We have not received a formal request for U.S.-operated armed drones operating
over Iraq, nor are we planning to divert armed I.S.R. over Iraq,'' said
Bernadette Meehan, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, referring to
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance missions. For now, the new lethal
aid from the United States, which Iraq is buying, includes a shipment of 75
Hellfire missiles, delivered to Iraq last week. The weapons are strapped beneath
the wings of small Cessna turboprop planes, and fired at militant camps with the
C.I.A. secretly providing targeting assistance.

In addition, 10 ScanEagle reconnaissance drones are expected to be delivered to
Iraq by March. They are smaller cousins of the larger, more capable Predators
that used to fly over Iraq.

American intelligence and counterterrorism officials say they have effectively
mapped the locations and origins of the Qaeda network in Iraq and are sharing
this information with the Iraqis.

Administration officials said the aid was significant because the Iraqis had
virtually run out of Hellfire missiles. The Iraqi military, with no air force to
speak of and limited reconnaissance of its own, has a very limited ability to
locate and quickly strike Qaeda militants as they maneuver in western and
northern Iraq. The combination of American-supplied Hellfire air-to-ground
missiles, tactical drones and intelligence, supplied by the United States, is
intended to augment that limited Iraqi ability.

The Obama administration has given three sensor-laden Aerostat balloons to the
Iraqi government, provided three additional reconnaissance helicopters to the
Iraqi military and is planning to send 48 Raven reconnaissance drones before the
end of 2014. And the United States is planning to deliver next fall the first of
the F-16 fighters Iraq has bought.

The lack of armed drones, some experts assert, will hamper efforts to dismantle
the Qaeda threat in Iraq over the coming weeks and months.

''Giving them some ScanEagle drones is great,'' said Michael Knights, an expert
on Iraqi security at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ''But is it
really going to make much difference? Their range is tiny.''

''The real requirement today is for a long-range, high-endurance armed drone
capability,'' added Mr. Knights, who frequently travels to Iraq. ''There is one
place in the world where Al Qaeda can run a major affiliate without fear of a
U.S. drone or air attack, and that is in Iraq and Syria.''

In an effort to buttress the Iraqi military's abilities, the Obama
administration has sought congressional approval to lease and eventually sell
Apache helicopter gunships. But some lawmakers have been hesitant, fearing that
they might be used by Mr. Maliki to intimidate his political opponents.

A plan to lease six Apaches to the Iraqi government is now pending in the
Senate. Frustrated by the United States' reluctance to sell Apaches, the Iraqis
have turned to Russia, which delivered four MI-35 attack helicopters last month
and planned to provide more than two dozen more. Meanwhile, cities and towns
like Mosul, Haditha and Baquba that American forces fought to control during the
2007 and 2008 surge of American troops in Iraq have been the scene of bloody
Qaeda attacks.

Using extortion and playing on Sunni grievances against Mr. Maliki's
Shiite-dominated government, the Qaeda affiliate is largely self-financing. One
Iraqi politician, who asked not to be named to avoid retaliation, said Qaeda
militants had even begun to extort money from shopkeepers in Ramadi, Anbar's
provincial capital.

A number of factors are helping the Qaeda affiliate. The terrorist group took
advantage of the departure of American forces to rebuild its operations in Iraq
and push into Syria. Now that it has established a strong foothold in Syria, it
is in turn using its base there to send suicide bombers into Iraq at a rate of
30 to 40 a month, using them against Shiites but also against Sunnis who are
reluctant to cede control.

The brutal tactics, some experts say, may expose Al Qaeda to a Sunni backlash,
much as in 2006 and 2007 when Sunni tribes aligned themselves with American
forces against the Qaeda extremists.

But Mr. Maliki's failure to share power with Sunni leaders, some Iraqis say, has
also provided a fertile recruiting ground.

Haitham Abdullah al-Jubouri, a 40-year-old government employee in Baquba, said
that ''the policy of the sectarian government'' had ''contributed to the influx
of desperate young elements from the Sunni community to the ranks of Al Qaeda.''

In Mosul, most of the security force members who are not from the area have left
the city, and Al Qaeda controls whole sections of territory.

''In the morning, we have some control, but at night, this is when we hide and
the armed groups make their movements,'' said an Iraqi security official, who
spoke only on the condition of anonymity, out of fear of retaliation.

Ayad Shaker, a police officer in Anbar, said that Al Qaeda had replenished its
ranks with a series of prison breakouts, and that the group had also grown
stronger because of the limited abilities of Iraqi forces, the conflict in Syria
and tensions between Mr. Maliki and the Sunnis.

Mr. Shaker said that three close relatives had been killed by Al Qaeda and that
he had been wounded by bombs the group had planted.

''I fought Al Qaeda,'' he said. ''I am sad today when I see them have the
highest authority in Anbar, moving and working under the sun without
deterrent.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/26/world/middleeast/us-sends-arms-to-aid-iraq-fig
ht-with-extremists.html

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Iraqis gathered in Tikrit on Tuesday to pray over journalists
killed in an attack claimed by a Qaeda-affiliated group. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHMOUD
AL-SAMARRAI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


