                             1566 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 19, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Week 1056: Weather or nuts

BYLINE: Pat Myers

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. T20

LENGTH: 1115 words


Phileas Fog: Heavy mist that dramatically increases your travel time.

Microshaft: The infinitesimal ray of sunlight that occasionally pierces the
Seattle clouds.

We've weathered a polar vortex, a superstorm, a derecho - and have expanded our
vocabulary with each crazy meteorological event. Loser Mike Gips suggests that
we ought to enlarge the lexicon even more: This week: Coin a term relating to
weather, climate, etc. - either literal or figurative - and define it, as in
Mike's examples above. Just do us this favor: Skip the joke about how the U.S.
Capitol is a source of hot air; I think I receive a Congress/hot-air joke from
someone or other in just about every contest I've judged - and I haven't given
any of them ink in the last 500-plus contests either.

Winner gets the Inkin' Memorial, the Lincoln statue bobblehead that is the
official Style Invitational trophy. Second place receives a climate-themed
prize, at least if you stretch the term absurdly: It's a hefty glass snow globe
(actually a glitter globe) on a gaudy gold plastic base. Inside, being glittered
on, is a leather-vested black-and-white cow doing a wheelie on a motorcycle.  A
Harley-Dairyson, perhaps. Or a Cowasaki. Donated by Loser Cheryl Davis, who has
donated many similarly elegant prizes over the years, such as Shells Playing
Poker.

Other runners-up win their choice of a yearned-for Loser Mug or the ardently
desired "Whole Fools" Grossery Bag. Honorable mentions get a lusted-after Loser
magnet, either the Po' Wit Laureate or Puns of Steel. First Offenders receive a
smelly tree-shaped air "freshener" (FirStink for their first ink). E-mail
entries to losers@washpost.com or, if you were born in the 19th century, fax to
202-334-4312. Deadline is Monday, Jan. 27; results published Feb. 16 (online
Feb. 13). No more than 25 entries per entrant per week. Include "Week 1056" in
your e-mail subject line or it might be ignored as spam. Include your real name,
postal address and phone number with your entry. See contest rules and
guidelines at wapo.st/InvRules. The subhead for this week's honorable mentions
is by Kevin Dopart. Join the lively Style Invitational Devotees group on
Facebook at on.fb.me/invdev, and click "like" on Style Invitational Ink of the
Day at bit.ly/inkofday.

Report from Week 1052

our perennial Clue Us In contest, in which we published a filled-in crossword
grid from an earlier Washington Post, and asked you to contribute novel clues
for any of the words.  Some funny ideas were submitted by too many Losers for
individual credit, such as "ACID: A generic Spanish hero," and "ACTUAL: An order
to the cast from a frustrated director." Some of the realset of clues, by puzzle
constructor Bob Klahn, trumped the Losers' entries, so Bob gets a magnet, too.

The winner of the Inkin'Memorial

BAGPIPES: Scotland's drone program (Brendan Beary, Great Mills)

2 Winner of the Vietnamese elixir including both a preserved scorpion and a
preserved snake:GRAFT: How politicians get money to grow on trees (Barry Koch,
Catlett, Va.)

3 ICE:  H2  O 3    (Rob Huffman, Fredericksburg)

4IRAN: Paul Ryan's revised marathon claim (Mark Richardson, Takoma Park)

Less taste, more fill-in:honorable mentions

MORAN: What an idiot calls another idiot (Jim Stiles, Rockville; Bill Verkuilen,
Brooklyn Park, Minn.)

EGGS: They break up with chicks after getting laid (Alex Jeffrey, Columbia)

PLACE: Fancy toilet paper (hyphenated) (Steve McClemons, Arlington, who last got
Invite ink in 2006)

SPOT: Lady Macbeth's annoying dog (Beverley Sharp, Montgomery, Ala.)

APRON: What the well-dressed woman wears - R. Santorum (Jesse Ellis, Fairfax, a
First Offender)

ESPN: Answer to "Where's Chris Berman? He's supposed to be on air right now!"
(Craig Dykstra, Centreville)

GUESTTOWEL: Newspaper in Your Mama's bathroom (Jeff Shirley, Richmond)

SMOG: It makes haze while the sun shines (John O'Byrne, Dublin)

BAGPIPES: Susan Boyle's singing voice (Rob Pivarnik, Stratford, Conn.)

ROSA: Parks in front of a bus (Bob Klahn, Wilmington, Del.)

IOWA: fascinating place, for two weeks every four years (Elden Carnahan, Laurel)

LAVA: Pompei circumstance (Robert Schechter, Dix Hills, N.Y.)

LAVA: Top-rated loo (hyphenated)  (Ann Martin, Falls Church)

CROCI: Final score in Nile conflict: Canoeist 0 / ______ (Mark Richardson)

ROCKCANDY:Michaele Salahi's new job description(David Ballard, Reston)

ROCKCANDY: Cliff bar (Jonathan Hardis, Gaithersburg)

ONE: Where to keep up with the Kardashians (two words) (Chris Doyle, The
Villages, Fla.; Kevin Dopart, Washington)

POPSINGLES: New diet product from Orville Redenbacher (Andy Promisel, Fairfax)

POPSINGLES: My wife gets mad at me when I do this into a stripper's thong (Alex
Jeffrey)

MOUE:McKayla Maroney's second claim to fame (Dan Ramish, Washington)

WADE: What you might do following DUI plumbing (Beverley Sharp)

WADE: What Elmer Fudd uses to kill bugs (Neal Starkman, Seattle)

TORUS: "The Heavenly Donut"; zodiac sign of Homer Simpson (Larry Gray, Union
Bridge, Md.; Beverley Sharp)

CIAO: Eat and run (Kathy El-Assal, Middleton, Wis.; Nan Reiner, Alexandria)

OBOE: Penetrating wind (Bob Klahn)

CZECH: Eastern European bouncer (Robert Schechter)

OBIE: Award won by "Baby Doc: The Musical" (Christopher Lamora, Los Angeles)

GUESTTOWEL: Something you bring when staying overnight at your son's bachelor
pad (Dave Prevar, Annapolis)

LUCKYROLL: Sushi made with "mystery fish" (Mark Raffman, Reston)

ICKY: The Bluegrass State's failed tourism campaign to counter I â[TM]¥ NY.
(Jeff Contompasis, Ashburn)

EBOOK: A more convenient format for the literary classics you still won't read.
(Lawrence McGuire, Waldorf)

IRE: What you get when your land is out of potatoes. (Edmund Conti, Raleigh,
N.C.)

RACK: Scrumptious part of both Lamb Chop and Shari Lewis (Ward Kay, Vienna)

CAPO: Text-message summary of Gov. Jerry Brown's State of the State address.
(Dave Prevar)

CAPFUL: Given to shouting on the Internet (Chris Doyle)

DOCK: Julius Erving's relative Kenny (Ben Aronin, Arlington; Jonathan Hardis)

STONEAGE: Count the rings on Keith Richards to get this  (Steve McClemons)

ROWE: The fifth-worst place to sit at a Justin Bieber concert. (Roger Dalrymple,
Gettysburg, Pa.)

ICE: It can send a chill up an undocumented worker's spine. (Jeff Contompasis)

FUNK: Odd-smelling but cutely shaped breakfast cereal (hyphenated) (Danielle
Nowlin, Woodbridge)

FUNK: Text message that makes Kim Jong Un-happy (acronym) (Mike Ostapiej, Mount
Pleasant, S.C.)

LINGO: He wrote "Octopus's Jargon" (Jonathan Hardis)

LINGO: Cheer at Houston Rockets game (Steve McClemons)

Still running - deadline Monday night: Our neologism contest for words in which
you add or substitute one or more K's.  See bit.ly/invite1055.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


