                             1536 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 24, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

How robots are stealing our jobs

BYLINE: - Lydia DePillis

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 809 words


If we talked about nothing else in 2013 - and, all right, 2012, too - we talked
about whether technology is going to take all our jobs. This latest surge of the
age-old debate seems to have lulled, for now, with the anti-robot contingent in
America somewhat mollified by the promise that additional automation may be the
one advance that allows for manufacturing jobs to return from overseas and that
it relieves humans of the most dangerous and unpleasant tasks. Theoretically,
the robotic gospel goes, that talent is then freed up for more fulfilling and
productive work. (Hint: The more "creative" and "social" you are, the more
likely you are to survive.)

Either way, it's worth looking at the different ways automation began rendering
new classes of jobs obsolete this year.

1. The people who mail stuff

In 2012, Amazon acquired Kiva Systems, a maker of robots that can be programmed
to fulfill online orders in a warehouse and shuttle them to their departure
points. The company now has 1,382 of the machines in three fulfillment centers,
which means it eventually may not need to hire the tens of thousands of
temporary workers it brings on for the busy holiday season. And if you had any
doubts that Amazon could eventually do the same with flying drones, well, let
this be a lesson. (Amazon chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The Washington
Post.)

2. The people who reheat pre-cooked food

The nationwide strikes by fast-food workers brought dire warnings from
restaurant-industry-backed researchers that if line cooks cost too much, they
could easily be replaced by robots. That hasn't quite happened yet, but at least
one company is working diligently to make it possible. It's reasonable to
believe that McDonald's - which is already replacing cashiers with touch screens
in Europe - would jump at the chance.

3. The people who sell clothes

E-commerce has been steadily eating away at bricks-and-mortar stores for years,
but what's been cropping up more recently is a breed of business that sees
taking storefronts out of the picture as a point of pride. Take American Giant,
for example: The purveyor of basic, high-quality clothing makes its stuff just
outside San Francisco, which it can do affordably because it sells to
in-the-know urban sophisticates purely online, skipping the American
Apparel-style marketing blitz altogether. That may mean you can get a
high-quality, U.S.-made hoodie for a competitive price. It also means that the
people who might otherwise have sold it to you don't have jobs.

4. The people who stock shelves and return shopping carts

Not all labor-saving innovations are high-tech. Discount supermarket Aldi -
which is owned by the same corporate parent as the more bourgeois Trader Joe's -
keeps payroll down by requiring a 25-cent deposit for shopping carts so
employees don't have to return them, and stocking shelves with boxes full of
goods rather than placing the individual items in neat rows. Again, great for
shoppers on a budget - at the cost of employment.

5. People who drive trucks

Autonomous vehicle technology is accelerating and, for now, is focused on
passenger vehicles. But the real labor shortage is in long-haul trucking, and
that's a job that might be more safely filled by a remotely controlled robot
that never gets tired or lost. Which just means that the 5.7 million people who
do the job now will have to find a new way to make a living.

6. People who operate farm equipment

The history of agriculture has been one long tale of automation, to the extent
that almost nobody works on farms in America anymore. The exception was supposed
to be people who operated the machines that replaced people who tilled the soil
and harvested the crops by hand. But even they're not safe anymore, with the
advent of tractors that can be piloted around the fields by computer or even
programmed with the right coordinates and set loose, like gigantic dirt-treading
Roombas.

7. The people who make iProducts

After years of close scrutiny of the working conditions in its factories,
Foxconn - which makes most of Apple's computers, phones and tablets - has said
it would swap people out for machines as much as possible. The process hasn't
been as quick or as easy as anticipated, but with wages rising in China, Foxconn
has little choice but to keep developing the one-million-strong army of
"Foxbots" it promised back in 2010.

8. The people who do low-level lab work

In North Carolina's Research Triangle Park, a company called LabCorp is hard at
work developing machines to sort and split blood samples, which is just one of
hundreds of thousands of menial laboratory jobs that pay decent money but could
more efficiently be done by robots.

We may be able to add bartenders to the list next year, but at this point, it
still seems that man has an advantage over machine in making a decent Manhattan.

- Lydia DePillis

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


