                             1523 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 22, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Google Invests Heavily in Effort to Blend Illusion and Reality

BYLINE: By DAVID GELLES and MICHAEL J. DE LA MERCED; Conor Dougherty contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; DEALBOOK; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1206 words


If Google has its way, hammerhead sharks will swim through your office,
elephants will fit in the palm of your hand and dragons will fly among the
birds.

These fanciful visions are being dreamed up by Magic Leap, a start-up making
augmented-reality technology. On Tuesday, it landed Google as its biggest
investor.

Valuing Magic Leap at about $2 billion, the $542 million cash infusion from
Google and other investors immediately vaulted the shadowy start-up into the
upper echelons of young technology companies.

But as is so often the case with tech start-ups, Magic Leap's soaring valuation
is based on little more than an ambitious vision and some nascent code. Magic
Leap, which is based far from Silicon Valley in the suburbs of Miami, has no
revenue -- and no products currently on the market.

''Until we see the device, you have to be a little skeptical,'' said Brian Blau,
an analyst at Gartner who has worked with virtual reality for two decades.

Details about Magic Leap's plans remain sketchy. The company declined requests
for an interview on Tuesday. On its website, the company has a few videos and
images that depict rich animations displayed over what people see with the naked
eye. Seahorses float above children in a schoolroom. A yellow submarine hovers
near an outdoor promenade. An astronaut walks through a train station.

So-called augmented reality technology already exists, but remains primitive.
Google itself has gone further than any other company to bring this concept to
market with Google Glass, its interactive spectacles.

But Magic Leap appears to have significantly broader aims, describing an
ambitious vision for displaying rich interactive graphics alongside what people
see naturally, using what it calls a dynamic digitized lightfield signal.

''Current technologies we use to access the digital world limit, or even take us
away, from the real world,'' Magic Leap's website reads.

Google's role as the lead investor is significant as it jockeys for position in
a rapidly shifting technology industry.

Just seven months ago, Facebook stunned Silicon Valley with the $2 billion
acquisition of Oculus, a virtual reality company. Though the social network's
interest in the maker of a virtual reality headset was a surprise to many,
Facebook believes Oculus can be a new sort of operating system as people
continue to find new ways to interact with computers.

Google views Magic Leap in much the same way, according to people briefed on the
company's thinking. As people become more comfortable with wearable technology,
technologies like Magic Leap are likely to become more commonplace.

''Magic Leap is going beyond the current perception of mobile computing,
augmented reality and virtual reality,'' Magic Leap's founder and chief
executive, Rony Abovitz, said in a statement. ''We are transcending all three,
and will revolutionize the way people communicate, purchase, learn, share and
play.''

Bing Gordon, a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, another investor in
Magic Leap, said that augmented reality could become a new platform -- one that
he argued could outstrip mobile devices in popularity. He compared the potential
advancements to the rise of cinema: a new way of seeing the world. In this case,
the start-up's technology allows highly realistic graphics to appear alongside
real-life objects.

The difference, according to Mr. Gordon, is that Magic Leap is better
coordinated with how the human eye and brain process images, making the computer
graphics feel, and move, more naturally.

Augmented reality could obviously be used to enhance video games, something that
Mr. Gordon, as a former executive of the game company Electronic Arts, is
familiar with. But he argued that the technology could be applied to an array of
other applications, creating a real-life equivalent to the magical newspaper
from the ''Harry Potter'' books.

''For a while, we thought it was technically impossible, and then financially
impossible,'' he said. ''Now it's technically and financially possible.''

With more than $60 billion in the bank, Google cannot seem to find enough ways
to invest its money. Google Ventures, the company's venture capital arm, has
invested in diverse companies including Blue Bottle Coffee and Uber, the
on-demand taxi service.

Google X, the company's research division, is the hatchery for all kinds of
''moonshots'' including self-driving cars, a drone-based delivery service called
Project Wing and, perhaps most notably, Google Glass.

The tech giant has spent much of the last two years trying to gain entry to
essentially everything with an Internet connection, through projects including
the Open Automotive Alliance, intended to bring its Android operating system to
cars, and its acquisition of Nest, a maker of Internet-connected thermostats and
smoke alarms.

But the investment in Magic Leap comes from Google Inc., not one of its
investment arms. This suggests that it is less concerned with the near-term
business prospects of augmented reality than in forging a long-term strategic
relationship with Magic Leap. Sundar Pichai, Google's senior vice president for
Android, Chrome and apps, will join the Magic Leap board.

The investment represents a huge bet by Google and its consortium of investors.
But such wagers are quickly becoming the norm for the likes of Google and
Facebook, two companies not content to rest on their already hugely profitable
existing business models.

''They're willing to take risks on the belief that their business will not be
around forever,'' Mr. Gordon said. ''The great tech C.E.O.s are all
simultaneously maxing out their current model while also looking around at
future models and placing big bets.''

Other investors in Series B, or the second major financing round, include
Qualcomm Ventures, Legendary Entertainment, the private equity firm KKR, Vulcan
Capital, Kleiner Perkins, Andreessen Horowitz and Obvious Ventures.

The group, a consortium of some of the biggest names in venture capital and
private equity, are all betting big money on ''an eclectic group of visionaries,
rocket scientists, wizards and gurus from the fields of film, robotics,
visualization, software, computing and user experience,'' as Magic Leap
describes itself on its website.

So far, however, augmented reality and virtual reality have remained more the
stuff of science fiction than of the everyday Internet.

Google's Glass, which essentially places a tiny computer screen on an eyeglass
lens, is available for $1,500 in ''open beta,'' a public test of the device.
Oculus does not have a product ready for buyers yet.

And even if Magic Leap or Oculus does create a compelling new computing
platform, the next challenge will be convincing media and tech companies to
create lots of content to keep users entertained.

''Virtual reality has been around for 20 years, and the one thing that has been
consistent throughout this is that the technology is not mature enough,'' Mr.
Blau said. ''Today there's the possibility for that to change, but it's going to
take a while for these app developers to get it right.''

Conor Dougherty contributed reporting.

Real-Life Illness in a Virtual World

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/10/21/google-invests-in-magic-leap-an-augmented
-reality-firm/

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Magic Leap, in which Google invested $542 million on Wednesday,
intends to make a device that overlays digital animation on a user's field of
vision. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAGIC LEAP)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


