                             1501 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 6, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Post Regains Its Place at the Table

BYLINE: By DAVID CARR.

Email: carr@nytimes.com; Twitter: @carr2n

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; THE MEDIA EQUATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1260 words


Nothing in God's creation is ever as good as it once was, but The Washington
Post is coming pretty close.

The once-embattled newspaper is in the middle of a great run, turning out the
kind of reporting that journalists -- and readers -- live for. That includes
coverage that played a role in the resignation of the director of the Secret
Service and investigative work that eventually led to the conviction of a former
governor of Virginia on corruption charges.

The people who work at The Post have been clobbered for decades for not matching
the glory days of Watergate -- it's doubtful anyone ever will -- but more
recently, after a series of buyouts and some management blunders, the decline in
ambition and quality was there for all to see. The Post became seen as more of a
basket case than best in class.

As Politico -- started by disaffected Post journalists -- gained traction with
its aggressive coverage of politics, the whispers that The Post was no longer
relevant became a loud refrain. The Columbia Journalism Review argued that by
making large reductions in staff, leaders at The Post had ''diluted'' its
quality, Vanity Fair lamented it had become ''a symbol of decline'' and The New
Republic called it a ''newspaper in disarray.''

The Graham family, longtime stewards of the newspaper, finally decided a little
over a year ago that deeper pockets and different thinking would be needed to
preserve the paper, and sold it to Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.

But now, more than a year after the sale, that narrative has changed and The
Washington Post is being talked about for all the right reasons. Did Mr. Bezos
have some digital lightning in a bottle that altered the math of modern
journalism? Far from it, but his willingness to finance hiring new employees --
over 100 so far this year -- has created an atmosphere of confidence and
financial stability.

The Post has been guilty of boring its readers in the past, but the current
version is a surprising, bumptious news organization -- maybe not the pirate
ship that Ben Bradlee helmed as executive editor, but it is a sharp digital and
daily read. It's creating challenges for, ahem, its competitors, and bringing
significant accountability to the beats it covers.

Only a nitwit would root against the health of the daily newspaper in the
nation's capital. The Post both covers and is part of the permanent class in
Washington, and there is a broad civic interest in having a well-funded news
outlet with sources and insights into Beltway bureaucracy and politics.

One of the deeper pleasures of covering the media world is that sometimes a
single person, arriving at the right time, can change the fortunes of an
organization. Think Tina Brown at The New Yorker, Eugene Roberts at The
Philadelphia Inquirer or Adam Moss at New York magazine. At The Post, Mr. Bezos
may have ensured the lights stayed on, but it is Martin Baron, who became editor
at the beginning of 2013, who pushed the newspaper back into the conversation.

''Marty is a very good newsman, a no-nonsense, really bright guy who believes in
the power of news, and that is highly contagious in a newsroom,'' said Tom
Rosenstiel, the executive director of the American Press Institute. ''Momentum
matters a lot in a news organization.''

Mr. Baron is a well-traveled and well-thought-of veteran who worked at The Miami
Herald, The Los Angeles Times and The New York Times before becoming the
executive editor of The Herald in 2000 and then quickly moving to the top job at
The Boston Globe in 2001. In that period, he distinguished himself as a leader
of journalists, but at both The Globe and The Herald, his tenure coincided with
financial chaos, cuts and reduced ambitions.

The Post is the first time he has been handed a baton that was not on fire --
Marcus Brauchli, the previous editor, was not universally praised but made
important moves to modernize its approach to news -- and he has run with it.

''With Jeff, we have the stability and resources to invest,'' Mr. Baron said by
phone. ''I think there are also intangibles in our business that matter
enormously. Reporters need to know that they will be supported, that their
colleagues aren't going to disappear and that they can do their job without
being worried all the time about losing it. Optimism, like negativity, can be
infectious.''

Part of The Post's current visibility has to do with an increasing
sophistication in promoting its content nationally; according to comScore, The
Post had 39,452,000 unique visitors in July, an increase of 63 percent from a
year before. But it's more than digital magic. The killer app, as I have written
before, is real, actual news. And The Post has generated a ton of it.

Apart from the unfolding story on a series of security lapses at the Secret
Service, including uncovering new details on just how far a fence-jumper got
into the White House, and the reporting on the Virginia corruption, there was a
great investigation on the police seizing millions from motorists not charged
with crimes, and a piece on how good project management took a back seat to
politics during the health care rollout.

There have been many others, but the current run began with a huge bang in June
2013, when Barton Gellman brought a series of high-risk, highly complicated
articles to the newspaper based on leaks from the former National Security
Agency contractor Edward Snowden. The Post, along with The Guardian, received a
prestigious public service Pulitzer Prize for its efforts.

''I think The Post is a very confident newsroom right now,'' said Dean Baquet,
executive editor of The New York Times, who competes against -- and is friends
with -- Mr. Baron. ''They pick the right stories, throw a lot of reporters at
them and go after them hard. That's a well-led newsroom.''

For all their bluster and outward crustiness, newspaper people can be delicate
flowers who have trouble doing their jobs when they believe that they are under
threat. The directionality of the business -- are we going up or are we going
down? -- is a kind of destiny. For years at The Post, and elsewhere in the
industry, so many goodbye cakes were ordered that it became a verb: caking.

''It's human nature,'' said Marc Fisher, a senior editor at The Post. ''If every
Friday you are getting called over to share cake with a departing colleague,
it's going to make you feel a little different if you see all sorts of cool new
people getting hired. In that kind of atmosphere, Marty has done a great job of
raising the ambitions of the place.''

Good news about journalism is as rare as Beltway bipartisanship, so watching The
Post's return to the big-boy table has been fun to watch. As it turns out, the
Grahams' final act of stewardship -- conveying The Post to an owner who could
afford and support it -- was among their most important. While Mr. Bezos may not
have figured out how to use drone delivery to change the economics of owning a
newspaper, he has financed excellence and stayed out of the way.

No one is going to mistake him for a print sugar daddy -- last month, the
company announced draconian cuts to pensions, like eliminating medical benefits
for retired employees. There was also a freeze in a defined-benefit plan for
managers with an eye toward imposing the same on The Post's union employees.

And it's also not to say that The Post has reinvented the math of producing
high-quality information in a commodity-priced age.

But for now, enabling journalists to break news, chase scoops and light up the
web seem like a better path than letting them eat cake.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/06/business/media/the-washington-post-regains-its
-place-at-the-table.html

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Martin Baron, executive editor of The Washington Post, standing,
and other Post editors read the list of Pulitzer Prize winners in April. The
newspaper won a public-service prize for its reporting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
(B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


