                             1548 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Week 1054: Dead letters

BYLINE: Pat Myers

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. T20

LENGTH: 1289 words


Mikhail Kalashnikov has died.â[#x20ac][#x192]He designed the AK-47.
â[#x20ac][#x192]Let's hope Saint Peter lets him slide â[#x20ac][#x192](After
all, he helped fill Heaven!).

As we welcome Little Squalling Infant 2014, it's the Style Invitational's
tradition to mark the other end of the life "cycle" by "honoring," in verse,
those who just missed the chance to assist in the delivery. This week: Write a
short, humorous poem commemorating someone (or maybe even something) who died in
2013, as in the example above from Washington Post Oddest Odist Gene Weingarten.
It doesn't have to rhyme, but poems that do rhyme, as well as those with a
consistent meter, tend to work better as light verse. Song parodies are not
forbidden. As always, long poems have to be funny enough to justify taking up a
lot of space, and they're more likely to run only online.

Winner gets the Inkin' Memorial, the Lincoln statue bobblehead that is the
official Style Invitational trophy. Second place receives, in honor of the
holiday of Epiphany, a hotel-minibar-size bottle of "anointing oil" that Loser
Marleen May picked up in Israel. It contains "myrrh, frankincense, and
spikenard" (you'll have to provide your own pyrite). And since we're feeling
especially gift-bearing, we'll toss in a small container of Doctor Wacko's Silly
Sludge. "Stretch it! Pour it! Watch it drip!"

Other runners-up win their choice of a yearned-for Loser Mug or the ardently
desired "Whole Fools" Grossery Bag. Honorable mentions get a lusted-after Loser
magnet, either the Po' Wit Laureate or Puns of Steel. First Offenders receive a
smelly tree-shaped air "freshener" (FirStink for their first ink). E-mail
entries to losers@washpost.com or fax to 202-334-4312. Deadline is Monday, Jan.
13; results published Feb. 2 (online Jan. 30). No more than 25 entries per
entrant per week. Include "Week 1054" in your e-mail subject line or it might be
ignored as spam. Include your real name, postal address and phone number with
your entry. See contest rules and guidelines at wapo.st/InvRules. The subhead
for this week's honorable mentions is by Mark Raffman. Join the lively Style
Invitational Devotees group on Facebook at on.fb.me/invdev, and click "like" on
Style Invitational Ink of the Day at bit.ly/inkofday.

Report from Week 1050

our annual look back at most of the year's previous contests, in which we
invited readers a second chance to enter: More honorable mentions, including
some terrific song parodies, are in the online version of the Invite at
bit.ly/invite1054.

The winner of the Inkin'Memorial

Week 1036, "Liffs," place names used as new terms:Natchez: More than merely.
"Peepa talk funny'n lotta places, natchez Miss-sippy." (Brendan Beary, Great
Mills)

2Winner of the Dead Sea souvenir T-shirt featuring a sunbathing ibex:Week 1009,
write something about someone using only the letters in the person's name:Manti
Te'o: I meet a mate; I mention a moment, an intimate tete-a-tete, a time; I omit
to note I met mate on Net, mate ain't animate, mate a man . . . An Onion meme? I
nominate me.(Frank Osen, Pasadena, Calif.)

3 Week 1003, repurposed ad slogans: "Because you're worth it" (L'Oreal) . . .
for Dollar Tree.(Kristen Rowe, Silver Spring)

4 Week 1012, current-events limericks:Said Obama, "The people will hailMy
'Affordable' Act and regaleMe with hearty huzzahs!"The reality was:When he
rolled the thing out: Epic fail.(Nan Reiner, Alexandria)

Mulligan stew:honorable mentions

Week 1000, change a word by one letter: Momfoolery: Mrschief. (Tom Witte,
Montgomery Village)

Week 1003, repurposed ad slogans: For Depends: "You're soaking in it." (Mike
Gips, Bethesda)

Week 1004, 2012 obit poems:It's time we accorded Neil Armstrong his due -
Assuming his death wasn't falsified, too.(Brendan Beary)

Week 1005, joint legislation:The Yoho-Kaine-Kildee-Payne Act to legalize
"medical prostitution."(Kelley Rogers, Darnestown, a First Offender)

The Pocan-Cotton-Holding-Titus Act regulating the thickness and resiliency of
bra fabrics. (Michael Jacobs, Columbia)

Week 1006, superheroes: Eye-Tee: Has the ability to slow or disable any software
and hardware by "upgrading" it. (Jeff Contompasis, Ashburn)

Week 1007, crossword clues: ARROGATE: Woodward and Bernstein investigate the
team-name brouhaha. (Barry Koch, Catlett, Va.)

Week 1008, rearrange the words in a movie title:"Sheba, Come Back Little": A man
sends his spouse to a fat farm.(Howard Walderman, Columbia)

"Club Dallas Buyers": When a Black Friday riot breaks out, Texas mall cops take
matters into their own hands. (Mark Raffman, Reston)

Week 1009, write something using only the letters in the person's name: Donald
Trump: Rump on top. (William Kennard, Arlington)

Week 1015, bogus music trivia: "Vuvuzela" is Zulu for "butt trumpet." (Jeff
Contompasis)

Week 1019, headlines using just one vowel not counting Y:Toronto's Rob Ford on
D.C. Sports Show: Boozy Bozo's Sooo Not Sorry!(Mark Raffman)

Week 1020, "grandfoals": Urine the Money x A Penny Urned = Second Kidney Sold
(Danielle Nowlin, Woodbridge)

Round Yon Virgin x Unlimited Losses = Carol of the Bills (Perry Beider, Silver
Spring)

Week 1023, haiku sent to Mars: Here's greetings from EarthThirty minutes to your
doorBy Amazon drone(Bruce Carlson, Alexandria)

Week 1024, alphabet couplets:E's for Enrolling in health care - now book me!F's
for the Fifty-three times that it took me.(Danielle Nowlin)

M for Mandela: huge chains he helped break. N for the nut job who "signed" at
his wake. (Nan Reiner)

Week 1026, "You might . . .":  You might want to cut back on the coffee if you
have trouble finding a vein for your French IV drip. (Jeff Contompasis)

Week 1027, paired building elements at particular places: At the Statue of
Liberty: Sign on benches: "Your Tired"; sign on trash cans: "Your Wretched
Refuse" (Beverley Sharp, Montgomery, Ala.)

Week 1031, words within words: R'amen': God's gift to the starving grad student.
(Pam Sweeney, Burlington, Mass.)

Week 1033, Limericks featuring a word beginning with fa-:After foolishly downing
a jawfulOf food that included a waffleAnd over a poundOf fava beans, ground,I
could honestly say I falafel.(Chris Doyle, Ponder, Tex.)

Week 1036, Liffs: Azerbaijan: Describing "In My Life," "Come Together" and other
"Lennon/McCartney" songs that Paul had no hand in. (Brendan Beary)

Michigan: What you'll do on your next turn after losing a round of beer pong.
(Danielle Nowlin)

Richmond, v., past tense: "The governor left office under a cloud, but he soon
richmond into a good law firm and seats on some well-paying boards." (Mike
Barnes, Arlington, a First Offender)

Week 1042, neologisms with the letter block s-a-n-e in any order: Sinsane:
Realistic about what you can get away with. (Fred Dawson, Beltsville)

Week 1044, comical safety rules:To deter skin cancer, tanning on public beaches
will be allowed only at night.(Lawrence McGuire, Waldorf)

Week 1045, pair a line in a song with a question:A. And the sign said longhaired
freaky people need not apply.Q. What sign was recently ripped down at the Red
Sox employment office?(Cate Magennis Wyatt, Waterford, Va., a First Offender)

A. Get a good job with more pay and you're okay. Q. Congressman, what advice do
you have for the millions of Americans affected by the cut in food stamps?
(Douglas Goralski, McLean, a First Offender)

And Last: A. "Gangnam style, ehhh sexy lady."Q. What could be less stylish than
the Style Invitational? (Heather Spence, New York)

And Even Laster: Week 1030, cinquains:SILimericks, punsScatological fun!But
there is no Swimsuit Issue.(Thank God.) (Todd DeLap, Fairfax)

Still running - deadline Monday night - our Questionable Journalism contest, in
which you take any line from a newspaper article and pair it with a funny
question it might answer. See bit.ly/invite1053.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


