                              15 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Demand Grows, Drones Outpace Rules

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1292 words


Jeremiah Johnson was flying his battery-powered drone above a park in Brooklyn
on a recent weekend when he saw something in the distance.

Faster than you could say ''speeding quadcopter,'' Mr. Johnson, a design
technologist, realized it was a small, remote-controlled aircraft just like his
-- and it was only about 150 feet away. ''We were eyeing each other,'' he said,
''sizing each other up.''

Not long ago, drones were a relatively rare sight over New York City, usually
piloted by photographers. But now drones are soaring as never before, deployed
more and more by those who just love gadgets, as new models come on the market
at lower and lower prices.

But their proliferation has also resulted in problems.

Two men were charged with reckless endangerment in July after the police said a
drone they were flying in Upper Manhattan came within 800 feet of a New York
Police Department helicopter near the George Washington Bridge.

Also in July, the Federal Aviation Administration opened an investigation into
whether a drone sent aloft by the photographer at the wedding of Representative
Sean Patrick Maloney, Democrat of New York, in Cold Spring, N.Y., broke rules on
airspace restrictions. Mr. Maloney, who is on the House subcommittee that
oversees the F.A.A., said last week that he had been ''amazed'' by the
technology ''but wasn't up to date on the lack of regulations around it.''

More recently, a building manager on the Upper West Side of Manhattan sent a
stern email to residents. Do not even think of launching a drone from the
building's circular driveway, the July 14 email said before explaining that the
last drone that had taken off from there had crashed on a neighbor's terrace.

''Right now, unlike a manned-aircraft pilot who can get a license from the
F.A.A., there's no official training program for small drones,'' said Brendan M.
Schulman, a lawyer in Manhattan who represents a number of drone operators and
enthusiasts. ''What you're seeing is popularity because they don't require any
particular expertise to get going. What you're seeing is people buying these
devices off the shelf and operating them without any experience or training
because they're easy to use.''

There are no specific regulations for local enforcement of drones in the city.
Sgt. Brendan Ryan, a police spokesman, said the local law that covers drones is
in a section of the city's administrative code titled ''aviation in and over the
city.'' ''The circumstances determine the seriousness,'' he said in an email.
''Individuals could potentially be charged with reckless endangerment if, for
example, it falls out of the sky, or unlawful surveillance, if one videotapes
the inside of private property.''

On Sunday, Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat from New York, said the city had
turned into the Wild West for drones. He said it was time for new federal rules
and urged the F.A.A., which is considering regulations for drones, to issue them
by the end of the year.

Other officials have also expressed concern. In Lower Manhattan, Community Board
1's quality of life committee discussed drones at a hearing convened after two
reports of drones flying in or near a park, and after a member of the board saw
a drone hovering outside an apartment in Battery Park City.

Unquestionably, affordability is one reason more drones are taking to the skies.
Lower-priced models, some costing less than $80, have propelled drones beyond
their early niche as specialized equipment for committed hobbyists and
professional photographers. Drones are now what Mr. Schulman called ''more of an
impulse purchase'' for many buyers.

Retailers agree. ''This is the summer of the drone,'' said Henry Posner, the
director of corporate communications for B&H Photo and Video, which stocks
drones from half a dozen manufacturers. The least expensive model with a video
camera costs $79.99.

Mr. Posner would not provide sales figures but said, ''It's as if I woke up one
day and realized, lo and behold, they're extremely popular.''

Time magazine recently published an article by Martha Stewart with the headline
''Why I Love My Drone'' in answer to a satirical essay in The New Yorker. She
wrote that her drone was a birthday present. She said that ''one of my farm
workers'' had flown his own more expensive-looking drone over her farm in
Bedford, N.Y. She described the images of the horse paddocks and chicken coops
as ''amazing.''

But with the increase in popularity have come privacy and safety issues. Some
operators have lost control of their drones -- but managed to recover video of
the ensuing crash -- while others have lost them entirely. Drones have been
known to fly off and not come back, no matter how hard their owners worked the
controls.

On the Upper West Side, the building at 201 West 70th Street, at Amsterdam
Avenue, warned residents not to launch drones there after one ''unfortunately
landed on another resident's terrace,'' according to the email to residents from
the building's assistant manager. The email threatened to make violators pay the
co-op's legal fees if the matter went to court.

''We really do frown upon anybody flying in that manner,'' said Steve Cohen, an
aerial photographer who is a leader of the New York Drone Users Group, a loosely
organized two-year-old group with 700 members that promotes ''responsible use of
flying robots.''

''People think, you buy something off the shelf, you charge it up and you fly
it,'' he added. ''But New York is a densely populated place. There are so many
different wind patterns, and if there's a gust, suddenly, you're out of
control.''

The F.A.A. permits amateurs to fly unmanned aviation systems -- the agency's
term for drones and other devices governed by remote control -- if the aircraft
stay under 400 feet and well away from any airports. The agency also says the
person with the controls must keep the device in sight at all times once it is
in the air.

The city's Parks and Recreation Department has no rules that specifically apply
to drones, a spokesman said. It does have rules about unmanned model aircraft --
the same rules that apply to balloons, parachutes and hang gliders. They can be
flown only in designated areas, and there are no designated areas in Manhattan
or the Bronx. There are two in Brooklyn, two in Queens and one on Staten Island.

The spokesman, Philip Abramson, said a drone was discovered in a tree in Central
Park a couple of months ago. Where it was going and why it ended up in the tree
remain a mystery. ''As it was unclaimed,'' he said, ''it was turned over to the
N.Y.P.D.''

Jonathan Atkin, a photographer from the Bronx, took no chances before flying his
drone over the white dome of the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory at the New York
Botanical Garden. He got permission from its officials.

''I'm not interested in putting myself at risk by being a cowboy,'' he said
after a flight of more than 15 minutes.

Mr. Johnson, the design technologist, works for the Barbarian Group, an
interactive marketing agency, and has flown his drone at the office and at a
photo shoot. He said he crashed it five or six times in the first week he had
it.

''It's like a cross between playing a video game and playing with a
remote-control car,'' he said. ''It's remarkably easy to control, but it's also
remarkably easy to make a mistake.''

A day or two after he saw the other drone in McCarren Park in Greenpoint, two
girls about 5 years old ran to where he was flying it about 20 feet off the
ground.

''They started jumping for it,'' he said. ''I started taunting them, bringing it
down and then taking it up. They wouldn't leave until their mom dragged them
away.''

A 6-year-old boy was more direct, he said. ''He came over,'' Mr. Johnson said,
''and tried to grab the controller from me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/04/nyregion/drones
-outpacing-rules-as-popularity-soars-in-new-york.html

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Jeremiah Johnson flying a drone inside the Barbarian Group
office in Manhattan last month. Left, a photo of the New York Botanical Garden
taken from a drone controlled by Jonathan Atkin, a Bronx photographer.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 JONATHAN ATKIN)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


