                             1518 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 20, 2014 Monday
                        The International New York Times

Fiction Writers Help Scientists Push Known Boundaries

BYLINE: By PAUL VOOSEN | THE CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION; Pg.

LENGTH: 1030 words


WASHINGTON -- It's a conservative, incremental time in science these days.
Grants are elusive. Many researchers say that to win financing, they have to
almost know the results of their experiment before they conduct it. Forget
moonshots; they just want to make it to next year with a full salary.

Despite those headwinds, a group of science-fiction authors and researchers met
this month to support those engineers, scientists and entrepreneurs with big
dreams. It's time to aim higher, they said -- much higher.

The day was a roadshow, held here at the National Academies' Keck Center for a
new book: ''Hieroglyph: Stories and Visions for a Better Future.'' An anthology
of so-called techno-optimistic science-fiction stories, the book is a product of
Arizona State University's Center for Science and the Imagination, which was
founded in 2012 to foster collaboration among writers, artists and scientists.

The center spun out of an encounter between Neal Stephenson, the author of
''Snow Crash'' and ''Cryptonomicon,'' and Michael M. Crow, Arizona State's
president. Mr. Stephenson, who grew up watching the Gemini and Apollo missions,
had gone public with a complaint: Society has grown risk-averse, reluctant to
dream big. Mr. Crow turned the lament around: Maybe science-fiction writers were
not doing enough to inspire these dreams.

It was a pitch that hearkened back to a progressive view of the sciences that
has long been out of fashion -- not just in academia but also in science
fiction. Dystopia is dominant. In novel after novel, humans have found infinite
ways, enabled by technology, to fall prey to our basest impulses. Long gone are
the dreams of science fiction writers like Robert A. Heinlein, Arthur C. Clarke
and Isaac Asimov. Long gone, too, are the fans: Today's readers seem to prefer
fantasy over science fiction: vampires, werewolves and wizards over Mars
colonists and robot butlers.

Mr. Stephenson took the bait, and alongside the center's director, Ed Finn, he
charged 16 authors, including luminaries like Bruce Sterling and Cory Doctorow,
to write stories of the near future that avoided ''hyperspace, holocaust and
hackers.'' (Namely, implausible scientific advances, dystopias and ragtag groups
finding new uses for existing technology.) His own story describes the erection
of a 12-mile-high steel tower above the Nevada desert. Drones and 3-D printers
come up frequently in the book.

A few lessons emerged from the book, Mr. Stephenson said at the National
Academies. First, ''dystopia has its defenders,'' he said. Look no further than
''1984,'' which has been highly productive for society as a warning of what
government surveillance could look like. Second, he said, the hacker narrative
proved unkillable. More often than not, the stories' innovations came from
outsiders, not institutions.

''That's all well and good, but I'll just point out that that's not where most
actual innovation really occurs. It tends to occur in giant corporations and big
government-funded labs,'' Mr. Stephenson said. Even in an optimistic book, he
noted, ''we're no longer looking toward big institutions as places where big,
creative, technical thinking can occur.'' He had no answer to why that was the
case.

It was noteworthy, then, that some of the bigger ideas of the day came from
government employees. Thomas Kalil, a deputy director at the Office of Science
and Technology Policy at the White House, made a pitch for mini-Apollo programs
like the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's mission to chart every
potential hazardous asteroid. ''This is something we have to worry about,'' he
said. ''It's not just science fiction.''

Meanwhile, Daniel Kaufman, a director at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, wanted to make technical knowledge less of an elite system.

''What if you could just talk to a computer and tell it what you want? We could
articulate it at a high level and have it write its own code,'' he said. It
would be revolutionary. ''What if you didn't just have a robot babysitter'' --
the premise of one story -- ''but you could program your robot babysitter? And
it could reflect your ideas and your mores?''

Often, talk veered from positive futures to present worries. Barton Gellman, a
Washington Post reporter known for his coverage of the leaks by Edward J.
Snowden -- the former National Security Agency contractor -- sat on one panel.
''We're inside this one-way mirror,'' he said, referring to the surveillance
state. What does science fiction say to do about that?

It depends on who's writing. One contributor to ''Hieroglyph,'' David Brin, has
argued that surveillance technology is getting so cheap that its spread can't be
stopped; instead we should ensure that everyone has access, to equalize its
power. Another author, Peter Watts, argues that this presumes an equality of
risk; in nature, when a bigger animal begins stalking a smaller animal, the
smaller animal runs away.

Over all, the relationship between science and science fiction remains
mysterious. Certainly, many nascent scientists read it. But rare is the author
who anticipated a discovery, writes Lawrence M. Krauss, a physicist at Arizona
State, in the book's foreword: ''The imagination of the natural world far
exceeds that of even the most gifted science-fiction writer.''

There are small pockets of direct innovation, though, added the chief scientist
of NASA, Ellen Stofan. For example, right now on the International Space
Station, there's a floating robotic orb directly inspired by Luke Skywalker's
dueling partner in ''Star Wars.'' (The spheres are used to test the best
algorithms for zero-gravity movement and docking.)

As it happened, even Mr. Stephenson had revised his views, after writing a
''hard science'' novel, including a dive into ways to escape the planet's
atmosphere.

''What I found out pretty quickly is that so many brilliant people have been
thinking about that exact problem for so long that it's almost a waste of
time,'' he said. There's a zoo of ideas out there, many decades old. ''It's less
a problem of coming up with cool ideas, more a problem of how do you push those
ideas forward.''

In other words, it's about money.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/20/science/fiction-writers-help-scientists-push-k
nown-boundaries.html

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


