                             1531 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 27, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Newcomers and Comebacks

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1185 words


Slowdive, the British band that performed on Saturday night at Terminal 5, held
pride of place at this year's CMJ Music Marathon, the annual showcase that
brought more than 1,300 bands to Manhattan and Brooklyn clubs from Tuesday
through Saturday (with some stragglers continuing into Sunday afternoon). For
Slowdive, the festival's biggest club was sold out, the audience was reverent,
and the performance was imposing, giving the band's magisterial songs a weight
and resonance that was never captured in the studio.

But the music was from the 1990s. Slowdive was a pioneer of the unhurried,
effects-drenched rock called shoegaze (for the musicians' undemonstrative stage
presence), and it released its last album in 1995; the band reunited this year.
Like much of the music at the CMJ Music Marathon, its performance looked to the
past, when the college radio stations at the core of CMJ were early spotters and
promoters of new sounds and ideas. (CMJ formerly stood for College Media
Journal, a newsletter tabulating and shaping what was played on college radio.)
That was before the Internet made all sorts of media gatekeepers far less
pivotal.

As college radio has been outflanked, the marathon's scope has shrunk. It is
less a magnet for aspiring bands nationwide and worldwide than the springtime
South by Southwest Music Festival in Austin, Tex. (even though baby bands there
increasingly have to compete for attention with pop celebrities).

Like South by Southwest, CMJ can start the campaign for a new pop product. On an
album due in December, the R&B singer Mary J. Blige has been reinventing her
music in sessions with London producers of electronic dance music like
Disclosure. In an unannounced miniset at the Fader Fort Presented by Converse,
singing to recorded tracks, Ms. Blige proved her voice could be just as
forthright over a club-music beat as with an R&B band. (She remarked that she
hadn't performed without instruments since 1992.)

CMJ also provided a Bowery Ballroom debut for the pop songwriter Ryn Weaver, who
had an Internet sensation over the summer with a song, ''OctaHate,'' a
collaboration with pop professionals including Charli XCX and Benny Blanco. Out
of the studio, her voice was bright and strong, with an urgent, fluttering
vibrato at emotional peaks and more than a hint of Stevie Nicks. Though her
other songs were more conventional than ''OctaHate,'' they were aimed at pop
radio, reveling in victim-to-victory dynamics and charged choruses.

Despite the huge number of bands at CMJ, the vast majority came from New York
City or nearby; a subway ride is not a major career investment.

Yet while it could seem as if every Brooklynite with a laptop was in the CMJ
lineup, New York is still home to bands as varied as Sunflower Bean, whose music
suggests what might have happened if psychedelia had emerged after punk and the
Police rather than before; New Myths, whose updated new wave can sprout shoegaze
distortion and three-part vocal harmonies; and Sons of an Illustrious Father,
whose rowdy roots-rock holds a poetic core.

There were delegations from more distant places. One of the festival's most
memorable arrivals came from Norway: Aurora, the songwriter Aurora Aksnes, with
her band. Her voice was vivid and clear in pop arrangements pulsating with
synthesizers and kicking in with harder drumbeats on choruses. Aurora's lyrics,
full of quests and transformations, show ambitions beyond love songs: ''The sky
is open wide,'' one song declared.

From closer to New York -- Philadelphia -- came Son Little, a singer with a firm
soul foundation who laced his bluesy flirtations with little electronic
disruptions and hints of existential dread.

Australia sent dozens of acts, among them the wry, hard-nosed rock songwriter
Courtney Barnett, who gained traction at CMJ last year and headlined Webster
Hall on Wednesday. There was a British contingent, too, with bands dedicated to
the snappy, tautly constructed, guitar-driven rock song: bands like Circa Waves,
with the relentless rhythm-guitar drive of the Strokes; Happyness, whose
slightly bent song structures echo the 1990s indie-rock of Pavement and the
Replacements; and the Crookes, which reached back toward the Beatles by way of
the Smiths.

It's easier to recall past glories than to envision a path forward. This year's
marathon often had the air of a musical museum celebrating the particular array
of genres that make college-radio programmers nostalgic: 1960s garage-rock and
psychedelia, 1970s punk and postpunk, 1980s electro-pop, 1990s grunge and
shoegaze, and the eternal charms of the guitar-strumming singer-songwriter.

The positive side is that those vintage styles arrive with both youthful fervor
and a self-conscious streak. King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard, from Australia,
clearly don't take themselves entirely seriously, but they tore into their
hopped-up boogie drone, topped with blues harp. Immigrant Union revived the
folk-rock wing of psychedelia. Odessa, a songwriter who reinvented herself in
California after making a reputation in Nashville bluegrass as Odessa Rose
Jorgensen, sang serenely gorgeous two-chord mantras supported by an attentive
jam band.

The guitarist Ryley Walker was one more kind of psychedelic-era throwback,
reaching back to the blues-folk-jazz guitar experimenters of the late 1960s and
early '70s like Pentangle and John Martyn. He began his set on Friday at Rough
Trade Records with an open-ended, 10-minute jam with a bassist, a two-chord
waltz that built to him singing in tongues, with androgynous moans and bursts of
wordless, primal sound.

The power of punk endures, too. Paws, from Scotland, brought a deliberately
disheveled punk attack to songs that galloped through tersely phrased
complaints. Protomartyr, from Detroit, put the rumbling propulsion of punk
behind bleak, free-associative lyrics that were part ranted, part sung.

Quieter performers survived the chatty crowds at CMJ. S, the Seattle group led
by Jenn Ghetto, sang in a wispy but unflinching voice about breakups, betrayal
and loneliness while transparent but steely patterns of guitar picking revealed
the nervous energy behind them. Luluc, a duo from Melbourne, sang diaristic
reflections in close, intimate harmony. Invisible Familiars, a New York band,
had songs that started out wry and low-key but took smart, whimsical and
sometimes raucous detours.

But in a CMJ Music Marathon full of genre exercises, my favorite performance was
by a band with more unhinged aspirations: Bo Ningen, a group of Japanese
musicians based in London, devoted to pandemonium. The members had the long,
long hair of a psychedelic band, but their version of psychedelia was decidedly
nonvintage; the drummer's kit included electric ones as well as traps, and the
musical vocabulary slashed through punk, noise, progressive rock and hardcore,
jumping from ultraprecise dissonant compositions to sonic chaos. By the end of
its set at Pianos, one guitar was hanging from a speaker, an invitation to
feedback. Bo Ningen wasn't looking for an exhibition spot in any rock museum; it
was going to reduce it to rubble.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/27/arts/music/newcomers-and-comebacks-.html

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Rachel Goswell of the British band Slowdive, which performed
Saturday in the CMJ Music Marathon. (C1)
Yuki Tsujii, of the London-based Japanese band Bo Ningen, performed in this
year's CMJ Music Marathon, though most of the bands in the festival came from
New York or nearby.
 Left, Son Little, from Philadelphia, and Aurora Aksnes, from Norway, performed
at the Rockwood Music Hall as part of CMJ. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (C5)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


