                             1512 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 14, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkey Denies Reports of Deal for Use of Its Bases in Fight Against Islamic
State

BYLINE: By TIM ARANGO; Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Istanbul, Eric
Schmitt from Washington, and Ceylan Yeginsu from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 727 words


ISTANBUL -- A day after American officials said Turkey had agreed to allow its
air bases to be used for operations against the Islamic State, which they
described as a deal that represented a breakthrough in tense negotiations,
Turkish officials said on Monday that there was no deal yet, and that talks were
still underway.

The Turkish comments represented another miscommunication between the United
States and its longtime ally Turkey, as President Obama pushes to strengthen an
international coalition against the militants that control a large area of both
Syria and Iraq, by securing a greater role for Turkey.

The Turks have insisted that any broad support to the coalition is dependent on
the mission going beyond the Islamic State, also called ISIS or ISIL, to also
target the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad, which Turkey has long opposed
and blames for creating the conditions that led to the rise of the extremists
within Syria and Iraq.

''We approach this issue from a comprehensive perspective, including safe havens
and a no-fly zone to be established in the region,'' said an official in the
office of Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, speaking on the condition of anonymity
because he was not authorized to speak to the press.

The official, who said that no deal over the use of air bases had been
completed, added, ''Talks, therefore, continue as we look into things we can do
together while covering all these aspects.''

A senior Defense Department official insisted on Monday that Turkey had agreed
in principle to the use of its bases. The official also sought to tamp down
reports of a rupture between the two allies.

''They have agreed to some base usage, but the details of how it will be
executed are still being worked out,'' said the official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity because of pending negotiations.

As part of an effort against Mr. Assad's government, the Turks have insisted on
a no-fly zone in northern Syria, near the border with Turkey, that would create
a safe haven in which to arm and train moderate rebels fighting against Mr.
Assad and where an opposition government could take root. The United States has
largely opposed this -- although some within the government, especially at the
State Department, believe the idea should be given serious consideration --
because it would broaden Mr. Obama's stated objective of focusing only on the
destruction of the Islamic State.

The apparent disagreement between officials of both countries seemed to reflect
unresolved differences, still to be negotiated, on the exact uses of Turkish air
bases, whether for logistics or airstrikes. Turkey, a NATO member, already
allows the use of its base at Incirlik, in southern Turkey, to fly surveillance
drones. Turkey has agreed to a host of other measures in the fight against the
Islamic State, including sharing intelligence, tightening border controls to
halt the flow of foreign fighters and taking part in an American-led program to
arm and train moderate Syrian rebels fighting against Mr. Assad's government.

Speaking in New York where he was meeting with United Nations officials,
Turkey's foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, told the semiofficial Anadolu
Agency, ''right now, we agree with the U.S. on some issues related to the
train-and-equip project.''

He added, ''There is no decision made on Incirlik or on any other matter.''

The latest tensions in the relationship between the United States and Turkey
came after two days of talks last week in Ankara, the Turkish capital, between
retired Gen. John R. Allen, Mr. Obama's envoy to the coalition against the
Islamic State, and Turkish officials.

A team of American military officials is expected to arrive in Ankara this week
for further talks, not just about the use of the air bases but also about
Turkey's role in training the moderate Syrian rebels, a program in which Turkey
has agreed to participate.

''There needs to be a new strategy in Syria, where a new power consisting only
of Syrians emerges to protect the Syrian people from IS and the regime,'' Mr.
Davutoglu said in an interview over the weekend with Daily Sabah, a Turkish
newspaper.

''The solution lies in the creation of a third force in addition to the Syrian
regime and IS that represents the Syrian people and is made up of Syrians from
all factions and not foreign fighters,'' Mr. Davutoglu said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/14/world/europe/not-so-fast-turkey-says-on-us-use
-of-air-bases.html

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


