                             158 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 25, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones Along Nature's Trails

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 410 words


It was John Muir, the great evangelist of America's wilderness, who warned:
''The gross heathenism of civilization has generally destroyed nature.''

The National Park Service made no mention of heathenism, but its concern was
clear when it imposed a ban on the use of noisy airborne drones by visitors
intent on adding an extra dimension to the majesty of the nation's 401 national
parks and monuments. The ban is a temporary measure while the service figures
out a policy on how to deal with this gnatlike advance of aeronautics that
already has been pestering hikers, climbers and campers.

Park officials described how the sunset serenity of a group at the edge of the
Grand Canyon was suddenly interrupted in April by a loud and intrusive drone
that careered about before crashing into the canyon wall. Then there was the
drone that rose up uninvited to hover before the four presidents carved into
Mount Rushmore, then swooped down to buzz perilously close to hundreds of people
seeking something more contemplative.

Meanwhile, bighorn sheep have been buzzed into panic at Zion National Park, and,
at Yosemite, climbers trying to master the risky Half Dome had no need for the
drone that paused like a stalker one day to look over their shoulders.

The Park Service was wise to act early. The retail price of drones is falling,
and they are fast becoming adult toys of choice with built-in temptations for
mischief. Ordinary hobbyists can now buy them for several hundred dollars or
less, store them in the car trunk, then radio-control the copter-bladed crafts
on 40-minute flights hundreds of feet through the skies.

Drones can weigh just a few pounds, replete with cameras. Serious photographers
are already complaining about the ban, citing the peerless possibilities of
drone cameras. But it's important to remember that park treasures were protected
in the first place to invite human adventure more actual than virtual.

Officials need time to craft a wise policy, one that may involve a permit system
and would allow drone use by emergency crews, research scientists and others
with useful missions. Parklands seem bedeviled enough by snowmobiles and
overcharged recreational vehicles. What's the point of a fresh nuisance, however
innovative?

The Park Service's drone challenge is not easy, as officials consult a variety
of voices and interests.

Even so, the parkland voice they must heed first is John Muir's: ''Go quietly,
alone; no harm will befall you.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/25/opinion/drones-along-natures-trails.html

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


