                             1532 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 28, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Aloft Through Automation

BYLINE: By NICOLA CLARK

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; ITINERARIES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1502 words


ORNSKOLDSVIK, Sweden -- On a clear day, Per Granquist cannot see forever. But
from his perch inside the airport control tower here, he does have an
unobstructed view of the future.

The big picture is provided from a 33-foot mast where a gray turret holds an
array of digital video cameras, communications antennas, sensors and microphones
-- a setup that resembles a cross between a space-age dovecote and a prison
guard tower. The system is meant to collect and integrate information of the
sort that Mr. Granquist, 40, has been providing with his own eyes and ears as an
air traffic controller for the last 17 years at this small airport in northern
Sweden.

The information from this array, though, is being sent elsewhere -- beamed by
fiber-optic cable to a windowless room of another airport, 100 miles south, in
the slightly larger town of Sundsvall.

The system is still in test mode, but the rest of the global commercial aviation
industry is watching closely. Early next year, Mr. Granquist and a handful of
his colleagues expect to move to Sundsvall. And from there, they will begin
''virtually'' guiding the half-dozen or so daily flights in and out of
Ornskoldsvik.

Ornskoldsvik is about to become the world's first remotely controlled airport.

''At first it seemed a bit weird,'' Mr. Granquist said of his training on the
new system.

In Sundsvall, instead of surveying the airport through plate-glass windows, he
will sit before a semicircular wall of more than a dozen 55-inch liquid-crystal
displays.

''But after two weeks,'' Mr. Granquist added, ''it really feels no different
from sitting here.''

Carved from an Arctic pine forest along Sweden's fjord-studded eastern coast,
Ornskoldsvik might seem an unlikely setting for a potential aviation revolution.
But over the last several years, officials from dozens of countries have made
their way down the airport's rutted gravel road and past the yellow
moose-crossing signs to get a firsthand look at technology that many expect will
eventually transform the way air traffic is managed worldwide.

It is a concept that experts say has uses not only for the world's out-of-the
way places but could also enhance efficiency and safety at sprawling urban
airports where increasing air traffic places ever greater demands on human
controllers.

''I have little doubt that this is the next big thing for our industry,'' said
Paul Jones, operations manager at NATS, which provides air navigation services
at Heathrow and a dozen other British airports.

He is among those who have seen the Swedish setup firsthand.

''I do think one day it could replace traditional visual control towers almost
completely,'' Mr. Jones said.

It is no accident that the idea for a remote-controlled airport emerged from
Sweden, whose northern regions are thinly populated and poorly served by rail or
other transportation alternatives. Much like Alaska and vast swaths of northern
Canada, Scandinavia is dotted with dozens of small airports that provide vital
connections to the outside world.

While many of the world's remote communities are so tiny as to rely on small
private planes whose pilots coordinate their own takeoffs and landings by radio,
towns like Ornskoldsvik -- population 55,000 -- are just big enough to justify
minimal scheduled airline services and a control tower. Yet with just a handful
of takeoffs and landings most days, air traffic controllers at such airports
often spend more of their time monitoring the weather or filling out paperwork
than actually guiding planes.

''It doesn't really make economic or even social sense to station a fully
qualified air traffic controller in some of these places,'' said Erik Backman,
director of operations at LFV, Sweden's state-owned air navigation service
provider.

Full-time controllers in Sweden average about $77,000 a year in pay, he said, a
cost that rises to more than $140,000, once social security and other employee
charges are included. There are also expenses for maintaining a building for use
by human controllers. For the 28 civilian and military airports that LFV serves
-- several of them, like Ornskoldsvik, lose money -- air traffic control
represents a large part of their operating costs.

That is why LFV began exploring the idea of pooling controllers at a single
location, to guide flights remotely. In 2006, the agency invited the Swedish
aeronautics and technology group Saab to develop a prototype that could be
operated with minimal additional training by licensed controllers as well as
meet international safety requirements. The system Saab developed was installed
at both Ornskoldsvik and Sundsvall airports in 2012 and it was expected to
receive certification from Swedish regulators by the end of this week.

To guard against a remote-control airport's being hijacked by hackers, the data
transmitted between the camera tower and the remote control center is scrambled
using dedicated hardware and encryption software, said Anders Carp, a Saab vice
president in charge of traffic management systems. As an added layer of
security, he said, Saab also uses an algorithm to verify that images have not
been tampered with en route.

Mikael Henriksson has been at the fore of LFV's push into the future. An air
traffic controller for 40 years, Mr. Henriksson, 59, has worked at dozens of
civilian and military airports in Sweden and abroad, including a few harrowing
stints in the war zones of Iraq. His job now is helping controllers like Mr.
Granquist make the leap to remote tower technology, which unlike transitioning
from being an airplane pilot to a drone operator, largely relies on an identical
set of skills.

''Controllers are already spending most of their time looking at a screen
instead of out a window,'' Mr. Henriksson said.

On a recent day at the remote control center in Sundsvall, Mr. Henriksson put
the cameras in Ornskoldsvik through their paces. With the tap of a stylus on a
sleek glass panel, the arc of display panels flickered to life, presenting a
crisp 360-degree panorama of the Ornskoldsvik runway.

As passengers boarded a Stockholm-bound turboprop on the tarmac, a flock of
blackbirds flitted over the projected airfield, then disappeared into the trees,
which swayed in the gentle breeze. A truck rolling slowly past a hangar was
automatically highlighted by a red rectangle that followed its movement across
the screens. Mr. Henriksson clicked to activate one of two robotic zoom cameras,
opening a new window that functioned as virtual binoculars.

When the plane took off, a few minutes later, the hum of its engines passed from
right to left through the room's speakers, in perfect surround sound.

Mr. Carp, of Saab, explained that the system could be equipped with optional
enhancements like infrared or night-vision lenses and 3-D-augmented reality
overlays. Such features could come in particularly handy in places like
Scandinavia, where frequent snowstorms and long winter nights are particularly
challenging to air controllers. A built-in recording function allows airports to
store and replay video and data for training purposes -- or to aid investigators
in the event of an accident.

Officials at larger airports are also intrigued by the possibility of using
remote camera technology to complement traditional control towers -- either to
give human controllers a clearer view of parts of the airport that might be
obstructed by other buildings, or to serve as a contingency in the event of
extreme weather, a disaster or even a terrorist attack.

A few major international airports already have emergency backup centers where a
team of controllers can direct a reduced number of flights remotely, relying on
radar and radio communications. Heathrow, for example, set up such a site in
2009, in a building near the airport that Mr. Jones of NATS said had never been
deployed but was capable of operating at 80 percent capacity in the event the
airport's main control towers were disabled by a fire or a power failure.

''But it doesn't have windows,'' Mr. Jones said of the Heathrow site. Installing
a remote-tower system with cameras and video screens, he said, would --
virtually, at least -- ''put the windows back in'' and enable the airport,
Europe's busiest, to operate at close to full capacity in an emergency.

Back in Ornskoldsvik, Mr. Granquist most days now works his nine-hour shift in
solitude, with only an occasional visit from Robert Gyllroth, the airport
manager, who sometimes asks him to pitch in with other airport tasks, like
manning the tiny duty-free shop.

Three years ago, when he first learned of the plan to operate Ornskoldsvik's
tower remotely, Mr. Granquist was upset at the prospect of having to move his
family to Sundsvall. But his reluctance has since turned to impatience -- and
excitement at the career possibilities that remote technology might open for him
at other, larger airports.

''It will also be nice,'' Mr. Granquist said as he padded in stocking feet to
adjust a window blind against the setting sun, ''to have some colleagues.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/28/business/international/directing-planes-by-rem
ote-control.html

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Per Granquist, an air traffic controller in Ornskoldsvik,
Sweden, and colleagues will ''virtually'' guide daily flights.
 At the remote control center, the tap  of a stylus on a glass panel brings up
a panorama of the runway. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CASPER HEDBERG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


