                             1515 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 16, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Car Bomb Kills 8 Afghans From Unit Linked to C.I.A.

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH; Farooq Jan Mangal contributed reporting from Khost,
Afghanistan, and Ahmad Shakib from Kabul.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 658 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Eight Afghan paramilitary soldiers were killed during an
assault on a Taliban hide-out in eastern Afghanistan, Afghan officials said
Wednesday. It was the latest of several clashes to take a heavy toll on the
security forces as American combat forces leave the country.

The deaths, caused by a car bomb, occurred during a raid by the Khost Protection
Force, a C.I.A.-trained paramilitary unit that has carried out operations along
the border with Pakistan for more than a decade.

Fighters with the force, who operate in Khost Province, swooped on a remote
compound believed to house suicide bombers, killing three people including one
woman, the Khost governor's office said in a statement. But once they had
secured the compound, a car bomb exploded, killing eight of the militiamen and
wounding five.

The governor's spokesman, Mohammad Mubarez Zadran, confirmed in a phone
interview that the troops belonged to the Khost militia force, established by
the C.I.A. and American Special Operations forces after 2001, and which The
Associated Press reported in May had up to 3,500 fighters.

The future of the Khost Protection Force, and others like it in various Afghan
provinces, has been unclear as the C.I.A. withdraws from remote Afghan bases in
concert with the broader drawdown of American combat troops from Afghanistan.
Some of the units were earmarked to be handed over to the Afghan intelligence
service, the National Directorate of Security, after this year.

The Khost force operates on the border with North Waziristan, the Pakistani
tribal belt that is a major hub for the Taliban and the allied Haqqani Network,
which has leveraged its ability to straddle the border to carry out numerous
attacks on high-profile Western and Afghan targets in Afghanistan.

The Khost Protection Force, which generally maintains a low profile, has until
recently been one of the largest of several C.I.A.-sponsored paramilitary forces
along the border. During the Obama administration's troop surge in 2010 and
2011, some American news reports said it had carried out illegal cross-border
raids, with support from armed American drones, to attack Qaeda and Taliban
fighters in North Waziristan.

Those attacks came at a time of high tension between the United States and
Pakistan over the situation in North Waziristan. American officials were angered
by close ties between the Haqqani Network and Pakistani military intelligence,
while Pakistanis privately complained of cross-border interference from American
forces and spies based in southern Afghanistan.

Drawn from local tribes, the Khost Protection Force initially enticed recruits
with the promise of higher pay and better conditions than the regular Afghan
Army. ''The food, the training, everything is better,'' Mohammed Yousuf, a medic
with the force, told Newsday in 2004.

Until recently, it had been unusual for Afghan officials to publicly acknowledge
its operations. In an interview in July 2011 the outgoing commander of American
forces in Afghanistan, Gen. David Petraeus, described it as ''a border force
that is quite effective and well supported.''

The deaths in Khost occurred as the Taliban stepped up a renewed assault on
government forces across the country in recent days, following a relative lull
in violence that coincided with last week's Eid al-Adha religious holiday.

In the southern province of Helmand, Taliban fighters killed Muhammad Anwar, the
district governor of Nad Ali district, in an ambush on his vehicle late Tuesday.

Nad Ali district is a major center of opium poppy cultivation and was the scene
of heavy fighting between Western and Taliban fighters during the American
troops surge in 2010-11. Mr. Anwar was considered a staunch anti-Taliban force
in the area and had personally participated in battles against the insurgents.

Zabiullah Mujahid, a Taliban spokesman, took responsibility for the attack, in
which at least two policemen were also killed.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/16/world/asia/car-bomb-kills-cia-trained-afghan-s
oldiers.html

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


