                             153 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Debates Drone Strike on American

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and ERIC SCHMITT; Charlie Savage contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 821 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration is debating whether to authorize a lethal
strike against an American citizen living in Pakistan who some believe is
actively plotting terrorist attacks, according to current and former government
officials.

It is the first time American officials have actively discussed killing an
American citizen overseas since President Obama imposed new restrictions on
drone operations last May.

The officials would not confirm the identity of the suspect, or provide any
information about what evidence they have amassed about the suspect's
involvement in attacks against Americans. The debate about whether to put the
individual on a kill list was first reported on Monday by The Associated Press.

The first time the Obama administration carried out a targeted killing operation
against an American citizen was in September 2011, when a C.I.A. drone killed
the radical preacher Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen; officials said little publicly
about the operation. The White House acknowledged last year that four American
citizens had been killed in drone strikes during Mr. Obama's time in office.
According to the White House, only Mr. Awlaki had been intentionally targeted.

During a speech last May, Mr. Obama said he intended to gradually shift drone
operations from the C.I.A. to the Pentagon, partly to make them more
transparent. American officials said then that drone strikes in Pakistan would
continue to be launched by the C.I.A. because Pakistan refuses to allow open
American military operations on its soil.

However, under a classified policy issued by Mr. Obama, there is a strong
preference for the Pentagon -- not the C.I.A. -- to carry out drone strikes
against American citizens, though the policy is said to allow exceptions if
necessary.

American officials said that the new discussions about whether to strike the
American in Pakistan had been going on since the middle of last year. The public
got a glimpse of the debate last week when Representative Mike Rogers of
Michigan, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, spoke angrily about the
drone restrictions imposed by Mr. Obama.

''Individuals who would have been previously removed from the battlefield by
U.S. counterterrorism operations for attacking or plotting to attack against
U.S. interests remain free because of self-imposed red tape,'' Mr. Rogers, a
Republican, said during a congressional hearing.

The new rules, he said, are ''endangering the lives of Americans at home and our
military overseas in a way that is frustrating to our allies and frustrating to
those of us who engage in the oversight of our classified activities.''

Still, several senior officials in both the executive branch and Congress
confirmed that even though the policy establishes a baseline rule that only the
Pentagon is to conduct drone strikes against American citizens, a clause makes
an exception that would in theory allow the administration to use the C.I.A. to
carry out a strike if circumstances justified it.

''This was Brennan's brainchild,'' said a senior congressional aide, who spoke
on the condition of anonymity because of the continuing policy debate over the
matter, referring to John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director. ''They wanted to be
able to talk about it, disclose it and provide the legal footing for it.''

Details about the deliberations -- including the identity of the proposed
target, what he is accused of doing and the quality of any evidence against him
-- remain murky. It is not clear how much reluctance by the administration to
approve a strike is based on whether he meets the standard -- a continuing,
imminent threat against Americans -- and how much other factors, like the
complications raised by the military preference, are playing a role.

Despite Mr. Obama's efforts to reform the rules governing the use of drones,
they remain controversial. ''So little has changed since last year when it comes
to government secrecy over killings,'' said Naureen Shah, advocacy adviser at
Amnesty International U.S.A. ''The public and most members of Congress are still
completely in the dark about where the U.S. claims authority to strike, the
legal rules and the identity of those already killed.''

''The policy is still the stuff of official secrecy and speculation when it
should be a matter of open debate and explicit constraints,'' Ms. Shah said.

Spokesmen at the Pentagon, C.I.A. and White House declined on Monday to comment
on the matter.

The administration's ambivalence on this case has infuriated Mr. Rogers. ''The
chairman is fired up about this,'' the congressional aide said.

The aide also confirmed that the Defense Department was initially reluctant to
place the individual on the targeting list, questioning whether he met the new
standards that Mr. Obama laid out in May. But eventually the Pentagon came
around, said the aide, who added that the C.I.A. had supported a lethal strike
from the beginning.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/11/world/asia/us-debates-drone
-strike-on-american-terror-suspect-in-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


