                             1500 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Departed Friends and Some of Their Disciples

BYLINE: By NATE CHINEN

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 830 words


Charlie Haden and Jim Hall

CHARLIE HADEN-JIM HALL

For the time being, it's impossible to take in ''Charlie Haden-Jim Hall''
without a twinge of sadness. The album, out on Impulse! this week, is a memento
of collaboration between the guitarist Jim Hall and the bassist Charlie Haden,
profound musicians whose departures knocked the jazz world back on its heels.
(Mr. Hall died last December, at 83; Mr. Haden was 76 when he died in July.) But
the music, recorded in concert at the 1990 Montreal International Jazz Festival,
could hardly feel more alive. This is the earliest known duologue between two
masters of the form, and the delight behind the interplay is obvious. Their
ballad work -- on the standards ''Skylark'' and ''Body and Soul,'' and Mr.
Haden's ''First Song'' -- is extraordinary even by their high standards. Just as
rewarding are pieces by Ornette Coleman (''Turnaround'') and Thelonious Monk
(''Bemsha Swing''), and a calypsoesque theme by Mr. Hall (''Down From
Antigua''). At every turn, you hear the unpretentious wisdom and honest
intuition in these artists' styles, along with their sheer alertness to the
moment.

David Virelles

MBÓKÒ

Ritual and cultural memory meet a ceaseless call to reinvention in the music of
David Virelles, a Cuban pianist now living in Brooklyn. His debut album,
''Continuum'' (Pi), was among the best releases of 2012; ''Mbókò -- Sacred Music
for Piano, Two Basses, Drum Set and Biankoméko Abakuá,'' due out on ECM on
Tuesday, is even better. Mr. Virelles, 30, has made it his mission to
interrogate the folkloric and religious root systems of Afro-Cuban life -- often
in collaboration with Román Díaz, who works here with the percussive array known
to the Abakuá, a secret fraternal order, as biankoméko. The album's two
bassists, Thomas Morgan and Robert Hurst, lock in deep-drone mode, while the
drummer Marcus Gilmore floats through every groove while remaining grounded.
There's a feeling of dusky enigma in these compositions, but also a gripping
suspense, especially as the album establishes a flow. You might hear a piece
like ''Seven, Through the Divination Horn'' and reflect on what Mr. Virelles has
gleaned from the composer-bandleader Steve Coleman. This is an album deeply
informed by a couple of traditions but ultimately nourished by many.

Bill Frisell

GUITAR IN THE SPACE AGE!

Bill Frisell -- a grateful heir to Jim Hall, and an occasional partner to
Charlie Haden -- is 63, and has earned the right to follow his interests
wherever they lead. On ''Guitar in the Space Age!'' (OKeh), due out on Tuesday,
they've brought him back to the surf-rock and Top 40 instrumentals of his youth,
the realm of Duane Eddy, Link Wray, the Tornados and the Chantays. Mr. Frisell
reels off many of his melodic lines in tandem, favoring a Fender Telecaster
while Greg Leisz, a trusted partner, plays a Fender Jazzmaster. (Also aboard are
the members of Mr. Frisell's longtime trio: Tony Scherr on bass and additional
guitars, and Kenny Wollesen on drums.) The album has an easy-listening sheen,
even a touch of treacle, but then Mr. Frisell has never shied away from
sincerity. There's more to his version of the Beach Boys' ''Surfer Girl'' than
prettiness, but he makes you wonder why prettiness can't sometimes be enough.

Ron Miles

CIRCUIT RIDER

For the more exploratory side of Bill Frisell's personality, you could do worse
than ''Circuit Rider,'' the new trio album by the cornetist Ron Miles, due out
on Enja/Yellowbird on Oct. 14. Mr. Miles, a natural melodist with an openhearted
style, has a long-running history with Mr. Frisell, as well as an easy bond with
the drummer Brian Blade. Together they pursue earthy elasticity and a dawning
sort of lyricism. Mr. Miles has a knack for pairing strong melodies with stealth
convolutions of form, as shown by tunes like ''The Flesh Is Weak'' and the title
track. What's always striking about his music is a sense of possibility that
rings of the American frontier. (Mr. Miles is a nearly lifelong resident of
Denver, for what it's worth.) Even the choice of covers -- by Charles Mingus and
Jimmy Giuffre -- suits this ideal, giving the musicians room to run.

Ryan Keberle & Catharsis

INTO THE ZONE

A trombonist and composer with far-ranging credentials, Ryan Keberle is onto
something with Catharsis, his update of a pianoless postbop quartet. ''Into the
Zone'' (Greenleaf) is his second album with the band, which has Mike Rodriguez
on trumpet, Jorge Roeder on bass and Eric Doob on drums; at times, its roster
expands to feature the singer Camila Meza and the saxophonist Scott Robinson,
who will also join the band on Tuesday at the Jazz Standard. There's heart and
soul in Mr. Keberle's tunes -- even at their trickiest, as in a workout with a
wry title, ''Without a Thought.'' For good measure, he throws in a few
standards, including Charlie Parker's ''Cheryl.'' But the lasting impression is
made by tunes like ''Gallop,'' which could practically be a dynamic marking on
the sheet music.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/arts/music/new-releases-by-charlie-haden-and-j
im-hall-and-bill-frisell.html

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ryan Keberle & Catharsis, his update of a pianoless postbop
quartet: from left, Jorge Roeder, Mr. Keberle, Mike Rodriguez, Camila Meza and
Eric Doob. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN ROGERS)
Charlie Haden, left, and Jim Hall at the Montreal International Jazz Festival in
1990. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAN THIJS)
Bill Frisell (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL MOORE)
Ron Miles (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE MCGRATH)
 David Virelles (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN RO)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
﻿
