                             156 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 7, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reining In the Drones

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 399 words


For all the slick technology, there are grave moral and legal questions going
unanswered in the government's use of armed drones to kill people considered
terrorist threats. The problems involving these secretive executions are ably
underlined by a bipartisan panel of military and intelligence veterans who warn
in a new report that without adequate controls and public accountability, the
United States could be on a ''slippery slope'' into a form of perpetual warfare
that invites other nations to follow suit and never explain themselves.

''The United States should not conduct a long-term killing program based on
secret rationales,'' the panel cautioned in a 77-page analysis released by the
Stimson Center, a nonpartisan Washington think tank specializing in
international peace and security.

Targeted killings by drones may be justified at times against terrorist threats
to the United States, but the ''blow back'' from unintended civilian killings in
places like Pakistan and Yemen is becoming ''a potent recruiting tool for
terrorist organizations,'' the report noted. The panel, which had experienced
specialists from the George W. Bush and Clinton administrations, concluded that
there was no indication that drone attacks on suspected terrorists had advanced
''long-term U.S. security interests.''

The Obama administration should be addressing these issues with regular reports
to the public about the rationale for the use of drones and the numbers of
militants and civilians killed. Instead, excessive secrecy shrouds these
operations. While the report points out that there may be fewer civilian
casualties in a drone strike than in a conventional bombing, drone operations
need to be subject to credible oversight.

The report sensibly proposes that drones be run by the Pentagon alone, without
sharing that authority with the Central Intelligence Agency. It also calls for
the creation of a nonpartisan, independent commission of specialists to review
drone policy and make sure it is not trading short-term gains for longer-term
strategic setbacks.

Rosa Brooks, a law professor at Georgetown University and a leader of the drone
task force, summarized the essential problem on National Public Radio: ''You can
have all these tactical successes, where you end up with a lot of dead bad guys,
but then you just see the problem proliferating elsewhere because the roots are
political.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/07/opinion/reining-in-the-drones.html

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


