                             1503 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 7, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Book, Panetta Recounts Frustration With Obama

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1100 words


WASHINGTON -- After resigning as secretary of defense last year, Leon E. Panetta
watched with growing dismay at what he perceived as a president losing his way.
Instead of asserting American leadership on the world stage, Mr. Panetta
concluded, President Obama was vacillating and overly cautious.

''He was concerned about the frustration and exhaustion of the country having
fought two wars,'' Mr. Panetta observed in an interview on Monday. The
president, he said, nursed ''the hope that perhaps others in the world could
step up to the plate and take on these issues.'' As a result, he added, ''there
was a kind of a mixed message that went out with regard to the role of the
United States.''

Typically frank, occasionally feisty and finally free of the constraints of
clearing opinions with the White House, Mr. Panetta is re-emerging with a blunt
account of his time in the Obama administration. In a new memoir to be published
on Tuesday, Mr. Panetta draws a largely respectful portrait of a president who
made important progress and follows a ''well-reasoned vision for the country''
but too often ''avoids the battle, complains, and misses opportunities.''

The latest in a series of insider accounts of the Obama administration, ''Worthy
Fights: A Memoir of Leadership in War and Peace,'' issued by Penguin Press, is
not as scathing as the one by Mr. Panetta's predecessor, Robert M. Gates, but
more openly critical than those of former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton or former Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner.

Mr. Panetta, who was C.I.A. director before taking over the Pentagon, recounted
decisions that he disagreed with, including the withdrawal of all troops from
Iraq in 2011, the failure to intervene in Syria's civil war by arming rebels and
the abrupt reversal of Mr. Obama's decision to strike Syria in retaliation for
using chemical weapons on civilians. Mr. Obama ''vacillated'' over the Syria
strike and ''by failing to respond, it sent the wrong message to the world,'' he
wrote.

Had the president followed different courses, Mr. Panetta said in the interview,
the United States would be in a stronger position as it now tries to counter the
rise of the extremist Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. He added that he believed
the president has turned a corner and ''is going a long way in terms of
repairing some of the damage I think took place as a result of the credibility
issue that was raised on Syria.''

But he criticized the president for not going to Congress to seek approval for
attacks on the Islamic State and for ruling out in advance the deployment of
American ground troops. ''I don't think it's good enough now to fall back on
what was provided soon after 9/11,'' Mr. Panetta said, referring to the 2001
congressional vote authorizing force against Al Qaeda and affiliates.

For Mr. Panetta, the moment that crystallized his frustration with Mr. Obama
came when the president made little effort to stop deep automatic budget cuts
mandated by the sequester.

''Indeed, that episode highlighted what I regard as his most conspicuous
weakness, a frustrating reticence to engage his opponents and rally support for
his cause,'' Mr. Panetta wrote. ''That is not a failing of ideas or of
intellect,'' he added. ''He does, however, sometimes lack fire. Too often, in my
view, the president relies on the logic of a law professor rather than the
passion of a leader.''

Mr. Obama grew more reticent, in Mr. Panetta's view, because his legitimacy has
been challenged more than any of his predecessors by accusations like the
unsubstantiated claim that he was not born in the United States. ''Those
challenges have encouraged the president's caution and defensiveness, which in
turn has emboldened further challenges,'' Mr. Panetta wrote.

The book, and the media blitz that accompanies it, becomes the latest headache
for a White House that, like other second-term administrations, finds itself
fending off friendly fire from veterans of the first. Vice President Joseph R.
Biden Jr. pushed back last week when asked about Mr. Panetta's book during an
appearance at Harvard.

''I'm finding that former administration officials, as soon as they leave, write
books, which I think is inappropriate,'' Mr. Biden said. When the audience
laughed, he interjected: ''No, I'm serious. I do think it's inappropriate. At
least give the guy a chance to get out of office.''

Mr. Panetta, unsurprisingly, disagreed. ''I don't think you put history on
hold,'' he said in the interview. ''I'm one who believes you present history as
you see it to the American people and they're wise enough to make judgments
about what's right and wrong.''

Mr. Panetta sent a copy to the White House, although only after it was finished.
He also went through separate clearance processes with the C.I.A. and Defense
Department over potentially classified information. The C.I.A. engaged in a
vigorous tug of war over what would be in the book, and Mr. Panetta said he took
out some material, but nothing that changed the narrative.

The book traces Mr. Panetta's life growing up the son of Italian immigrants in
Northern California to his early days in politics as a moderate Republican in
President Richard M. Nixon's administration who was fired for pressing the
desegregation of Southern schools. Mr. Panetta switched parties and was elected
to Congress before becoming President Bill Clinton's budget director and, later,
White House chief of staff.

Surprised to be invited back to Washington by Mr. Obama, Mr. Panetta described
masterminding the raid that killed Osama bin Laden and approving the drone
strike that killed an American jihadist, Anwar al-Awlaki. He said he felt
hamstrung by a White House that centralized decision-making and tried to control
his contacts with lawmakers and journalists. ''In fact, several times when I
reached out to Congress or the press without prior White House approval,'' he
wrote, ''I was chastised for it.''

He opposed an early version of the prisoner swap for the captured Army Sgt. Bowe
Bergdahl because ''I did not believe it was fair to trade five for one.'' And he
defended the failure of the military to reach Benghazi, Libya, when a diplomatic
post came under attack. ''We moved as quickly as we could,'' he wrote, ''but
this took place too far away for our forces to reach them in time.''

Now 76, Mr. Panetta said he hoped to inspire young people with his story but
lamented the dysfunction in Washington. He has no further plans for public
office. Instead, he said, he is focusing now on his walnut farm.

''I'm dealing with a different set of nuts,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/07/world/middleeast/ex-defense-secretary-panetta-
tells-of-frustrations-with-obama.html

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Leon E. Panetta  with President elect  Obama on  Jan. 9, 2009,
when he was the  choice to head the  C.I.A. Mr. Panetta,  who has written a  new
memoir  about his government  service, was  also a defense secretary  under Mr.
Obama.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/ THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


