                             1591 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              March 2, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Hagel wants a smaller Army. Good idea.

BYLINE: Andrew J. Bacevich

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 713 words


Armies are like newspapers. They have become 21st-century anachronisms. To
survive, they must adapt.

For the press, that means accommodating the demands of the Internet. For the
United States Army, it means adjusting to a changing security environment.
Nostalgia about a hallowed past is a luxury that neither armies nor newspapers
can afford to indulge.

So the hand-wringing triggered by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel's plan to reduce
the Army's size, while predictable, is beside the point. Yes, those cuts would
leave the United States with its fewest active-duty soldiers since the eve of
World War II.

So what?

This isn't 1940. Moreover, as an instrument of coercion, that smaller army would
be more lethal than the much larger one that helped defeat Nazi Germany and
imperial Japan. Given a choice between a few hundred of today's Abrams tanks and
a few thousand vintage Shermans, Gen. George Patton would not hesitate to choose
the former.

More relevant questions are: Do we need even a few hundred tanks? And for what?
In its 2012 report to Congress , the Army's senior leadership described the
service as "The Nation's Force of Decisive Action." In the  2013 version, they
"guarantee the agility, versatility and depth to Prevent, Shape and Win."

Yet to judge by outcomes, the Army is not a force for decisive action. It cannot
be counted on to achieve definitive results in a timely manner. In Afghanistan
and Iraq, actions that momentarily appeared to be decisive served as preludes to
protracted and inconclusive wars. As for preventing, shaping and winning, this
surely qualifies as bluster - the equivalent of a newspaper promising
advertisers that it will quadruple its print circulation.

Washington's preoccupation with budgets provides Army leaders - and the entire
national security establishment - an excuse to dodge core questions. The most
pressing: What should the nation expect of its armed forces?

After the Cold War and especially after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001,
expectations of what the U.S. military should be able to accomplish expanded
considerably. Defense per se figured as an afterthought, eclipsed by the
conviction that projecting power held the key to transforming the world from
what it is into what Washington would like it to be: orderly, predictable,
respectful of American values and deferential to U.S. prerogatives.

The "Global War on Terror" put that proposition to the test, with disappointing
results. Putting boots on the ground produced casualties and complications, but
little by way of peace and harmony. It did nothing to enhance the standing and
reputation of the United States. And as a means to engineer positive political
change, America's Army proved sadly wanting. That's not a knock against our
soldiers. They performed admirably, even if the same cannot be said for those
who conceived and mismanaged the wars our soldiers were sent to fight.

Americans today are not inclined to indulge this experiment further. With his
widely noted preference for drones and Special Operations forces, President
Obama has tacitly endorsed the public's view - even if his improvised way of war
is devoid of any serious strategic rationale.

The principal military lesson of the Global War on Terror affirms what ought to
have been the principal military lesson of the Cold War: Force held in readiness
has far greater political utility than force expended. Armies are well suited to
defending and containing. But invading and occupying countries are fraught with
risk.

It's the Bush Doctrine, just inverted: Rather than engaging in preventive war,
commit troops only after exhausting every other alternative. As long as that
approach pertains - may it do so for many decades - the projection of U.S.
military might will come in the form of bombs and missiles, falling under the
purview of naval and air forces.

What role, then, remains for the U.S. Army? The honorable and necessary one of
defending this country. For that task, absent the emergence of a major Mexican
or Canadian threat, a smaller Army should serve just fine.

outlook@washpost.com

Read more from Outlook:

With Iran, Obama can end America's long war for the Middle East

Are Manning and Snowden patriots? That depends on what we do next.

Friend us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


