                             1535 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 22, 2013 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

Secret U.S. aid helps Colombiacripple rebels

BYLINE: Dana Priest

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 4639 words


The 50-year-old Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), once considered
the best-funded insurgency in the world, is at its smallest and most vulnerable
state in decades, due in part to a CIA covert action program that has helped
Colombian forces kill at least two dozen rebel leaders, according to interviews
with more than 30 former and current U.S. and Colombian officials.

The secret assistance, which also includes substantial eavesdropping help from
the National Security Agency, is funded through a multibillion-dollar black
budget. It is not a part of the public $9 billion package of mostly U.S.
military aid called Plan Colombia, which began in 2000.

The previously undisclosed CIA program was authorized by President George W.
Bush in the early 2000s and has continued under President Obama, according to
U.S. military, intelligence and diplomatic officials. Most of those interviewed
spoke on the condition of anonymity because the program is classified and
ongoing.

The covert program in Colombia provides two essential services to the nation's
battle against the FARC and a smaller insurgent group, the National Liberation
Army (ELN): Real-time intelligence that allows Colombian forces to hunt down
individual FARC leaders and, beginning in 2006, one particularly effective tool
with which to kill them.

That weapon is a $30,000 GPS guidance kit that transforms a less-than-accurate
500-pound gravity bomb into a highly accurate smart bomb. Smart bombs, also
called precision-guided munitions or PGMs, are capable of killing an individual
in triple-canopy jungle if his exact location can be determined and
geo-coordinates are programmed into the bomb's small computer brain.

In March 2008, according to nine U.S. and Colombian officials, the Colombian Air
Force, with tacit U.S. approval, launched U.S.-made smart bombs across the
border into Ecuador to kill a senior FARC leader, Raul Reyes. The indirect U.S.
role in that attack has not been previously disclosed.

The covert action program in Colombia is one of a handful of enhanced
intelligence initiatives that has escaped public notice since the Sept. 11,
2001, attacks. Most of these other programs, small but growing, are located in
countries where violent drug cartels have caused instability.

The roster is headed by Mexico, where U.S. intelligence assistance is larger
than anywhere outside Afghanistan, as The Washington Post reported in April. It
also includes Central America and West Africa, where trafficking routes have
moved in response to U.S. pressure against cartels elsewhere.

Asked to comment on U.S. intelligence assistance, President Juan Manuel Santos
told The Post during a recent trip to Washington that he did not wish to speak
about it in detail, given the sensitivities involved. "It's been of help," he
said. "Part of the expertise and the efficiency of our operations and our
special operations have been the product of better training and knowledge we
have acquired from many countries, among them the United States."

A spokesman for the CIA declined to comment.

Colombia and the FARC have been in peace negotiations in Havana for a year. They
have agreed so far on frameworks for land reform, rural development and for
allowing insurgents to participate in the political process once the war ends.
The two sides are currently discussing a new approach to fighting drug
trafficking.

On the verge of collapse

Today, a comparison between Colombia, with its vibrant economy and swanky Bogota
social scene, and Afghanistan might seem absurd. But a little more than a decade
ago, Colombia had the highest murder rate in the world. Random bombings and
strong-arm military tactics pervaded daily life. Some 3,000 people were
kidnapped in one year. Professors, human rights activists and journalists
suspected of being FARC sympathizers routinely turned up dead.

The combustible mix of the FARC, cartels, paramilitaries and corrupt security
forces created a cauldron of violence unprecedented in modern-day Latin America.
Nearly a quarter-million people have died during the long war, and many
thousands have disappeared.

The FARC was founded in 1964 as a Marxist peasant movement seeking land and
justice for the poor. By 1998, Colombia's president at the time, Andres
Pastrana, gave the FARC a Switzerland-sized demilitarized zone to encourage
peace negotiations, but its violent attacks only grew, as did its links with the
narcotics trade.

By 2000, the emboldened insurgency of 18,000 took aim at Colombia's political
leaders. It assassinated local elected officials. It kidnapped a presidential
candidate and attempted to kill a presidential front-runner, hard-liner Alvaro
Uribe, whose father the FARC had killed in 1983.

Fearing Colombia would become a failed state with an even greater role in drug
trafficking into the United States, the Bush administration and Congress ramped
up assistance to the Colombian military through Plan Colombia.

By 2003, U.S. involvement in Colombia encompassed 40 U.S. agencies and 4,500
people, including contractors, all working out of the U.S. Embassy in Bogota,
then the largest U.S. embassy in the world. It stayed that way until mid-2004,
when it was surpassed by Afghanistan.

"There is no country, including Afghanistan, where we had more going on," said
William Wood, who was U.S. ambassador to Colombia from 2003 to 2007 before
holding the same post in war-torn Afghanistan for two years after that.

When Bush became president, two presidential findings were already on the books
authorizing covert action worldwide. One allowed CIA operations against
international terrorist organizations. The other, signed in the mid-1980s by
President Ronald Reagan, authorized action against international narcotics
traffickers.

A presidential finding is required for the CIA to do things other than collect
and analyze overseas intelligence. Giving spy equipment to a partner, supporting
foreign political parties, planting propaganda, and participating in lethal
training or operations all require a finding and a notification to congressional
intelligence committees.

The counternarcotics finding had permitted the CIA and a technical unit of the
clandestine Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC) to provide support to the
years-long hunt for Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar, killed by Colombian
forces 20 years ago this month. It also made possible CIA-supported operations
against traffickers and terrorists in Bolivia and Peru years ago.

Under the Colombian program, the CIA is not allowed to participate directly in
operations. The same restrictions apply to military involvement in Plan
Colombia. Such activity has been constrained by members of Congress who had
lived through the scandal of America's secret role in Central America's wars in
the 1980s. Congress refused to allow U.S. military involvement in Colombia to
escalate as it had in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Panama.

The FARC miscalculates

The new covert push against the FARC unofficially began on Feb. 13, 2003. That
day a single-engine Cessna 208 crashed in rebel-held jungle. Nearby guerrillas
executed the Colombian officer on board and one of four American contractors who
were working on coca eradication. The three others were taken hostage.

The United States had already declared the FARC a terrorist organization for its
indiscriminate killings and drug trafficking. Although the CIA had its hands
full with Iraq and Afghanistan, Bush "leaned on [CIA director George] Tenet" to
help find the three hostages, according to one former senior intelligence
official involved in the discussions.

The FARC's terrorist designation made it easier to fund a black budget. "We got
money from a lot of different pots," said one senior diplomat.

One of the CIA officers Tenet dispatched to Bogota was an operator in his
forties whose name The Washington Post is withholding because he remains
undercover. He created the U.S. Embassy Intelligence Fusion Cell, dubbed "the
Bunker."

It was a cramped, 30-by-30-foot room with a low ceiling and three rows of
computers. Eight people sat at each row of consoles. Some scoured satellite maps
of the jungle; others searched for underground FARC hiding places. Some
monitored imagery or the movement of vehicles tagged with tracking devices.
Voice intercepts from radio and cellphone communications were decrypted and
translated by the National Security Agency.

Bunker analysts fused tips from informants and technically obtained information.
Analysts sought to link individuals to the insurgency's flow of drugs, weapons
and money. For the most part, they left the violent paramilitary groups alone.

The Bunker's technical experts and contractors built the Colombians their own
nationwide intelligence computer system. They also later helped create regional
fusion centers to push tactical intelligence to local commanders. The agency
also paid for encrypted communications gear.

"We were very interested in getting the FARC, and it wasn't so much a question
of capability, as it was intelligence," said Wood, "specifically the ability to
locate them in the time frame of an operation."

Outside the Bunker, CIA case officers and contractors taught the art of
recruiting informants to Colombian units that had been vetted and polygraphed.
They gave money to people with information about the hostages.

Meanwhile, the other secret U.S. agency that had been at the forefront of
locating and killing al-Qaeda arrived on the scene. Elite commandos from JSOC
began periodic annual training sessions and small-unit reconnaissance missions
to try to find the hostages.

Despite all the effort, the hostages' location proved elusive. Looking for
something else to do with the new intelligence equipment and personnel, the
Bunker manager and his military deputy from the U.S. Special Operations Command
gave their people a second mission: Target the FARC leadership. This was exactly
what the CIA and JSOC had been doing against al-Qaeda on the other side of the
world. The methodology was familiar.

"There was cross-pollination both ways," said one senior official with access to
the Bunker at the time. "We didn't need to invent a new wheel."

A request from Colombia's president

Locating FARC leaders proved easier than capturing or killing them. Some 60
times, Colombian forces had obtained or been given reliable information but
failed to capture or kill anyone senior, according to two U.S. officials and a
retired Colombian senior officer. The story was always the same. U.S.-provided
Black Hawk helicopters would ferry Colombian troops into the jungle about six
kilometers away from a camp. The men would creep through the dense foliage, but
the camps were always empty by the time they arrived. Later they learned that
the FARC had an early-warning system: rings of security miles from the camps.

By 2006, the dismal record attracted the attention of the U.S. Air Force's newly
arrived mission chief. The colonel was perplexed. Why had the third-largest
recipient of U.S. military assistance [behind Egypt and Israel] made so little
progress?

"I'm thinking, 'What are we killing the FARC with?'â[#x20ac][#x2c6]" the
colonel, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said in an interview.

The colonel, a cargo plane expert, said he "started Googling bombs and fighters"
looking for ideas. Eventually he landed on the Enhanced Paveway II, a relatively
inexpensive guidance kit that could be strapped on a 500-pound, Mark-82 gravity
bomb.

The colonel said he told then-defense minister Santos about his idea and wrote a
one-page paper on it for him to deliver to Uribe. Santos took the idea to U.S.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. In June 2006, Uribe visited Bush at the White
House. He mentioned the recent killing of al-Qaeda's chief in Iraq, Abu Musab
al-Zarqawi. An F-16 had sent two 500-pound smart bombs into his hideout and
killed him. He pressed for the same capability.

"Clearly this was very important" to Uribe, said retired Air Force Gen. Michael
V. Hayden, who had taken over as CIA director just months earlier.

First, there was the matter of fitting the smart bombs onto a Colombian
aircraft. Colombia did not have F-16s. Raytheon, the kit manufacturer, sent
engineers to figure out how to mount the equipment on a plane. First they tried
mounting it on a Brazilian-made Embraer A-29 Super Tucano, a turboprop aircraft
designed for low-flying counterinsurgency missions. But affixing the cable that
ran from the bomb's computer brain to the cockpit meant drilling too close to
the fuel cell. Instead, they jerry-rigged it to an older Cessna A-37 Dragonfly,
a light attack aircraft first developed by the U.S. Special Operations air force
for Vietnam and later used in the Salvadoran civil war.

Then the engineers and Colombian pilots tested the first of three PGMs in a
remote airfield near the Venezuelan border. The target was a 2-by-4 stuck in the
ground. The plane launched the bomb from 20,000 feet. "It landed about a foot
from it," the colonel said. The results were so good, he thought, "why waste two
more kits?" The smart bombs were ready for use.

But White House lawyers, along with their colleagues from the CIA and the
departments of Justice, Defense and State, had their own questions to work
through. It was one thing to use a PGM to defeat an enemy on the battlefield -
the U.S. Air Force had been doing that for years. It was another to use it to
target an individual FARC leader. Would that constitute an assassination, which
is prohibited by U.S. law? And, "could we be accused of engaging in an
assassination, even if it is not ourselves doing it?" said one lawyer involved.

The White House's Office of Legal Counsel and others finally decided that the
same legal analysis they had applied to al-Qaeda could be applied to the FARC.
Killing a FARC leader would not be an assassination because the organization
posed an ongoing threat to Colombia. Also, none of the FARC commanders could be
expected to surrender.

And, as a drug-trafficking organization, the FARC's status as a threat to U.S.
national security had been settled years earlier with Reagan's counternarcotics
finding. At the time, the crack cocaine epidemic was at its height, and the
government decided that organizations that brought drugs to America's streets
were a threat to national security.

There was another concern. Some senior officials worried that Colombian forces
might use the PGMs to kill their perceived political enemies. "The concerns were
huge given their human rights problems," said a former senior military officer.

To assure themselves that the Colombians would not misuse the bombs, U.S.
officials came up with a novel solution. The CIA would maintain control over the
encryption key inserted into the bomb, which unscrambled communications with GPS
satellites so they can be read by the bomb's computers. The bomb could not hit
its target without the key. The Colombians would have to ask for approval for
some targets, and if they misused the bombs, the CIA could deny GPS reception
for future use.

"We wanted a sign-off," said one senior official involved in the deliberations.

To cut through the initial red tape, the first 20 smart bomb kits - without the
encryption keys - came through the CIA. The bill was less than $1 million. After
that, Colombia was allowed to purchase them through the Foreign Military Sales
program.

A first strike

Tomas Medina Caracas, also known as Negro Acacio, the FARC's chief drug
trafficker and commander of its 16th Front, was the first man the U.S. Embassy
Intelligence Fusion Cell queued up for a PGM strike.

At about 4:30 a.m. on Sept. 1, 2007, pilots wearing night vision goggles
unleashed several Enhanced Paveway II smart bombs into his camp in eastern
Colombia as officials in both capitals waited. Troops recovered only a leg. It
appeared by its dark complexion to belong to Acacio, one of the few black FARC
leaders. DNA tests confirmed his death.

"There was a great deal of excitement," recalled William Scoggins,
counternarcotics program manager at the U.S. military's Southern Command. "We
didn't know the impact it would have, but we thought this was a game changer."

Six weeks later, smart bombs killed Gustavo Rueda DÃ­az, alias Martin Caballero,
leader of the 37th Front, while he was talking on his cellphone. Acacio's and
Caballero's deaths caused the 16th and 37th fronts to collapse. They also
triggered mass desertions, according to a secret State Department cable dated
March 6, 2008, and released by the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks in 2010. This
was just the beginning of the FARC's disintegration.

To hide the use of the PGMs from public discovery, and to ensure maximum damage
to a FARC's leaders' camp, the air force and U.S. advisers developed new strike
tactics. In a typical mission, several A-37 Dragonflys flying at 20,000 feet
carried smart bombs. As soon as the planes came within a three-mile "basket" of
the target, a bomb's GPS software would automatically turn on.

The Dragonflys were followed by several A-29 Super Tucanos, flying at a much
lower altitude. They would drop a series of dumb bombs in a pattern nearby.
Their blast pressure would kill anyone close in and also flatten the dense
jungle and obscure the use of the smart bombs.

Then, low-flying, Vietnam-era AC-47 gunships, nicknamed Puff the Magic Dragon,
would strafe the area with mounted machine guns, "shooting the wounded trying to
go for cover," according to one of several military officials who described the
same scenario.

Only then would Colombian ground forces arrive to round up prisoners, collecting
the dead, as well as cellphones, computers and hard drives. The CIA also spent
three years training Colombian close air support teams on using lasers to
clandestinely guide pilots and laser-guided smart bombs to their targets.

Most every operation relied heavily on NSA signal intercepts, which fed
intelligence to troops on the ground or pilots before and during an operation.
"Intercepts . . . were a game changer," said Scoggins, of U.S. Southern Command.

The round-the-clock nature of the NSA's work was captured in a secret State
Department cable released by WikiLeaks. In the spring of 2009, the target was
drug trafficker Daniel Rendon Herrera, known as Don Mario, then Colombia's most
wanted man and responsible for 3,000 assassinations over an 18-month period.

"For seven days, using signal and human intelligence," NSA assets "worked day
and night" to reposition 250 U.S.-trained and equipped airborne commandos near
Herrera as he tried to flee, according to an April 2009 cable and a senior
government official who confirmed the NSA's role in the mission.

The CIA also trained Colombian interrogators to more effectively question
thousands of FARC deserters, without the use of the "enhanced interrogation"
techniques approved for use on al-Qaeda and later repudiated by Congress as
abusive. The agency also created databases to keep track of the debriefings so
they could be searched and cross-referenced to build a more complete picture of
the organization.

The Colombian government paid deserters and allowed them to reintegrate into
civil society. Some, in turn, offered valuable information about the FARC's
chain of command, standard travel routes, camps, supply lines, drug and money
sources. They helped make sense of the NSA's voice intercepts, which often used
code words. Deserters also sometimes were used to infiltrate FARC camps to plant
listening devices or beacons that emitted a GPS coordinate for smart bombs.

"We learned from the CIA," a top Colombian national security official said of
the debriefing program. "Before, we didn't pay much attention to details."

Ecuador and the not-forgotten hostages

In February 2008, the U.S.-Colombian team got its first sighting of the three
U.S. hostages. Having waited five years, the reaction was swift at U.S. Special
Operations Command headquarters in Tampa, which began sending JSOC commandos
down, said a senior U.S. official who was in Colombia when they arrived.

The JSOC team was headed by a Navy SEAL Team Six commander. Small units set up
three operational areas near the hostages and conducted long-range
reconnaissance, the senior official said. The NSA increased its monitoring. All
eyes were on the remote jungle location. But as initial preparations were
underway, operations were heating up elsewhere.

Just across the Putumayo River, one mile inside Ecuador, U.S. intelligence and a
Colombian informant confirmed the hideout of Luis Edgar Devia Silva, also known
as Raul Reyes and considered to be the No. 2 in the seven-member FARC
secretariat.

It was an awkward discovery for Colombia and the United States. To conduct an
airstrike meant a Colombian pilot flying a Colombian plane would hit the camp
using a U.S.-made bomb with a CIA-controlled brain.

The Air Force colonel had a succinct message for the Colombian air operations
commander in charge of the mission. "I said, 'Look man, we all know where this
guy is. Just don't f--- it up.'â[#x20ac][#x2c6]"

U.S. national security lawyers viewed the operation as an act of self-defense.
In the wake of 9/11, they had come up with a new interpretation of the
permissible use of force against non-state actors like al-Qaeda and the FARC. It
went like this: If a terrorist group operated from a country that was unable or
unwilling to stop it, then the country under attack - in this case, Colombia -
had the right to defend itself with force, even if that meant crossing into
another sovereign country.

This was the legal justification for CIA drone strikes and other lethal
operations in Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia and, much later, for the raid into
Pakistan that killed Osama bin Laden.

So minutes after midnight on March 1, three A-37 Dragonflys took off from
Colombia, followed by five Super Tucanos. The smart bombs' guidance system
turned on once the planes reached within three miles of Reyes's location.

As instructed, the Colombian pilots stayed in Colombian airspace. The bombs
landed as programmed, obliterating the camp and killing Reyes, who, according to
Colombian news reports, was asleep in pajamas.

Colombian forces rushed across the border into Ecuador to retrieve Reyes's
remains and also scooped up a large treasure trove of computer equipment that
would turn out to be the most valuable FARC intelligence find ever.

The bombing set off a serious diplomatic crisis. Venezuelan leader Hugo Chvez
called Colombia "a terrorist state" and moved troops to the border, as did
Ecuador. Nicaragua broke off relations. Uribe, under pressure, apologized to
Ecuador.

The apology, while soothing relationships in Latin America, angered the small
circle of U.S. officials who knew the back story, one of them said. "I remember
thinking, 'I can't believe they're saying this,'â[#x20ac][#x2c6]" he said. "For
them to be giving up an important legal position was crazy."

But the flap did not damage the deep ties between U.S. and Colombian forces or
deter the mission to rescue the hostages. In fact, the number of JSOC troops
continued to mount to more than 1,000, said the senior official then in
Colombia. Officials thought for sure they would be spotted, but they never were.
A U.S.-Colombian military exercise provided sufficient cover when the
International Committee of the Red Cross showed up at isolated bases and
stumbled upon some burly Americans, said two U.S. officials.

After six weeks of waiting to find the hostages, most of the JSOC troops left
the country for pressing missions elsewhere. One unit remained. On July 2, 2008,
it had the role of unused understudy in the dramatic and well-documented
Operation Checkmate, in which Colombian forces pretending to be members of a
humanitarian group tricked the FARC into handing over the three U.S. hostages
and 12 others without a shot fired. The JSOC team, and a fleet of U.S. aircraft,
was positioned as Plan B, in case the Colombian operation went awry.

Santos continues the smart-bomb war

As a sign of trust, in early 2010 the U.S. government gave Colombia control over
the GPS encryption key. There had been no reports of misuse, misfires or
collateral damage from the smart bombs. The transfer was preceded by quick
negotiations over the rules of engagement for smart-bomb use. Among the rules
was that they would be launched only against isolated jungle camps.

President Santos, who was defense minister under Uribe, has greatly increased
the pace of operations against the FARC. Almost three times as many FARC leaders
- 47 vs. 16 - have been killed under Santos as under Uribe. Interviews and
analysis of government Web sites and press reporting show that at least 23 of
the attacks under Santos were air operations. Smart bombs were used only against
the most important FARC leaders, Colombian officials said in response to
questions. Gravity bombs were used in the other cases.

Colombia continues to upgrade its air capabilities. In 2013, the air force
upgraded its fleet of Israeli-made Kfir fighter jets, fitting them with
Israeli-made Griffin laser-guided bombs. It has also fitted smart bombs onto
some of its Super Tucanos.

Having decimated the top FARC leadership and many of the front commanders, the
military, with continued help from the CIA and other intelligence agencies,
appears to be working its way through the mid-level ranks, including mobile
company commanders, the most battle-hardened and experienced remaining cadre.
One-third of them have been killed or captured, according to Colombian
officials.

The Santos administration has also targeted the financial and weapons networks
supporting the FARC. Some critics think the government has been too focused on
killing leaders and not enough on using the army and police to occupy and
control rebel territory.

Killing an individual has never been a measure of success in war, say
counterinsurgency experts. It's the chaos and dysfunction that killing the
leadership causes to the organization that matters. The air operations against
the FARC leadership "has turned the organization upside down," said a senior
Pentagon official who has studied the classified U.S. history of Colombia's war.

Some have fled to Venezuela. One member of the secretariat hides out
intermittently in Ecuador, according to senior Colombia officials, breaking the
important psychological bond with ground troops and handicapping recruitment.

For fear of being located and targeted, units no longer sleep in the same place
two days in a row, so camps must be sparser. "They know the government has so
much information on them now, and real-time intelligence," said German Espejo,
security and defense counselor at the Colombian Embassy. Worried about spies in
their midst, executions are common.

The FARC still mounts attacks - a car bombing of a rural police station Dec. 7
killed six police officers and two civilians - but it no longer travels in large
groups, and it limits most units to less than 20. No longer able to mount
large-scale assaults, the group has reverted to hit-and-run tactics using
snipers and explosives.

The weariness of 50 years of transient jungle life has taken its toll on the
FARC negotiating team, too. Those who have lived in exile seem more willing to
continue the fight than those who have been doing the fighting, said Colombian
officials. The negotiations, Santos said in the interview, are the result of the
successful military campaign, "the cherry on the cake."

On Dec. 15, the FARC said it would begin a 30-day unilateral cease-fire as a
sign of good will during the holiday season. The Santos administration rebuffed
the gesture and vowed to continue its military campaign. Later that day,
security forces killed a FARC guerrilla implicated in a bomb attack on a former
minister. Three days later, the army killed another five.

dana.priest@washpost.com

Elyssa Pachico and Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


