                             1614 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 23, 2014 Sunday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Debris sightings renew hope in jet search

BYLINE: Simon Denyer;Jia Lynn Yang

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 1703 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA


KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia - China released a new image of a "suspected floating
object" in the Indian Ocean on Saturday as Australians spotted debris in the
search area, bringing fresh hope to the massive hunt for a missing Malaysia
Airlines jetliner.

China has sent ships to investigate the object spotted by its satellite,
according to the Malaysian government. But Australia said its planes had passed
over the same area Saturday and did not find anything.

The Chinese government said one of its satellites spotted the object Tuesday
about 75 miles southwest of another debris sighting last week.

A grainy image of the latest find was tweeted Saturday by Chinese state
television. It is dated two days after two earlier images released by Australia.

The search for the missing airliner has entered a third week, with the main hope
for a breakthrough hinging on planes and ships being able to locate floating
objects spotted by satellites in a desolate stretch of ocean almost as close to
Antarctica as to Australia.

"It's still too early to be definite, but obviously we have now had a number of
very credible leads, and there is increasing hope - no more than hope, no more
than hope - that we might be on the road to discovering what happened to this
ill-fated aircraft," Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said Sunday.

Abbott said observers had been able to see "a number of small objects fairly
close together," including a wooden pallet.

On Saturday, Malaysia's Defense Minister Hishammuddin Hussein interrupted a news
conference to say he had just received "breaking news" from the Chinese
ambassador: A new satellite image had been received showing a floating object in
the Indian Ocean.

"They will be sending ships to verify," he said. The object was74 feet by 43
feet, the Malaysian government said.

A Boeing 777-200 is 209 feet long, with a wingspan of 199 feet and a tail height
of 60 feet. Its body is 20 feet in diameter.

Experts said an object that large, if it came from the plane, could only be part
of  a wing. But even if empty fuel tanks inside the wing were filled with air,
some doubted a fragment could stay afloat for 10 days after the Malaysia
Airlines plane vanished March 8, especially in rough seas.

The search for debris from the plane has been complicated by strong and
unpredictable currents in that part of the Indian Ocean. The two objects
previously spotted by satellite March 16, the focus of the current
Australian-led search, could have drifted more than 100 miles, experts said.

Charitha Pattiaratchi, a professor of coastal oceanography at the University of
Western Australia in Crawley, said currents in the area are generally moving in
a northeasterly direction.

He said the new debris spotted by the Chinese satellite could easily have come
from the same crash site as the previous objects but could be trailing behind.
"The bigger it is, the harder it is to move," he said. "It is totally consistent
with what we know."

For the past three days, surveillance planes have been passing back and forth
over the Indian Ocean in an effort to locate debris.

The search has become a race against time - before the objects drift too far,
break up or sink in heavy ocean swells - and because bad weather was expected to
set in Sunday and last through this week.

On Saturday, a civilian plane reported seeing a "number of small objects"
floating in the water within a radius of three miles, including a wooden pallet,
the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) said in a statement.

When a New Zealand air force P-3 Orion surveillance plane "with specialist
electro-optic observation equipment" went to the area, it found only clumps of
seaweed.

A merchant ship has been asked to return to the area for a closer look, AMSA
said. The agency, which is coordinating the search in the southern Indian Ocean,
said it would evaluate the information supplied by China and take it into
account in Sunday's search plans.

Three Australian P-3 Orion planes and one from New Zealand were being joined
Saturday by two long-range commercial jets with trained volunteers on board
peering out of windows. Two merchant ships were joined by an Australian naval
vessel, while China said two of its air force transport planes arrived in the
Australian west coast city of Perth from Malaysia on Saturday to assist.

Saturday's search centered on an area of roughly 14,000 square miles located
about 1,550 miles southwest of Perth. It partly overlapped with a smaller area
searched on Friday and with a larger patch of ocean searched Thursday, according
to maps and data supplied by AMSA.

Warren Truss, Australia's deputy prime minister, said a complete search could
take a long time and warned that the objects could have sunk already.

"Even though this is not a definite lead, it is probably more solid than any
other lead around the world, and that is why so much effort and interest is
being put into this search," he told reporters at the air force base in Perth
that is being used as a staging area for the search planes.

"It is a very remote area, but we intend to continue the search until we're
absolutely satisfied that further searching would be futile - and that day is
not in sight," Truss said.

The area takes four hours' flying time to reach, meaning the Orions have only
enough fuel for two hours of searching before having to return home. The
commercial jets can search the area on site for five hours. AMSA said radar
sweeps of the area have not turned up anything, meaning the effort largely must
rely mostly on spotters scanning vast expanses of ocean by eye.

"While these aircraft are equipped with very advanced technology, much of this
search is actually visual," Truss said.

While AMSA and pilots reported good visibility of around six miles Friday and
Saturday, that may not last.

Meteorologists say worse weather is expected to set in after Sunday, with a
series of fronts passing through the area throughout the week.

That raises the prospect of rain, huge swells and wind-driven whitecaps in a
remote and inhospitable part of the Indian Ocean near latitude 40 degrees south
that is known as the Roaring Forties because of its frequent fierce westerly
winds.

A Category One cyclone struck Australia's Christmas Island on Saturday, 1,600
miles northwest of Perth, and could bring further bad weather to the search
area.

Time pressure is heightened by the fact that the location beacon built into the
plane's flight recorder, or "black box," is likely to keep transmitting for only
another two weeks before its batteries run out.

If debris from the airliner is found, complex and uncertain mathematical
modeling will have to be employed to track back and find out where the plane
might have come down, and naval vessels equipped with sonar technology will have
to sweep the area, listening for beeps from the black box.

Then, it will be a case of searching the deep ocean floor, roughly two miles
beneath the surface, with undersea drones to look for the main wreckage.

When an Air France plane crashed into the Atlantic in 2009, the first debris and
bodies were pulled from the sea after five days, but it took more than two years
to find the main wreckage on the ocean floor. That was partly because
mathematical models of ocean currents initially sent investigators to the wrong
place.

The two objects identified by Australia this week were roughly 80 feet and 15
feet long.

Peter Marosszeky, an aviation expert at the University of New South Wales, said
the larger object could have been a piece of wing kept afloat for a while by air
in empty fuel tanks or a fin - or simply a piece of unrelated debris of the sort
that litters the oceans of the world. "At the moment, it's all conjecture," he
said.

Marosszeky said the larger object could easily have been a shipping container,
noting that a couple of hundred thousand of them litter oceans around the world.

But it could also be a piece of wing, kept afloat for a while by air in empty
fuel tanks, or a fin - or simply a piece of unrelated debris, of the sort that
litters the oceans of the world. "At the moment, it's all conjecture," he said.

Alan Kin-Tak Lau, an expert in aircraft maintenance and accidents at Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, said he did not believe the large objects came from a
plane, because large metal aircraft parts would be expected to sink fairly
quickly.

"The only material you would expect to see is luggage and baggage and seats," he
said. "The metal parts are too heavy, and for the Boeing 777, the whole aircraft
is made of aluminum."

Meanwhile, the search for the Malaysia Airlines plane is continuing in other
parts of the world, both over land across vast expanses of central and southeast
Asia and over other parts of the Indian Ocean where the plane's final satellite
transmissions suggested it might have been at 8:11 a.m. on March 8.

Hishammuddin said China, India, Pakistan, Burma, Laos, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan
had informed Malaysia that "preliminary analysis" had not revealed any sightings
of the plane in the northern search area, primarily on land.

Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 vanished from civilian radar at 1:21 a.m. on
March 8, not long after setting off from Kuala Lumpur on its way to Beijing. It
then did a U-turn and headed west back across the Malaysian peninsula before
vanishing from Malaysian military radar at 2:11 a.m. in the northern end of the
Strait of Malacca.

The Malaysians running the investigations say they believe the flight must have
been deliberately flown off course, either by one of its pilots or by hijackers,
but have not ruled catastrophic mechanic failure.

There was no indication that the investigation into what may have caused the
flight to disappear had yielded new information.

A transcript of the cockpit's last minutes of conversation with air traffic
controllers "does not indicate anything abnormal," Hishammuddin, the defense
minister, said.

He did not comment on a report in the Sydney Morning Herald that nothing
suspicious had been found on data taken from a flight simulator removed from the
home of the airliner's pilot, Zaharie Ahmad Shah.

simon.denyer@washpost.com

jialynn.yang@washpost.com

William Wan and Gu Jinglu in Beijing contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


