                             168 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 10, 2014 Thursday 2:49 PM EST

Martha Stewart has a drone

BYLINE: Caitlin Dewey

LENGTH: 267 words


Martha Stewart - noted domestic goddess, former felon and adorably enthusiastic
late-adopter of all things tech - took to her personal blog Wednesday to
celebrate her latest toy: A drone.

Yep, the Martha has a drone - two of them, in fact. In the May issue of her
magazine, Stewart personally recommended the Parrot AR Drone 2.0. Since then
she's apparently upgraded, with a DJI Phantom flying camera that is
"controversial but fabulous" and takes "extraordinary photos," including some 31
aerial photos she posted to her blog.

#the martha blog has amazing photos of my farm taken by a drone! We love the
possibilities and opportunities drones offer. Do you?

Stewart has never been shy about her love of gadgets: She also has an iPad,
which she calls "awesome," and covers consumer tech with some regularity on her
show and in her magazine. And personal drones and drone cams, once exclusively
the pursuit of fringe hobbyists, are slowly creeping into the mainstream: The
Federal Aviation Administration estimates that there could be 7,500 hobbyist
drones in operation by 2019.

Still, there's something a little jarring about hearing a drone endorsement from
Stewart, a lady best-known for her embrace of all things fussy, florid and
otherwise unmodern. It's not a breakthrough moment for the technology, exactly -
but it's certainly a glimpse at how mainstream America might use it.

Then again, most of us don't have lavish, many-acred estates worth documenting
from the air. And given the murky legality around using drones in public spaces,
you might want to hold off on following Stewart's example, for now.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


