                             1620 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

Talked to death

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 544 words


FIVE MONTHS have passed since Secretary of State John F. Kerry declared that
"the world must act quickly" to stop a "war of starvation" being waged by the
Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad against "huge proportions of the population."
It's been nearly six weeks since the U.N. Security Council passed Resolution
2139, which ordered the regime and rebels to "promptly allow unhindered
humanitarian access" and threatened "further steps" in the case of
noncompliance.

Since then, according to U.N. humanitarian coordinator Valerie Amos, the war of
starvation has worsened. The number of Syrians cut off from international aid
has grown since January by 1 million, to 3.5 million. At least 180,000 people
are in areas directly blockaded by government troops, which refuse to allow in
supplies of food or medicine. In direct contravention of the U.N. resolution,
the Assad regime has authorized aid convoys to cross only one of eight border
posts identified by U.N. relief coordinators.

Ms. Amos reported to the Security Council on Friday that only 6 percent of the
population living in besieged areas had received relief since the resolution
passed. Meanwhile, she said, crimes against the population had escalated: Since
Feb, 22, there had been 300 instances of sexual assault in and around Damascus.
"The humanitarian situation," she said, "remains bleak."

The U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, called Ms. Amos's
report "harrowing." She said the Assad government "is the sole reason for the
lack of progress in cross-border assistance" that "would allow the U.N. and its
partners access to almost 4 million people." She said: "The Assad regime's
murderous appetite for deploying artillery, 'barrel bombs' and airstrikes
against civilians . . . is the No. 1 factor driving displacement and the broader
humanitarian crisis."

Naturally, reporters asked Ms. Power what she was proposing for the "next steps"
cited in the resolution. That's when the ambassador's robust rhetoric suddenly
went limp. "There's nothing I can do and that we can do unilaterally to make the
council do what we want," she said. "So I can't make any commitments."

No, the United States can't force action by the Security Council, where Russia,
Assad's ally, has a veto. But the Obama administration is not lacking in options
to stop the ongoing, horrific crimes against humanity in Syria. What it lacks is
the will to act. It could order the Assad regime to authorize border crossings
by aid convoys - something Ms. Power said would require only "a stroke of the
pen" - or face the same airstrikes Mr. Obama threatened last summer. It could
target blockade points with drone or missile strikes. It could provide rebels
with the air defense weapons they need to stop helicopters from dropping barrel
bombs on civilian housing, hospitals and schools. It could disable the bases
used by regime aircraft.

Ms. Power and her administration colleagues instead appear content to listen to
"harrowing" reports from U.N. monitors, deliver angry statements and then throw
up their hands because of their inability to win the cooperation of Vladimir
Putin. It's not a performance that will be judged well when historians consider
why the world's foremost power failed to stop this mass slaughter.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


