                             161 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. will release drone strike memo

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Sari Horwitz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 943 words


The Justice Department will publicly release a secret 2011 memo that provided
the legal justification for the killing of American terrorism suspects overseas,
according to a U.S. official, following extensive pressure on the administration
to do so.

The department had been weighing whether to appeal a court order to disclose the
memo but informed the White House on Tuesday that it would not, the official
said. The decision came on the eve of a Senate vote on President Obama's
nomination of David J. Barron, one of the memo's authors, to a federal appeals
court judgeship.

A group of liberal and conservative senators had said they would fight the
nomination unless the memo was made public, and others from both parties had
called for its release. The White House allowed lawmakers to view copies of the
memo last week in a secure Senate room.

The administration acknowledged last year that drones had killed four U.S.
citizens in Yemen, including cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, who was targeted by a CIA
drone attack in September 2011. Obama called Awlaki the head of foreign
operations for al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.

A federal court ruled this year that the CIA, the Defense Department and the
Justice Department did not have to respond to Freedom of Information Act
requests for documents related to drone killings in general, and more
specifically the targeted killings of U.S. citizens. The U.S. Court of Appeals
for the 2nd Circuit overturned that decision April 21.

The government had 45 days in which to ask the appeals panel to review the case
anew.  The administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity
about the unannounced decision, said it covered all requested information, not
just the Awlaki memo.

In addition to a court-approved, redacted version of the memo, the order covered
listings of all classified documents - but not the documents themselves -
responsive to the original FOIA requests, filed by reporters for the New York
Times and the American Civil Liberties Union.

ACLU Deputy Legal Director Jameel Jaffer said they had not been notified of any
decision by the Justice Department. "We'd welcome the public release of this
document," he said of the memo. "The government claims authority to carry out
targeted killings of Americans deemed to threaten national security - the public
surely has a right to know the breadth of the authority the government is
claiming as well as the legal basis for it."

Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), a critic of the administration's drone policy, called
news of the decision "very constructive." Wyden, who said he will announce his
decision on the Barron vote on Wednesday, said the release is "very much in the
public interest."

When asked about the fate of Barron's nomination Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader
Harry M. Reid (D-Nev.) told reporters, "I think we'll be okay."

The White House referred all questions on the Barron memo to the Justice
Department, where officials declined to comment.

News of the Justice Department decision - which the administration official said
was made last week by Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr. with the
concurrence of Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. - was first reported by the
Associated Press.

The official said that the redacted memo probably will be released in a "matter
of weeks."

As part of its consideration of the case, the appeals court, after listening to
government arguments, made its own redactions to the Barron memo. That is the
version that the court has now ordered the administration to release. But the
official said that the administration will go back to the court and re-argue for
additional redactions on national security grounds.

At issue is likely to be whether the court agrees to redact references to CIA
responsibility for the Awlaki strike. Although the administration has
acknowledged the strike, it has never said which agency was responsible for it.
The Defense Department also has carried out drone strikes in Yemen.

Last week's White House agreement to allow senators private access to the memo
did not sway some lawmakers opposing Barron's confirmation, who insisted that
the administration comply in full with the appeals court ruling.

Obama's nomination of Barron, a Harvard law professor, was approved by the
Senate Judiciary Committee on a vote of 10 to 8 in January. While working at the
Justice Department's Office of Legal Council, Barron was the principal author of
at least one memo that served as the legal foundation for the drone strike that
killed Awlaki.

Last year, Holder sent a letter to the Judiciary Committee outlining the
administration's  guidelines for targeting U.S. citizens, saying killing would
be used as a last resort when a person posed "an imminent threat of violent
attack against the United States" and capture was "not feasible."

Holder acknowledged the deaths of four U.S. citizens in drone strikes in Yemen,
including Awlaki's 16-year-old son, but said that only Awlaki had been a target.
The others were killed incidentally in strikes against other targets.

Outlining his updated drone policy in a speech one year ago, Obama said that he
had authorized Holder to reveal that information "to facilitate transparency and
debate on this issue and to dismiss some of the more outlandish claims that have
been made."

"For the record," Obama said, "I do not believe it would be constitutional for
the government to target and kill any U.S. citizen - with a drone, or with a
shotgun - without due process, nor should any president deploy armed drones over
U.S. soil."

karen.deyoung@washpost.comsari.horwitz@washpost.com

Ed O'Keefe, Julie Tate and Ellen Nakashima contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


