                             1622 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              April 4, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

Everyone finds a new role

BYLINE: Maura Judkis

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T24

LENGTH: 576 words


When "Moth" hits the stage at the Studio Theatre next week, it will be a
performance full of firsts. Not only is it the U.S. premiere of Declan Greene's
one-act, two-actor play, but it's also the directorial debut of longtime D.C.
actor Tom Story. And the two stars of the play, Allie Villareal and David Nate
Goldman, are relative newcomers, too.

"The first time you do something, there's a kind of energy around it, and
somewhat of an ignorance, which can be blissful," Story said. "It's a chance to
see people who are brand new at what they're doing, which is exciting. I'm a
brand new director, and they're brand new actors."

"Moth" is the story of two teenage outcasts persecuted by bullies. Together,
they experience a traumatic event and spend the rest of the play trying to piece
it back together from memory.

"At its heart, it's a story about this love between two freaky kids," said
Story.

They slip in and out of character, playing themselves, their teachers, their
tormentors, and traveling back and forth in time - a challenge for even an
experienced director to put onstage.

"It certainly is more complicated than I think some first-time directors would
want to tackle, just because the narrative is kind of kaleidoscopic," he said.
At the same time, that's why he was so interested in the play. "I'm drawn to it
because it could never really be a film. It's told in such a theatrical way."

For being so new at their jobs, Story, Villareal and Goldman seem to have it
down pat, at least from the vantage point of a recent rehearsal. As they tried
out their lines with sound effects, Goldman, 21, and Villareal, 24, ran a scene
before their hallway-locker set, in sharp teen-speak dialogue.

"Whenever they talk about you at school, whenever I hear your name, even, I feel
sick . . . like my heart just puked everywhere," Villareal said as Claryssa, a
goth girl.

"Gross!" said Goldman as Sebastian, her anime-obsessed, socially awkward friend.

Story tinkered with the sound effects, which range from background cafeteria
chatter to a menacing, mechanical drone. "There's something weird here, but
there's also something I like," he said to the cast and crew. It's the first
time that sound effects have been under his purview.

"As an actor, you're in charge of kind of one thing, which is that character,
and how you're going to breathe life into this person," Story said. "As a
director, you're in charge of everything, really. You're in charge of the actors
and their process of creating characters, you're in charge of the interpretation
of the story, and the clarity of the story, and then you're in charge of all of
the design elements."

Story, who is in his late 30s, was most recently seen on the Round House Theatre
stage in "Seminar" and the Shakespeare Theatre's "A Funny Thing Happened on the
Way to the Forum," but directing has always been his long-term ambition. One of
the hardest things about transitioning between the two professions, he said, is
resisting the impulse to demonstrate how he would play the part. He said he has
never acted out any part of the script for his cast.

"You can suggest things that you might do, but ultimately, they're creating the
thing," he said. "So you have to help them create their version of it, and not
the version that you would do if you were actually playing it."

maura.judkis@washpost.com

Moth

Wednesday through May 4 at Studio Theatre, 1501 14th St. NW. 202-332-3300.
www.studiotheatre.org. $30-$35.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


