                             1605 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            March 12, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

In Senate committee's clash with spy agency, a test for Obama's legacy

BYLINE: Scott Wilson

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 1082 words


To save his run for the Democratic presidential nomination six years ago,
then-Sen. Barack Obama turned to author William Faulkner for assistance in
explaining how U.S. history has a way of shadowing its present politics.

"The past isn't dead and buried," Obama said, slightly embellishing the famous
quote in his speech about race. "In fact, it isn't even past."

On Tuesday, the past again proved alive for Obama, who now faces a political
quandary less personal but still fraught with history.

At the core of the accusations over whether the CIA spied on its Senate
overseers is the legacy of Sept. 11, 2001 - and the full public accounting of
U.S. actions in its aftermath that has never occurred.

The issues involved span two presidencies from two parties, and have placed a
group of powerful Democratic senators against John Brennan, a trusted adviser
whom Obama chose to head the CIA.

"It's important to stand back and look at what we're talking about here," White
House press secretary Jay Carney told reporters Tuesday. "We are talking about
an investigation into activities that occurred under the previous
administration, that then-candidate Barack Obama strenuously opposed, that he
promised to end, and which he ended very shortly after being sworn into office."

How Obama manages another political fight between Congress and the intelligence
community - as well as a possible Justice Department investigation of the
allegations - will have implications for his record as the post-9/11 president.

This one, like the argument over the National Security Agency's widespread
collection of phone and Internet records, is clouded by partisanship and
political inheritance, although with an added element of personal loyalty.
Carney said Tuesday that "the president has great confidence in John Brennan and
confidence in our intelligence community and our professionals at the CIA."

From ending two wars to prohibiting the interrogation practices at issue in the
current debate, Obama has made moving the country beyond what he described as a
"season of fear" a central element of his legacy in office. But doing so has
been difficult.

The U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, that he promised to close
remains open. A more coherent and publicly accountable framework for the use of
drones is unfinished. The scope and legality of U.S. eavesdropping has been
revealed as vast and largely unchecked.

"We have made mistakes - more than a few - and we have tried mightily to learn
from them," Brennan said Tuesday in an appearance at a Council on Foreign
Relations event. "Even as we have learned from the past, we must also be able to
put the past behind us so we can devote our full attention to the challenges
ahead of us."

Brennan was a senior CIA official under George W. Bush at a time when
interrogation methods that the International Committee of the Red Cross
characterized as torture were being used. The agency also operated a series of
"black sites" overseas where it held and interrogated terrorism suspects.

Obama campaigned against those practices, then named Brennan as his chief
counterterrorism adviser after taking office in early 2009.

The new president moved quickly to distinguish himself from his immediate
predecessor, arguing that national security policy in the age of international
terrorism was not inconsistent with the rule of law.

The left wing of his party, among others, hoped for a public reckoning for Bush
administration officials who sanctioned torture, the word Obama used to describe
the interrogation methods. He chose not to take that course, urging the country
to move on and do better.

"I recognize that many still have a strong desire to focus on the past," Obama
said in May 2009 at the National Archives. "When it comes to actions of the last
eight years, passions are high."

A few weeks earlier, Obama had authorized the release of Bush-era legal opinions
that sanctioned the use of harsh interrogation methods, angering conservatives
and prompting demands for more accountability from frustrated liberals.

At the National Archives that day, Obama acknowledged that "some Americans are
angry" and "others want to re-fight debates that have been settled, in some
cases debates that they have lost."

"The Congress can review abuses of our values, and there are ongoing inquiries
by the Congress into matters like enhanced interrogation techniques," he said.

Later that day, former vice president Richard B. Cheney spoke at the American
Enterprise Institute, offering a pointed rebuttal to Obama's remarks.

"I was, and remain, a strong proponent of our enhanced interrogation program,"
he said. "The interrogations were used on hardened terrorists after other
efforts failed. They were legal, essential, justified, successful and the right
thing to do."

Cheney said the techniques Obama denounced hours earlier "prevented the violent
death of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of innocent people."

"Our successors in office have their own views on all of these matters," Cheney
said. "For reasons the administration has yet to explain, they believe the
public has a right to know the method of the questions, but not the content of
the answers."

In many ways, the virtual debate that took place that day in May has guided the
argument in Washington over torture, terrorism and disclosure ever since -
leading to the tension between the CIA and the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence that emerged publicly on Tuesday.

The intelligence panel's 6,500-page report was envisioned, in part, to put the
issue to rest. It was adopted 14 months ago and concluded, among other things,
that no valuable intelligence was gained through interrogations that involved
torture.

The Obama administration has supported declassifying the report's findings.
Chairman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), whose criticism of the CIA  officially
brought the debate to light, is moving to do that soon.

At the same time, the Justice Department is considering a CIA inspector-general
referral that could lead to the prosecution of any agency staff members
involved.

"As a country, we should never go down this road again, and part of making sure
we don't is understanding what happened," said Christopher E. Anders, senior
legislative counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union. "It's not just some
historic interest. We must understand how we got there and we must make sure
that if there is formal accountability that should happen, then it can happen."

scott.wilson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


