                             1621 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              April 4, 2014 Friday
                                Regional Edition

The Senate has lost its way

BYLINE: Michael Gerson

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 822 words


God saves the queen. He saves this honorable court. But who will save the United
States Senate?

The venerable institution that Democrats control and Republicans covet has
lately been something of a circus. The Senate majority leader, Harry Reid
(D-Nev.), prevents amendments and pursues an unhinged vendetta against the Koch
brothers, private citizens engaged in lawful political activity. The Senate
minority leader, Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), is under political siege from right
and left in his own state. Conservative populists gain presidential buzz by
blowing up or shutting down Senate processes.

Since the Senate is America's pinnacle of institutional self-regard - "the
world's greatest deliberative body" - its reputation has always had a long way
to tumble. Even the Senate of Webster and Clay was also the Senate of
Know-Nothings, Doughfaces, Hunkers, Hard-Shells and secessionists, picking their
teeth and missing the spittoons.

But the gap between constitutional calling and institutional infirmity has
seldom been greater than it is today. One long-serving senator recently told me,
"The Senate has lost its soul." He means that the institution has lost its
defining, deliberative function. It is becoming circus-like in certain modern
and destructive ways.

The first, bear with me, concerns Senate procedure. In the not-too-distant past,
a few senators - say, an odd pairing of a Democrat and a Republican - might have
gotten to push for a creative or unexpected amendment. This is how much of the
agenda of compassionate conservativism, for example, was carried out when I
worked as a Senate staffer in the 1990s. Amendments were an opportunity for
innovation. They could also, of course, be used to force political opponents
into clarifying and embarrassing votes, which is also part of the deliberative
process.

But the amendment process is increasingly and purposely blocked in the Senate.
Reid often writes major legislation in his office, bypassing the hearings and
markups through which senators outside the leadership get their say and where
the political opposition can become more invested in bills as they move forward.
And Reid employs a maneuver called "filling up the amendment tree" - which
blocks amendments on the Senate floor outside his control - as the norm rather
than the exception. None of these practices is unprecedented; they have just
become commonplace.

Reid blames Republican obstructionism for such stern procedural measures. His
actions, not coincidentally, also protect vulnerable Democrats from having to
take awkward votes. But whatever the justification, the routinization of this
approach - passing leadership-written bills without a real amendment process -
is a highly partisan shift in the traditions of the Senate. It is difficult to
imagine, say, Sen. Ted Kennedy meekly accepting up-or-down votes on legislation
written by Majority Leader George Mitchell. And Robert Byrd, the great Senate
historian and institutionalist, would have been provoked to long-winded apoplexy
by such a diminution of privilege.

Republicans are now highly critical of these procedures. But they will, almost
certainly, employ them if they gain the majority. Partisans will not accept the
voluntary renunciation of established advantages. Procedural ruthlessness seems
to be a one-way ratchet.

The second source of Senate dysfunction concerns the nature of modern political
movements. In particular, social media and conservative media have created a
powerful avenue of influence outside of party structures, and this empowers
ideological purists and intimidates other conservative legislators. A senator
such as Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) or Rand Paul (R-Ky.) does not need to work his way up
to influence by persuading his Senate colleagues; he gains prominence by using
populist issues (unrealistic attempts at Obamacare repeal or imaginary domestic
drone threats) to criticize the weakness or perfidy of his colleagues.

I wonder if conservative "constitutionalists" have any idea how odd and
disturbing the Founders would have found the whole idea of the Senate as a
populist platform. According to Federalist 63: "There are particular moments in
public affairs when the people, stimulated by some irregular passion, or some
illicit advantage, or misled by the artful misrepresentations of interested men,
may call for measures which they themselves will afterwards be the most ready to
lament and condemn." The Senate is specifically designed to minimize, not
multiply, such moments.

Many senators I talk to, Republican and Democrat, are frustrated by this
multifronted attack on the possibility of deliberation. Both partisans and
ideologues are impatient with institutional restraint, which they see as an
obstacle to progress or purity. It should bother them, and us, that the Founders
were institutionalists to the core and for good reason: because a democracy must
deliberate somewhere.

michaelgerson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


