                             1629 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            April 12, 2014 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Australian authorities 'confident' signals are from Flight 370

BYLINE: Simon Denyer

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


BEIJING - Authorities are confident that a series of underwater signals in the
Indian Ocean are coming from a missing Malaysia Airlines plane, Australia's
prime minister said Friday, while warning that those signals are beginning to
fade.

Tony Abbott told reporters in Shanghai that searchers have narrowed the area
where they hope to locate the plane's wreckage on the ocean floor by listening
for pings from emergency locator beacons built into the plane's flight data and
cockpit voice recorders.

Audio transmissions were picked up by the Australian navy vessel Ocean Shield in
four locations April 5 and Tuesday by a device called a towed pinger locator
supplied by the U.S. Navy and dangled deep in the sea.

But no further sounds have been heard since Tuesday, and efforts to triangulate
those pings to a more precise location for the plane's wreckage are racing
against time, as the batteries powering those beacons have surpassed their
advertised 30-day shelf life.

"We are confident that we know the position of the black box flight recorder to
within some kilometers, but confidence in the approximate position of the black
box is not the same as recovering wreckage from almost 41 / 2 kilometers [about
three miles] beneath the sea or finally determining all that happened on that
flight," Abbott said.

Abbott said that some of the audio signals have been tracked over "quite a long
period of time," helping to reduce the search area.

"Nevertheless, we're getting to the stage where the signal from what we are very
confident is the black box is starting to fade," he said. "We are hoping to get
as much information as we can before the signal finally expires."

A fifth acoustic signal was picked up by an Australian aircraft Thursday, but
retired Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, who is in charge of the search, said
detailed analysis suggested that it was "unlikely to be related" to the missing
plane.

"Further analysis continues to be undertaken by Australian Joint Acoustic
Analysis Center," he said in a statement Friday.

The search was focused Friday on three areas in the Indian Ocean: two larger
areas where ships and aircraft were searching for any debris from the missing
plane, and a third, much smaller area, where ships and sonar buoys were
listening for pings from the black box.

The smaller search area, where the plane is thought to have settled on the ocean
floor, lies about 1,040 miles northwest of the western Australian city of Perth.

The larger search areas, together amounting to more than 18,000 square miles,
lie several hundred miles to the west of that point, where searchers say debris
from the plane might have drifted.

Up to 12 military aircraft, three civilian aircraft and 13 ships are taking part
in the search, but Houston said no debris was sighted and no objects were
recovered from the ocean Friday.

"Today Ocean Shield is continuing more focused sweeps with the Towed Pinger
Locator to try and locate further signals that may be related to the aircraft's
black boxes," he said in a statement. "It is vital to glean as much information
as possible while the batteries on the underwater locator beacons may still be
active."

He said three P-3 Orion surveillance planes will continue to work with Ocean
Shield, dropping sonar buoys into the water to listen for sounds. Those buoys
deploy hydrophones deep in the ocean and transmit audio signals back to the
planes by radio.

Houston said a decision to deploy an underwater drone - the U.S. Navy's
Bluefin-21 - to explore the ocean depths could still be "some days away."

The Bluefin-21 would be operating about three miles deep in the ocean, near its
technical limit, and moves only about 4 mph. So it could take weeks to survey
the ocean floor unless the search zone is narrowed further.

The disappearance of Flight 370, which was carrying 227 passengers and 12 crew
members from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to Beijing, has turned into one of the most
confounding aviation mysteries on record.

The Boeing 777 is presumed to have crashed in the southern Indian Ocean, having
traveled in its final hours in the opposite direction from its scheduled flight
path. Malaysian officials say they believe the plane was deliberately steered
off course by somebody on board, but they have not completely discounted the
possibility of a mechanical failure.

Search officials have said the audio signals' frequencies are consistent with
tracking pings from a black box. But the officials have not conclusively
determined that the signals came from the missing plane.

Two-thirds of the passengers on board the plane were Chinese, and their
relatives have complained bitterly about how the investigation has been handled
and what they see as a lack of transparency.

Abbott also met with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Beijing on Friday and
briefed him on the search.

"This will be a very long, slow and painstaking process," Abbott told Xi, the
Associated Press reported.

simon.denyer@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


