                             1630 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            April 12, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

American jailed in Yemen for alleged slaying of guard has disappeared, lawyers
say

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 495 words


Attorneys for an American jailed for more than four years in Yemen allege that
their client has disappeared within Yemen's maze of security facilities and is
in danger.

Sharif Mobley, now 30, was snatched off the street by Yemeni security agents in
2010, after his contact with an American-born radical preacher had attracted the
attention of U.S. counterterrorism authorities.

Mobley has not been seen by his attorneys or their representatives since late
February. An April 2 court hearing that his attorneys  expected would include an
account of U.S. interest in Mobley leading up to his arrest was canceled because
of a judicial strike, according to the British-based human rights group
Reprieve.

Yemeni authorities have given conflicting and erroneous accounts of his
whereabouts, Reprieve lawyer Cori Crider wrote in a letter last week to the U.S.
Embassy in Sanaa.

"I request urgent action" to locate Mobley and assure his family and lawyers
that he is safe, Crider wrote.

Mobley was jailed on allegations of killing a hospital security guard while
trying to escape from detention weeks after his 2010 arrest. Yemeni authorities
said that  he tricked a guard into unshackling him, then grabbed a gun and tried
to shoot his way out of the hospital where he had been taken for treatment of
injuries received during his initial capture. He was again injured and
recaptured during a gun battle with police.

His attorneys say he had suffered abusive interrogation by U.S. officials prior
to the hospital attack and that he feared for his and his family's lives. They
challenge his initial seizure as an unlawful "kidnapping."

Mobley was a New Jersey Muslim who grew increasingly devout and moved to Yemen
with his young family in 2008 for what he said was religious and language
education. U.S. officials have said they suspect he had extremist motives, and
cite his contact with extremist preacher Anwar al-             Awlaki, who was
killed by a U.S. drone strike in 2011.

Mohammed Albasha, spokesman for the Yemeni Embassy in Washington, said Mobley is
in the central Sanaa Correctional Facility. But Crider insisted to U.S.
authorities that Mobley is not in that prison. , nor in another one where her
representatives were directed last month. in March.

"We have not had any news of him for 39 days, despite strenuous attempts to
locate him," Crider wrote last week. "We are extremely concerned as to Mr.
Mobley's safety and well-being."

The State Department declined to comment on Mobley, citing privacy laws.

But Mobley's attorneys are exempt from the privacy restriction, and they say
that U.S. Embassy officials are similarly in the dark about Mobley's
whereabouts.

"We have contacted all the possible locations where he could be held. We have
received denials from everyone except the Ministry of the Interior who said they
would get back to us," Reprieve quoted a U.S. Embassy official as writing last
week.

Reprieve did not identify the official.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


