                             1611 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 17, 2014 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

Va. event unleashes the inner inventor

BYLINE: Michael Alison Chandler

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 604 words


On Sunday afternoon, 7-year-old Russell Welland built a parachute out of coffee
filters, cups and pipe cleaners. He wanted to make it fly.

So the amateur aeronautical engineer tested the parachute by putting it in the
bottom of a tall plastic tube set atop an electrical fan in a South Lakes High
School auditorium.

"Whee!" he said, his eyes following as his creation circled up and out of the
wind tunnel. "I made that!"

Russell was one of the thousands of people who came to the Reston school to make
things and to admire the creations of others at Northern Virginia's first
official Mini Maker Faire.

Part science fair, part craft fair, the event, which featured creations by
designers and engineers up to age 92, was organized to inspire more creations.

"What would you invent?" read a giant poster in the school's hallway.

There were model airplanes built from aluminum cans, homemade drones and a
solar-powered car at the expo, which spilled over into neighboring Langston
Hughes Middle School.

One group offered to scan images of passersby with help from a video camera and
a rotating chair, and then print them out using a 3-D printer.

And, of course, there were lots of things you could make yourself, including
hand-spun yarn, belts made of bicycle tires and decorative butterflies made from
recycled milk jugs.

The first Maker Faire was organized in the San Francisco Bay area nearly a
decade ago by a do-it-yourself-themed magazine called Make. Since then, scores
of affiliated events have been organized around the globe.

Silver Spring hosted a Mini Maker Faire last fall. The White House announced in
February that it plans to host its own Maker Faire to encourage a generation of
students to become, as President Obama has said, "makers of things, not just
consumers of things."

"Every young person is a designer, engineer and tinkerer, but eventually,
unfortunately, we lose that wonder," said Matt Barinholtz, an educator with the
group FutureMakers.

"Our job is to coach them so they can hold on to it," he said.

Many educators are committed to finding ways to infuse science and math classes
with more hands-on activities so students will stay interested in the subjects
and understand how they relate to the real world. After-school robotics clubs
and Lego leagues are taking off.

"Making things is the best way to learn," said Fairfax County School Board
member Pat Hynes (Hunter Mill). "Our challenge is to make the classroom more
like these great opportunities that children have outside the classroom."

Many adults also are gravitating toward tinkering because they feel a void in
their jobs.

Nova Labs, the main sponsor of the Northern Virginia fair, is a warehouse space
in Reston where people can share tools and ideas and create things.

President Brian Jacoby said the lab fills a void for a lot of white-collar
workers.

"A lot of people around here have an IT or desk job, where they tap, tap, tap
away at a computer. At the end of the day, it's hard to point to what you
actually did," Jacoby said. "It turns out that's really frustrating for people."

Jacoby grew up on a farm in Minnesota where he built things. As an adult, he
lived in the suburbs and worked as a manager of network engineers. At Nova Labs
he builds 3-D printers and helps other people make them.

"We give people a bucket of parts and say, 'Go build this,' " he said.

Robert E. Simon Jr., the 99-year-old founder and designer of the town of Reston,
spoke at the Maker Faire. He was introduced as a "community-maker," and he
encouraged people to think more creatively.

"Worthwhile projects come from imagination," he said.

michael.chandler@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


