                             1612 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 21, 2014 Friday
                                Regional Edition

Minimalist collaboration, to the max

BYLINE: Stephen Brookes

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 237 words


Minimalist music isn't for every taste. The endlessly repeated phrases, the
static harmonies, the general sense of cud-chewing - it can all drive the
thinking ear crazy. But when it works, it can be close to exalting, as A Winged
Victory for the Sullen (a collaboration between composers Dustin O'Halloran and
Adam Wiltzie) showed in a fascinating and often luminous performance at the
Sixth & I Historic Synagogue on Wednesday night.

That's not to say it was an upbeat evening. Opening with "A Symphony Pathetique"
from their debut album, O'Halloran (piano) and Wiltzie (keyboard and guitar)
were joined by string players from the American Contemporary Music Ensemble and
delivered a seamless flow of slow, meditative music throughout the evening,
weaving simple musical gestures into pulsing, multilayered clouds of sound that
seemed to float - almost weightlessly - over a base of low-pitched drones.

The effect was striking, as if it were the music of some distant celestial
orchestra, unfolding with stately and impassive and elemental force. And
virtually every work on the program - from the gorgeous "We Played Some Open
Chords and Rejoiced" and "Steep Hills of Vicodin Tears" to five pieces from
their new project "Atomos" and a reworking of Michael Nyman's first string
quartet - evoked that same sense of gravity and simplicity. This was minimalism
in skillful hands.

style@washpost.com

Brookes is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


