                             1602 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 11, 2014 Tuesday
                                Regional Edition

Rand Paul's retreat

BYLINE: Michael Gerson

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 777 words


The Republican Party is undergoing its most significant foreign policy debate
since President Richard Nixon dismissed then-California Gov. Ronald Reagan as
"shallow" and of "limited mental capability" and Reagan criticized the policy of
detente, initiated by Nixon, as "a one-way street that the Soviet Union has used
to pursue its own aims."

Once in the Oval Office himself, President Reagan proved willing to engage in
negotiations with the Soviet Union. He also, in a series of national security
directives, set out the objective of winning the Cold War by undermining Soviet
power in Eastern Europe, disrupting the Soviet economy and rolling back Soviet
influence at every opportunity. And he publicly addressed the reality of Soviet
communism - its inherent coercion and violence - in frankly moral terms.

Over the past few years, Reagan's internationalism, moralism and strategic
aggressiveness have been out of favor in much of the GOP. Many elected
Republicans grew tired of defending George W. Bush-era interventions in Iraq and
Afghanistan and the global exertions of the war on terrorism. With the arrival
of President Obama, they no longer had a political imperative to do so. It
became possible and convenient for conservatives to attack Obama and
international engagement at the same time.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) was just the man to lead the backlash, given his
marination in the isolationism of his father's foreign policy. In 1987, Ron Paul
formally resigned from the GOP, protesting Reagan's "indiscriminate military
spending, an irrational and unconstitutional foreign policy, zooming foreign
aid, the exaltation of international banking, and the attack on our personal
liberties and privacy." Rand Paul has provided a version of the same critique
against an easier target: Obama. The younger Paul has proposed defense cuts,
criticized foreign aid, led opposition to U.S. involvement in Syria, raised the
possibility of accepting and containing a nuclear Iran and railed against
"possible targeted drone strikes against Americans on American soil."

His reaction to the Ukrainian crisis has been revealingly typical. As Russian
troops massed, Paul said, "Some on our side are so stuck in the Cold War era
that they want to tweak Russia all the time, and I don't think that is a good
idea." And he seemed to signal the legitimacy of Russian claims: "The Ukraine
has a long history of either being part of the Soviet Union or within that
sphere."

Paul has attempted to associate his foreign policy with the realism of Henry
Kissinger. It is not a good fit. Realism has generally asserted the need for a
strong executive in conducting global strategy. Paul apparently believes that
U.S. presidents can't be trusted with sophisticated weapons lest they kill
Americans in cafes. His approach is not realism but non-interventionism. His
libertarian foreign policy holds that America is less secure because it has been
"too belligerent" and that decades of international engagement have both
corrupted our constitutional order and corrupted other nations with our largess
or militarism. This perspective sometimes overlaps with foreign policy realism
but only in the narrow cases when both recommend disengagement. Paul has a
trumpet that only sounds retreat.

For a while, it seemed that Paul's views were sweeping the GOP. Now we are
witnessing the beginnings of a backlash to his backlash, aided by Vladimir
Putin. Americans may not have suddenly developed a keen humanitarian concern for
Ukrainians, but a revanchist Russia is the type of threat that has mobilized
conservatives in the past. While a "let them fight it out" argument may play
well concerning Syria, a "let Putin get away with it" argument is a harder sell.
The partisan momentum in the GOP is no longer entirely on the side of
disengagement. Across the party, a Reaganite critique of Obama's foreign policy
stirs.

For evidence, look no further than Sen. Ted Cruz (Tex.), who possesses the GOP's
most sensitive instrument to determine the fluctuation of populist energies. In
the aftermath of the Ukraine invasion, Cruz criticized Paul for insufficient
fidelity to Reagan's belief that "U.S. leadership is critical in the world."
Paul has been on the defensive, belatedly referring to Russia as a "rogue
nation." And he has tried to claim credit for the fact that Western nations are
not sending troops to the Crimean Peninsula - which no one has actually
considered since the Crimean War ended in 1856.

Paul is left to insist, "I'm a great believer in Ronald Reagan." This amounts to
a serious concession, since Reagan would not have returned the compliment.

michaelgerson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


