                             162 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

FAA allows commercial drone ï¬[#x201a]ights over land

BYLINE: Joan Lowy

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 406 words


The Federal Aviation Administration said Tuesday that it has granted the first
permission for commercial drone flights over land, the latest effort by the
agency to show that it is loosening restrictions on commercial uses of the
unmanned aircraft.

Drone-maker AeroVironment of Monrovia, Calif., and the energy corporation BP
have been given permission to use a Puma drone to survey pipelines, roads and
equipment at Prudhoe Bay in Alaska, the agency said. The first flight took place
Sunday.

Made by AeroVironment, the Puma is a small, hand-launched craft about 41 / 2
feet long and with a nine-foot wingspan. It was initially designed for military
use.

Drones are often less expensive to operate than manned aircraft and easier to
maneuver. Equipped with 3D cameras, the Puma will provide images, currently
unavailable, of hard-to-reach places, BP and AeroVironment say.

AeroVironment chief executive Tim Conver said that the Puma "is now helping BP
manage its extensive Prudhoe Bay field operations in a way that enhances safety,
protects the environment, improves productivity and accomplishes activities
never before possible."

Last summer, the FAA approved the Puma and the ScanEagle, made by Boeing
subsidiary Insitu of Bingen, Wash., for flights over the Arctic Ocean to scout
icebergs, count whales and monitor drilling platforms.

"These surveys on Alaska's North Slope are another important step toward broader
commercial use of unmanned aircraft," said Transportation Secretary Anthony
Foxx. "The technology is quickly changing, and the opportunities are growing."

Last week, the FAA said it was considering giving permission to seven filmmaking
companies to use drones for aerial photography, a potentially significant step
that could lead to greater relaxation of the agency's ban on commercial use of
drones.

Congress directed the FAA to provide commercial drones access to U.S. skies by
September 2015, but the agency's efforts to write safety rules for such flights
have been slow, and it is not expected to meet the deadline. FAA officials are
on their third attempt to draft regulations acceptable to the Transportation
Department and the White House.

Much of the commercial demand for unmanned aircraft is for small drones, some of
which weigh only a few pounds. The FAA estimates that within five years after
regulations are in place, there will be about 7,500 commercial drones operating
in the United States.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


