                             1616 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

'Loveland' waxes bittersweet

BYLINE: Celia Wren

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 737 words


Some people juggle. Some people do celebrity imitations. Frannie Potts, the
kooky heroine of the one-woman play "Loveland" has her own entertainment
specialty. "I do facial gesturing to sound," she explains brightly at one point
in the show, a tidily wacky meditation on grief and loss. She proceeds to
demonstrate with a piece called "Car Alarm." As the familiar tones of an
automobile theftprevention system wail in the background, Frannie pendulums her
tongue, rolls her eyes and head, and flexes and purses her lips - in each case
keeping in sync with the din.

This tour de force of mugging is one of the funniest sequences in
writer-performer Ann Randolph's show, which has arrived at Arena Stage's Kogod
Cradle after reaping considerable acclaim on the West Coast. Directed by Joshua
Townshend-Zellner, "Loveland" introduces us to the likably quirky Frannie -
nature freak, solicitous daughter and occasional fount of offbeat sexual
fantasies - and chronicles the cross-country plane trip she takes to attend a
relative's funeral.

Excitable, awkward and something of a know-it-all, Frannie is not good at
judging what behavior suits a given situation. Hence her decision to perform
"Car Alarm" for the easily frightened residents of a retirement home. She
follows that performance up with an even less judicious encore: a chant that's
set to a repetitive harmonium note and that features the cheery refrain: "Listen
to the drone. It will help you die."

Inappropriate? You bet! And therein lies one of the insights of "Loveland,"
whose zaniest moments always seem to bend inexorably toward heart-wrenching
epiphany. As Randolph evokes Frannie's social faux pas, including her
confrontations with a slew of colorful acquaintances and strangers, the play
seems to grapple with the fact that death itself can strike us as inappropriate
- as a reality that is devastating, intolerable and a little bit outrageous.

Gesturing animatedly with her large hands as she moves around a chair at center
stage (the only other significant bit of scenery is the briefly seen harmonium),
Randolph throws herself fervently into Frannie's enthusiasms and angst. On the
airplane, when Frannie isn't petulantly ringing her call button to summon the
flight attendant, she's often exclaiming ecstatically over the beauty of the
American landscape she sees through her window. Glimpsing snow on California's
Mount San Jacinto, she slaps her thighs and thumps her feet on the floor
repeatedly in sheer delight.

Other experiences go less well for our heroine (whose childhood home town of
Loveland, Ohio, gives the play its thematically loaded name). Frannie tangles
with the staff at her local Whole Foods (a massage chair is involved), and she
has serious differences with an officiously cheery social worker at the Crane
Lake County Manor retirement home. (Pressing her palms together serenely,
Randolph gives the social worker an aptly sanctimonious squinty-eyed smile). The
fact that Crane Lake - where Frannie's mother resides - uses Mozart's Requiem as
its telephone hold music doesn't help matters.

The testy but devoted relationship between Frannie and her curmudgeonly mother
(Randolph lends the character a wisecracking drawl) is very touching, and it
provides considerable emotional fuel as "Loveland" beelines toward its
laugh-through-your-tears climax. That climax does feel a little confected, even
predictable. And, in general, some theatergoers may feel that the show guides
them a little too carefully toward a relatively narrow spectrum of response, the
kind of response that might express itself in a deep, bittersweet sigh.

But, judging by the murmurs and rueful laughs that rose from the audience at a
performance last weekend, "Loveland" will be hugely moving and even cathartic
for other viewers. (Randolph is scheduled to lead a mini-writing workshop after
each performance to "explore the transformative and healing power of expressed
personal grief.") It's the kind of artistic pay-off that Frannie Potts,
facial-gesturer extraordinaire, could only dream of.

style@washpost.com

Celia Wren is a freelance writer.

Loveland

Written and performed by Ann Randolph. Directed by Joshua Townshend-Zellner;
lighting designer, Andres Holder; dramaturg, Jocelyn Clarke. With the voice of
Wayne Wilderson. About 75 minutes. Tickets: $25-$40. Through April 13 at Arena
Stage, 1101 Sixth St. SW. Visit www.arenastage.org or

call 202-488-3300.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


