                             160 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 29, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Pakistan's Tribal North, U.S. Drone Strike Kills Four

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD; Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 344 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- An American drone strike in northwestern Pakistan killed
at least four people suspected of being militants, Pakistani officials said
Sunday.

The drone strike occurred Sunday afternoon in Karikot in the South Waziristan
tribal region. A vehicle parked near a house was the target, a local
administration official said on the condition of anonymity because he was not
authorized to talk to the news media. Two of those killed were believed to be
citizens of Arab nations. But their identities could not be immediately
confirmed.

This was the second American drone strike within a week and the first strike in
South Waziristan in almost a year.

On Wednesday, a drone strike in Datta Khel, in the adjacent North Waziristan
tribal region, killed at least 10 people who were thought to be militants.

The Pakistani military is engaged in an offensive against militants in North
Waziristan. On Sunday, the military said fighter jets had killed at least 15
militants in airstrikes on five hide-outs in the Shawal area of North
Waziristan.

The Pakistan military claimed success in its campaign against militants in South
Waziristan after a military offensive in 2009, but the militants still have a
presence in the region.

Drone strikes are extremely unpopular in Pakistan, where they are viewed as a
breach of the country's sovereignty by the United States. Human rights activists
have also criticized the drone strikes, claiming that they have resulted in a
large number of civilian casualties. The activists and the Pakistani government
do not agree on the toll.

The number of drone strikes has decreased in recent months, but American
officials have dismissed the idea that the classified drone program focusing on
the volatile northwestern Pakistani tribal regions will be halted.

American officials emphasize that remotely piloted drones are an essential
weapon in the hunt for militants in areas where ground troops cannot operate.
The hunt is mostly for members of the Haqqani network, who have orchestrated
deadly attacks against forces in Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/29/world/in-pakistans-tribal-north-us-drone
-strike-kills-four.html

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


