                             1632 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 15, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 359 words


Rush-hour blast  An explosion in a bus terminal killed 72 people in Nigeria's
capital; the president blamed an Islamist group.  A6

Boston anniversary  The city braced for an emotional week honoring those
affected by last year's Boston Marathon bombing.  A3

the nation

 The suspect in the slayings  of three people at Jewish facilities near Kansas
City is to face hate crime charges. A4

Two environmental groups joined forces to steer donations to candidates. A2

A defense attorney in the Guantanamo terror hearings said the FBI questioned
members of the defense team in a "chilling" intrusion. A2

The CBO lowered estimates of the health-care law's cost, saying it will be $104
billion less than projected over the next decade. A4

the world

 Londoners ate on Tube trains to protest a Facebook page with surreptitious
photos of female riders eating. A9

Search teams plan to send an unmanned submarine to the bottom of the Indian
Ocean to look for the missing Malaysian jetliner. A7

the economy

 Google ramped up its efforts to broaden Internet access with the purchase of
drone maker Titan Aerospace. A11

A new study revealed an increase in reports by U.S. adults who have Internet
access that their personal information was stolen in a data breach. A13

Retail sales spiked in March, but economists attributed it to pent-up demand.
A11

the region

 The shooting of a kayaker on an Anne Arundel County Creek may have been
accidental, officials said. B1

Alcohol may have been a factor in the death of a GWU student, struck while
crossing a street in College Park, police said. B4

The National Park Service, responding to criticism of its cleanup work at the
National Cherry Blossom Festival, said as much as 30 tons of trash, on par with
July 4 tonnage, had piled up. B3

The bones of a T. rex in Montana were scheduled to arrive Tuesday at the
Smithsonian's Natural History Museum. B2

City officials' questions about a D.C. Council member's spending on Emancipation
Day events this week threaten to derail a parade Wednesday. B1

Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley (D) signed legislation to remove the threat of
jail time for possession of small amounts of marijuana. B1

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


