                             1764 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 27, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 269 words


Drinking's heavy toll  Excessive use of alcohol causes 1 in 10 deaths of
working-age adults every year, health officials reported.  A3

the nation

 The Obama administration proposed new enrollment rules for the second year of
the health-care law. A6

Republicans and Democrats said immigration reform is unlikely to pass until
after President Obama leaves office. A2

Drone strikes represent a "slippery slope" toward a state of never-ending war, a
panel of former intelligence and defense officials said. A2

the world

 Moldova braced for a Russian backlash  over closer ties with the European
Union. A11

Pakistan's offensive against militants is complicated by tensions with
neighboring Afghanistan. A13

the economy

 The Obama administration announced  plans to beef up a program aimed at
ensuring access to affordable rental housing. A18

Investors sent shares of GoPro up more than 30 percent in the action-camera
maker's stock market debut. A18

Google began to remove user data and search results under Europe's new "right to
be forgotten." A17

the region

 A 3-year-old boy found dead  in Southeast Washington was beaten, police said.
B5

A judge dismissed a recall-petition case against Loudoun Supervisor Eugene A.
Delgaudio, who was accused of misusing his office. B4

The D.C. ABC board ordered  the Web-based Ultra liquor-delivery service to stop
operating in the city. B8

Robert Sarvis, the Libertarian candidate for Virginia governor last fall, has
qualified for the ballot for the U.S. Senate. B8

obituaries

 Diana McLellan, 76, wrote the Washington gossip column the Ear, which
chronicled social news and intrigue. C1

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


