                             1715 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 18, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

NSA mantra: 'Collect it all . . . know it all'

BYLINE: David Cole

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 1770 words


At a meeting with his British counterparts in 2008, Keith Alexander, then head
of the National Security Agency, reportedly asked, "Why can't we collect all the
signals, all the time?" The NSA has since sought to dismiss that remark as a
quip taken out of context. In his new book, "No Place to Hide," Glenn Greenwald,
one of three recipients of the voluminous, top-secret material that NSA
contractor Edward Snowden chose to leak, uses those documents to prove that this
was indeed the agency's guiding principle.

In one remarkable slide presented at a 2011 meeting of five nations'
intelligence agencies and revealed here for the first time, the NSA described
its "collection posture" as "Collect it All," "Process it All," "Exploit it
All," "Partner it All," "Sniff it All" and, ultimately, "Know it All."

Much has been written about the NSA's omnivorous appetite for personal data -
much of it by Greenwald for the Guardian and other outlets. In his new book,
however, he offers a revealing and disturbing overview, illustrated by dozens of
reproduced secret documents, of just how far the NSA has gone to achieve
Alexander's vision of collecting and knowing it all. Relying on newly disclosed
and already disclosed documents, Greenwald shows that the scope of the NSA's
surveillance exceeds not only our imagination but also the agency's capacity
even to store, much less analyze, it all.

In a one-month period last year, for example, a single unit of the NSA, the
Global Access Operations unit, collected data on more than 97 billion e-mails
and 124 billion phone calls from around the world; more than 3 billion of those
calls and e-mails were collected as they passed through the United States. As of
2012, the agency was processing more than 20 billion telecommunications per day.
In a single month in 2011, the NSA collected 71 million calls and e-mails from
Poland alone - not a major hub of terrorist activity, the last time I checked.
The NSA has admitted that "it collects far more content than is routinely useful
to analysts." These numbers call to mind Sen. Everett Dirksen's quip about
government spending: "A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon you're
talking about real money."

The NSA achieves these ends by working hand in hand with private
telecommunications and Internet service providers. One NSA document describes an
unnamed corporate partner as "aggressively involved in shaping traffic to run
signals of interest past our monitors" and reports that in a single month, this
top-secret, public-private partnership yielded more than 6 billion records of
telephone calls and Internet activity. Under another program revealed here, the
NSA intercepts routers, servers and other network equipment being shipped
overseas; installs back-door surveillance bugs; rewraps the packages with
factory seals; and sends them on their way, thereby ensuring that the agency
will have clandestine access to all information that passes through them.

Other documents describe X-KEYSCORE, the NSA's most powerful tool, which, as its
name implies, enables the agency to track every keystroke on a computer,
permitting the agency to monitor in real time all of a user's e-mail,
social-media and Web-browsing activity. In a single month in 2012, X-KEYSCORE
collected 41 billion records for one NSA unit. Greenwald contends that this is
the program Snowden was referring to when he said that, with an e-mail address,
he could tap into any American's communications. (The NSA has accused Snowden of
exaggerating, but the documents suggest that he may be right.)

Some of Greenwald's most disturbing disclosures concern not the NSA but its
British counterpart, the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ). His
documents reveal that the GCHQ engages in "online covert action" against loosely
defined "hacktivists" designed to disrupt, degrade and discredit their online
presence. Taking a page from COINTELPRO, the FBI's 1960s campaign against U.S.
radicals, the GCHQ's tactics include luring targets to sexually compromising Web
sites, posting false blogs and launching other "info ops to damage reputations."

Other revelations are less surprising, although Greenwald tends to deliver them
as if they were all equally scandalous. He reports, for example, that the NSA
cooperates with other countries' spy agencies, even as they spy on us and we on
them. Is anyone other than Greenwald "shocked, shocked" by this news? He notes
that the NSA collects data not only for counterterrorism purposes but for
economic and diplomatic advantage. Again, did anyone think otherwise? Since
1978, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act has expressly authorized the
collection of "foreign intelligence information," defined to include any
information about a foreign power or territory that "relates to . . . the
conduct of the foreign affairs of the United States." Surely oil supplies and
trade negotiations are as relevant to our foreign affairs as terrorism is. And
it hardly follows that, as Greenwald claims, "stopping terror is clearly a
pretext" for the NSA.

Some disclosures raise more questions about Greenwald's judgment than about the
NSA's activities. One document, for example, identifies the specific methods
used to bug 24 named foreign embassies. The document reveals top-secret methods
and targets, and its disclosure is likely to undermine legitimate
intelligence-gathering and cause serious diplomatic problems. Yet it is
difficult to see what possible value it adds to the public debate. It is one
thing to disclose secret government practices that raise serious moral,
political and constitutional concerns - as many of Snowden's disclosures have
done. But bugging foreign embassies is at the core of foreign intelligence, and
there is nothing particularly surprising about the fact that we do it.

Greenwald does not always recognize the difference between justified and
unjustified disclosures. And that's too bad, as Snowden placed his trust in
Greenwald to make such calls.

Greenwald's descriptions of NSA programs can also be misleading. He never
mentions, for example, that there are significant "back-end" limits on how the
agency can search and use much of the data it collects. These limitations
constitute the core of the NSA's defenses of its programs. While I don't find
those defenses entirely convincing, a serious effort to grapple with the issue
would not simply ignore them.

The force of Greenwald's argument is sometimes undermined by his hyperbolic
style and more-radical-than-thou attitude. He depicts the NSA, for example, as
part of a grand scheme by elites to control the masses, of a piece with what he
sees as "the response to the Occupy movement . . . to crush it with force,
through tear gas, pepper spray, and prosecution." Really? Maybe I'm imagining
things, but I recall seeing Occupy demonstrations for months on end throughout
the country, including in the nation's capital.

And he asserts that "both the United States and the United Kingdom have made
clear that there are no limits - ethical, legal, or political - that they will
observe when they claim to be acting in the name of 'terrorism.' " Has he read
the substantial debates in Britain over preventive detention, control orders,
complicity in torture and the like? Has he seen the Obama administration's brief
to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit insisting that the laws of war
must limit detention authority at Guantanamo and urging the court to reverse a
statement to the contrary? Or President Obama's orders barring the use of
enhanced interrogation techniques? Such overstatement weakens Greenwald's
credibility, which is unfortunate, because much of what he has to say is
extremely valuable.

Part of the problem is that Greenwald sees the world in black and white. As he
puts it, "There are, broadly speaking, two choices: obedience to institutional
authority or radical dissent from it." For him there is apparently nothing in
between. Anyone who does not share his radical dissent is, therefore, a tool for
the political elite. When the New Yorker's Hendrik Hertzberg and The Washington
Post's Ruth Marcus question the significance of metadata collection, Greenwald
concludes that "journalists who devote their careers to venerating the country's
most powerful official - the president . . . and defending his political party
rarely, if ever, risk alienating those in power." I, too, think Hertzberg and
Marcus fail to adequately appreciate the dangers of metadata collection, but one
need only read a random sample of their hard-hitting columns to see that they
are hardly averse to alienating those in power.

Similarly, Greenwald blasts the "establishment media" for consulting with the
government about disclosing secret information and accuses them of wanting only
to make the government look good. But then how does one explain the disclosures
of the Pentagon Papers, Watergate, Abu Ghraib, the CIA's black sites and torture
program, renditions to torture, the NSA's warrantless wiretapping, the New York
Police Department's spying on Muslims and the drone program? Most of what we
know about the government's most troubling national security measures comes from
what Greenwald dismisses as "the establishment media."

This is an important and illuminating book. It would have been more important
and illuminating were Greenwald able to acknowledge that the choices we face
about regulating surveillance in the modern age are difficult and that there are
no simple answers. (He notably suggests virtually nothing in the way of positive
reforms, sticking instead to criticism.)

Snowden handed Greenwald the story of a lifetime. NSA coverage based on the
leaked material resulted in The Washington Post and the Guardian winning
Pulitzer Prizes for public service this year. Greenwald has done the world a
service by helping to explain the significance of the disclosures for everyone's
privacy. He has helped spark a much-needed national and worldwide debate about
how to preserve privacy when we do so much online, and when the NSA and others
have the technological means to track virtually all we do there. But his book
would have been more persuasive had he confronted what is difficult about the
issue and not simply been satisfied with lobbing grenades at all who are less
radical than he is.

bookworld@washpost.com

David Cole  is the Hon. George Mitchell professor in law and public policy at
Georgetown University Law Center and the legal affairs correspondent for the
Nation.

NO PLACE TO HIDE

Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State

By Glenn Greenwald

Metropolitan. 259 pp. $27

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


