                             1768 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 1, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 283 words


Vow to take action  Assailing House inaction on immigration, President Obama
said he will redirect enforcement efforts to the border.  A3

the nation

 The FAA is likely to miss a deadline for allowing drones to fly in U.S. skies.
A9

Healthy women who are not pregnant do not need routine pelvic exams, a medical
journal recommended, and a doctors' group immediately challenged the new
guideline. A2

Another 200 American troops were sent  to Iraq to protect the U.S. Embassy and
Baghdad's airport. A9

the world

 Residents of an Iraqi city that welcomed Sunni extremists three weeks ago worry
about creeping authoritarianism and crumbling services. A10

North Korea said it is charging two American detainees with carrying out
"hostile acts" while in the country. A11

the economy

 GM announced its compensation fund  for victims of defective ignition switches
and recalled 8.4 million more vehicles. A12

the region

 New laws on a variety of matters,  including alcohol licenses and the minimum
wage, take effect today in the Washington region. B1

Prosecutors in the District have dropped the charges against a man and woman
accused of taking discarded city trash bins. B1

A member of the Virginia House of Delegates faces sex charges involving a
17-year-old receptionist who worked at his Richmond law firm; Joseph D.
Morrissey (D) denies wrongdoing. B2

A hearing examiner affirmed the suspension of an Anne Arundel County boy who as
a second-grader last year chewed a breakfast pastry into the shape of a gun at
school. B3

People who have D.C. driver's licenses were involved in 37 percent of the
crashes in the city in 2012, more than any other group, an analysis of
statistics by Howard University found. B1

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


