                             1786 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 20, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

More Medals of Honor awarded, but with longer waits

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 1213 words


When President Obama drapes the Medal of Honor around the neck of Army Staff
Sgt. Ryan J. Pitts on Monday, it will symbolize all of the heroism and sacrifice
that occurred in a ferocious battle in Afghanistan. But it will represent
something else, too: a dramatic rise in the amount of time it takes for troops
to be honored with the nation's highest award for combat valor.

Pitts, of Nashua, N.H., will receive the award six years and eight days after
holding off an enemy assault on his platoon's hillside observation post in
Afghanistan's Nuristan province. He did so even though he was wounded badly
enough that a fellow soldier had to put a tourniquet on his leg to control the
bleeding, Army officials say.

The amount of time between his actions and his ceremony at the White House will
be the second longest for any service member awarded the Medal of Honor for
actions after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. It is surpassed only by
Army Sgt. Kyle White, who received the medal May 13, more than 61 / 2 years
after he braved enemy fire numerous times in a Nov. 7, 2007, battle in Nuristan
after he was briefly knocked unconscious by a rocket-propelled grenade blast.

Obama has awarded the Medal of Honor twice as often as his predecessor for
actions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Still, the prolonged approval process has drawn
criticism on Capitol Hill, in the military and from experts who track military
awards and see a broken system.

"That is bureaucratic ineptness, is all that is," said Rep. Duncan D. Hunter
(R-Calif.), who served in Iraq and Afghanistan as a Marine. "It's probably
armchair generals who are afraid of their own shadows that just don't want to do
the right thing. It shouldn't take six years. In fact, I think it's a travesty
when these guys don't get their awards when they're still on active duty."

Before President George W. Bush left office early in 2009, he awarded five
Medals of Honor for actions in Iraq and Afghanistan, all posthumously to
recipients who died from injuries sustained while earning the award. Bush took
criticism in the military for not once decorating a living service member with
the Medal of Honor, but the medals he did award came relatively quickly - about
two years each, or 736 days on average.

Pitts will be the 11th post-9/11 service member to receive the Medal of Honor
from Obama. Nine of the awards have gone to living recipients, but those cases
have taken an average of nearly four years - 1,443 days - to conclude. The
president also has awarded two posthumous awards, which took about three years
each.

Combined, Bush and Obama have issued the award to 11 soldiers, three Marines and
two sailors, both of whom were posthumous recipients and Navy SEALs. The living
recipients include seven soldiers and two Marines.

The discrepancy in the number of Medals of Honor bestowed by Bush and Obama is
probably a function of U.S. military commanders gradually warming to the idea
that their troops may deserve the award as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have
progressed, said Doug Sterner, an Army veteran and military historian who is
widely recognized for his tracking of military awards.

"In World War II, the top commanders were in World War I. They understood the
process and they knew heroism when they saw it," Sterner said. "The same goes
for the top commanders in Vietnam, who served in Korea. The top commanders in
Iraq didn't have that."

At the same time, the awards process simply takes a lot longer now. Sterner
cited the awards that President Bill Clinton gave posthumously on May 23, 1994,
to Army Master Sgt. Gary Gordon and Army Sgt. 1st Class Randall Shughart, as one
example.

The two men were killed Oct. 3, 1993, in Somalia while defending a Black Hawk
helicopter and the injured pilot inside, then-Chief Warrant Officer 3 Michael
Durant. Gordon and Shughart received their Medals of Honor less than eight
months after their heroic actions. Durant was taken prisoner and was released 11
days later.

A White House spokesman referred questions for this story to the military,
saying it was a Defense Department issue.

Pentagon officials said it can be difficult to gather the "incontestable proof"
needed for the Medal of Honor. That's especially the case, they said, when there
are few witnesses or when the potential recipient and others present have been
evacuated from the battlefield after sustaining severe wounds.

Pitts's actions came in a controversial and bloody battle that killed nine U.S.
troops and wounded 27 others. The classification of documents associated with
the Battle of Wanat increased the difficulty of assessing his actions and
required special handling of his award documentation, Army officials said in a
written response to questions.

White's case also was complicated by the need for more information and
inquiries, the Army said without elaborating.

The Marine Corps, which has faced scrutiny for awarding just three Medals of
Honor for actions in Iraq or Afghanistan, is confident that its policies for
awarding heroism are fair and consistent, including on prestigious awards such
as the Medal of Honor, said Lee Freund, head of the service's awards branch.

Army officials are still smarting from the way the Medal of Honor case for Capt.
William D. Swenson was botched. The infantry officer received the award Oct. 15
for braving enemy fire repeatedly in eastern Afghanistan's Ganjgal Valley on
Sept. 8, 2009, to pull a fellow soldier who had sustained a gunshot from a kill
zone, then search for four service members who had been killed.

Swenson received the Medal of Honor more than four years after the battle - and
only after his digital nomination packet went missing in Afghanistan. He was
first recommended for the award by a battalion commander in December 2009, but
the case was subsequently recommended for a downgrade by Army Gen. David H.
Petraeus, according to the findings of a Defense Department inspector general
investigation. The package never received additional processing.

Swenson's case was submitted for review again in July 2011 as the military
prepared to award a Medal of Honor to another service member in the battle,
Marine Sgt. Dakota Meyer. Swenson refused to accept his award until the Army
investigated what happened, and he received a public apology from Defense
Secretary Chuck Hagel last year.

The mistakes led Army Secretary John McHugh to implement a policy in which the
Army's awards branch must follow up with a soldier's chain of command every 30
days after he has been recommended for the Medal of Honor.

Hagel, an infantryman who served in Vietnam, also called for a full joint review
of the military's awards process in March, saying in a letter to senior officers
that he wants to make sure that the military "adequately recognizes all levels
of combat valor." The inquiry also will determine how best to recognize drone
operators, cyber-warfare personnel and others who affect events on the
battlefield.

The review, which did not begin until last month, will assess lessons learned in
Iraq and Afghanistan to make sure service members are adequately awarded for
their actions, said Navy Lt. Cmdr. Nate Christensen, a Pentagon spokesman. It is
expected to take about a year.

dan.lamothe@washpost.com

David Nakamura contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


