                             1750 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

Gray-letter law

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 478 words


THE CAPTURE of Ahmed Abu Khatalla is a testament, as President Obama said, to
the "courage and professionalism" of U.S. military, law enforcement and
intelligence personnel. It vindicates Mr. Obama's promise to stay focused, no
matter how long it would take, on the hunt for the killers of Ambassador J.
Christopher Stevens and three other Americans in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012. But
this episode includes a couple of other lessons that Mr. Obama did not dwell on
in his brief statement.

We believe the president is correct, Republican criticism notwithstanding, to
send Mr. Khatalla to civilian court for trial. As Attorney General Eric H.
Holder Jr. has said, the courts have proved their capacity to deal fairly and
decisively with terrorism suspects. In one sense, to treat Mr. Khatalla as a
prisoner of war and send him to the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as the
critics demand, would be to accord too much respect to his alleged behavior. And
as Harvard law professor and former Bush administration official Jack Goldsmith
pointed out on the Lawfare blog Tuesday, civilian courts are likely the only
legal option for Mr. Khatalla's detention; he is not covered by the
congressional declaration that authorized the United States to go after the
perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks.

It's worth noting, however, that the Obama administration did not immediately
read Mr. Khatalla his Miranda rights and clap him into a U.S. jail. Instead they
put him on a ship where he could be questioned for intelligence purposes. This
is the right call, but it also shows what Mr. Obama has been reluctant to
acknowledge - that as long as the United States is engaged in hostilities with
terrorists such as Mr. Khatalla, the criminal system alone is not sufficient.
The country would be stronger if the administration worked with Congress to
update the 2001 declaration and clarify the rules for interrogating such
detainees.

In addition, dispatching U.S. Special Operations forces into other nations to
essentially kidnap wanted men without their government's permission is not the
ideal method of law enforcement. The United States behaves this way when a
country is unable or unwilling to assist in a legitimate apprehension. Libya
certainly fits that description today, suffering as it does from feuding
militias and a breakdown of law and order.

One reason the country finds itself in that sad state is that the United States
and its allies, after conducting a bombing campaign that led to the downfall of
dictator Moammar Gaddafi, didn't stick around to help a new government establish
itself. The United States can protect itself to a degree by killing (with
drones) or arresting individual enemies. In the long run though, that will be a
losing battle if it does not also work with partners to reduce the extent of
lawless spaces where such enemies can be trained and sheltered.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


