                             1709 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 6, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

An unsatisfying end to Chanticleer series

BYLINE: Charles T. Downey

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 308 words


Louis Botto founded the all-male choir Chanticleer in 1978 to perform music of
the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance. On Sunday, the current formation of
the group closed out this year's Georgetown Concert Series, which has presented
two complete seasons at St. John's Episcopal Church on O Street NW.

Chanticleer's original mission was to sing music destined for a small consort of
male voices, from countertenor to bass. In recent years, the San Francisco-based
choir has focused more on arrangements of folk and popular songs, as well as
mixed-choir repertory, music not originally meant for male ensemble. The
membership, which numbers 12, includes three countertenors stretched, sometimes
uncomfortably, into the soprano range. The group does not sing enough
Renaissance music these days to be considered specialists, and its performance
of 16th-century motets by Palestrina, Victoria and Guerrero mostly sounded
rushed and unshaped. Intonation often did not lock into place except on final
chords and, even then, not always.

Much of the rest of the program consisted of adaptations, beginning with "O
frondens virga," from Hildegard of Bingen's "Ordo virtutum," embellished with
drones and a modern polyphonic refashioning of the final phrase. The group
showed its most beautiful sound in Mendelssohn's "Wasserfahrt," because the
piece was allowed to be slow and quiet, and because the composer intended it for
men's voices. Pieces for mixed voices could work, because of the admirable range
of Chanticleer's sopranos, but the Chanticleer sound, with a lot of forced
loudness, often draws out their shrillness. That trademark wall of vocal tone
was heard to excess in contemporary pieces by Stacy Garrop and Eric Whitacre and
in effective arrangements of songs by Joni Mitchell and Ann Ronell.

style@washpost.com

Downey is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


