                             1776 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Six-Hooters: The Double Dactyls of Week 1076

BYLINE: Pat Myers

SECTION: SUNDAY ARTS; Pg. E16

LENGTH: 1286 words

New contest for Week 1080:McGonagall with the windiness

 To the Zoo, on a Cowardly, Profit-Driven Decision  Alas, the zoo is closing the
exhibit of invertebrates (Little animals that live on plankton and frankfurter
bits). Now where can we go to see coral and octopuses? Fie on thee, zookeepers.
You are spineless wusses. - Gene Weingarten, inspired by the "poetry" of William
Topaz McGonagall

The Empress was recently alerted to the oeuvre - emphasis on the oeuuuu - of
William Topaz McGonagall, a 19th-century Scotsman whose mawkish, clumsy odes on
various tragic subjects prompted audiences to throw rotten fish at him, and
today earns him such superlatives as "writer of the worst poetry in the English
language," in the words of a Web site devoted to his life and, uh, creations
(see bit.ly/mcgonagall). Such as this stanza from "The Execution of James
Graham, Marquis of Montrose":  After partaking of a hearty breakfast, he
commenced his toilet, Which, in his greatest trouble, he seldom did forget. And
while in the act of combing his hair, He was visited by the Clerk Register, who
made him stare.

Not surprisingly, such wordcraft inspired Washington Post Doggerel Laureate Gene
Weingarten to pen the tragic ode above, on the occasion of the closing of the
National Zoo's Invertebrate House. And inspired us to ask you to out-McGonagall
McGonagall:  This week: Memorialize a modern "tragedy" in a poem burdened with
hilariously overwrought verse; lame, forced rhymes; and painfully uneven meter.
While the work of the real McG typically drones on for a dozen verses, we think
you can get the badness across in  one verse of no more than eight lines.

Winner gets the  Inkin' Memorial , the Lincoln statue bobblehead that is the
official Style Invitational trophy. Second place receives, in keeping with the
quality of the verse that will earn it, a miniature key fob of an  itty-bitty
rubber gorilla:  You squeeze it and a little brown bubble of "poop" emerges from
the mini-butt; let it relax and the poop-bubble returns inside the ape. A
National Zoo souvenir donated by Loser Andrea Kelly.

Other runners-up  win their choice of a yearned-for Loser Mug or the ardently
desired "Whole Fools" Grossery Bag. Honorable mentions get a lusted-after Loser
magnet, either the Po' Wit Laureate or Puns of Steel. First Offenders receive a
smelly tree-shaped air "freshener" (FirStink for their first ink). E-mail
entries to  losers@washpost.com  or, if you were born in the 19th century, fax
to 202-334-4312. Deadline is Monday, July 21; results published Aug. 10 (online
Aug. 7). No more than 25 entries per entrant per contest. Include "Week 1080."
in your e-mail subject line or it might be ignored as spam. Include your real
name, postal address and phone number with your entry. See contest rules and
guidelines at wapo.st/InvRules. This week's honorable-mentions subhead is by
Danielle Nowlin. "Six-Hooters" is by Nan Reiner. Join the lively Style
Invitational Devotees group on Facebook at  on.fb.me/invdev,  and click "like"
on Style Invitational Ink of the Day at  bit.ly/inkofday.

3 Style conversational  The Empress's weekly online column discusses each new
contest and set of results. Especially if you plan to enter, check it out at
wapo.st/styleconv.

The double dactyl, a verse form invented just a few decades ago, has all sorts
of rules: It has to be eight short lines; one of the lines has to be a
six-syllable word; one has to include someone's name; and most important, it has
to be in dactylic (DUM-da-da) meter. As in today's inking entries, the best of a
stampede of a thousand or so galloping submissions. For more honorable mentions,
see the online Invite at bit.ly/invite1080.

The winner of the Inkin' Memorial

Higgledy piggledy, Ken Cuccinelli,  theGubernatorialAspirant found

Preoccupation with Transvaginalia Wasn't, as strategies Go, ultra sound. (Jeremy
Horowitz, Washington, a First Offender)

2nd place and the "Manneken Pis" snow dome from Brussels:

Abraca dabraca, Poor  Lois Lerner  hasLost all her e-mails - oh,Where could they
be?

Why does the IRSIncomprehensibly Never lose track of what's Owed them from me?
(Beverley Sharp, Montgomery, Ala.)

3rd place

Higgledy piggledy, Philippa Middleton  ("Pippa," Kate's sister): it's Clear to
deduce

How you upstaged royal Connubiality: She had the train, but you Had the caboose.
(Brendan Beary, Great Mills)

4th place

Hairily scarily Donald the Trump  thinks weDon't get enough of aView of his
fame.

On all his buildings is Egocentricity.Vandals should tear down the"T" from his
name. (Rick Haynes, Boynton Beach, Fla.)

Losery bluesery:honorable mentions

Honkoway Broncoway Orenthal Simpson,  whoBungled a burglary, Wound up in jail.

There, from inside of his Impenitentiary, Sits right on top of the Real killer's
tail. (Mark Raffman, Reston)

Upcoming Anniversaries Crashity splashity, Edward M. Kennedy  Drove off a bridge
span inMid-'69.

(Armstrong and Aldrin wereCoincidentallyManning the Eagle andLanded just fine).
(Jeff Contompasis, Ashburn)

Dandily, scandally Lerner's  computer is Suddenly missing some E-mails, Boo-hoo!

Ryan has dared to say "Impossibility!" Next year will Ryan get Audited, too?
(Claire Keeler, Manassas, a First Offender)

Votery dotery Eric I. Cantor  wasBeaten by Tea PartyFavorite Brat,

Proving that primariesRepresentationalOften exclude from theRing the wrong hat.
(Sam Gwynn, Beaumont, Tex., a First Offender)

Paleo, naileo Ogg the Neanderthal  Mated with humans, our DNA states.

Given the evident Heterospeciety,Stone Agers must have been Hard up for dates.
(Gary Crockett, Chevy Chase)

Nearical spherical Buckminster Fuller,  heNever had need for aBrush or a comb.

Egg-headed wizard whoRectangle-phobicallyTouted to all that there'sNo place like
dome. (Kevin Dopart, Washington)

Hiltony wiltony, Shooting the president,  John Hinckley Jr.  thought, "Jodie
will beam!"

Warped and deluded, the Heterosexual Gunman had missed she was Not on his team.
(Christopher Lamora, Los Angeles)

Ruefully; truefully? Eleanor Roosevelt, Asked by her spouse, when their Coupling
turned sham,

To be discreet in her "Extracurriculars": "Franklin, my dear, I just Don't give
a damn." (Nan Reiner, Alexandria)

Jerkily, twerkily,Hannah Montana, herOld alter ego, mustBe all aghast:

Miley,  who's older now,NymphomaniacallyGyrates and strips off thisPart of her
past. (David Franks, Greenland, Ark.)

Miracle-pyrical, Jesus of Nazareth Feeding five thousand: twoFish and some
bread.

"Such a proceeding isUneconomical."Bakers and fishermenHastily said.  (Hugh
Thirlway, The Hague)

Slimmery-flimmery, Mehmet C. Oz,  MD,Flogs coffee extract asFat-burning fuel,

Senators recommend,Hyper-emphatically,That he be labeled aGreat Weight Loss
Tool. (Frank Osen, Pasadena, Calif.)

Hoitily-toitily, Benedict Cumberbatch  (Cherished by fans as an Arrogant sleuth)

Mines the attractions of Sociopathically Keeping his coolness while Ditching his
couth.  (Susan McLean, Iowa City, Iowa, a First Offender)

Jumpity bumpity, George Herbert Walker Bush Strapped on a parachute, Took a big
leap;

Nobody told him most Nonagenarians Celebrate 90 by Falling asleep. (Beverley
Sharp)

Higgelton piggelton Pastor  Jim Jones  was an Egomaniacal, Sick puppeteer.

Mass suicide, though, is No laughing matter. So Don't get your hopes up -
there's No punch line here. (Niels Hoven, San Francisco)

And Last: Pattily-scattily, Empress  of Washington (Like Queen Victoria)Wasn't
amused.

Spurning my humor, sheUnjustifiablyBinned all my entries - whyWasn't I choosed?
(Brian Allgar, Paris)

Lots more double dactyls in the online Invite at bit.ly/invite1080.

Still running - deadline Monday night: Our contest for questions that have
rhyming answers. See bit.ly/invitewk1079.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


