                             1785 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 18, 2014 Friday
                                Regional Edition

Moral clarity in Gaza

BYLINE: Charles Krauthammer

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 827 words


Israel accepts an Egyptian-proposed Gaza cease-fire; Hamas keeps firing. Hamas
deliberately aims rockets at civilians; Israel painstakingly tries to avoid
them, actually telephoning civilians in the area and dropping warning charges,
so-called roof knocking.

"Here's the difference between us," explains the Israeli prime minister. "We're
using missile defense to protect our civilians, and they're using their
civilians to protect their missiles."

Rarely does international politics present a moment of such moral clarity. Yet
we routinely hear this Israel-Gaza fighting described as a morally equivalent
"cycle of violence." This is absurd. What possible interest can Israel have in
cross-border fighting? Everyone knows Hamas set off this mini-war. And everyone
knows the proudly self-declared raison d'etre of Hamas: the eradication of
Israel and its Jews.

Apologists for Hamas attribute the blood lust to the Israeli occupation and
blockade. Occupation? Does no one remember anything? It was less than 10 years
ago that worldwide television showed the Israeli army pulling die-hard settlers
off synagogue roofs in Gaza as Israel uprooted its settlements, expelled its
citizens, withdrew its military and turned every inch of Gaza over to the
Palestinians. There was not a soldier, not a settler, not a single Israeli left
in Gaza.

And there was no blockade. On the contrary. Israel wanted this new Palestinian
state to succeed. To help the Gaza economy, Israel gave the Palestinians its
3,000 greenhouses that had produced fruit and flowers for export. It opened
border crossings and encouraged commerce.

The whole idea was to establish the model for two states living peacefully and
productively side by side. No one seems to remember that, simultaneous with the
Gaza withdrawal, Israel dismantled four smaller settlements in the northern West
Bank as a clear signal of Israel's desire to leave the West Bank as well and
thus achieve an amicable two-state solution.

This is not ancient history. This was nine years ago.

And how did the Gaza Palestinians react to being granted by the Israelis what no
previous ruler, neither Egyptian, nor British, nor Turkish, had ever given them
- an independent territory? First, they demolished the greenhouses. Then they
elected Hamas. Then, instead of building a state with its attendant political
and economic institutions, they spent the better part of a decade turning Gaza
into a massive military base, brimming with terror weapons, to make ceaseless
war on Israel.

Where are the roads and rail, the industry and infrastructure of the new
Palestinian state? Nowhere. Instead, they built mile upon mile of underground
tunnels to hide their weapons and, when the going gets tough, their military
commanders. They spent millions importing and producing rockets, launchers,
mortars, small arms, even drones. They deliberately placed them in schools,
hospitals, mosques and private homes to better expose their own civilians. (Just
Thursday, the U.N. announced that it found 20 rockets in a Gaza school.) And
from which they fire rockets at Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.

Why? The rockets can't even inflict serious damage, being almost uniformly
intercepted by Israel's Iron Dome anti-missile system. Even West Bank leader
Mahmoud Abbas has asked: "What are you trying to achieve by sending rockets?"

It makes no sense. Unless you understand, as   Tuesday's Post editorial
explained, that the whole point is to draw Israeli counterfire.

This produces dead Palestinians for international television. Which is why Hamas
perversely urges its own people not to seek safety when Israel drops leaflets
warning of an imminent attack.

To deliberately wage war so that your own people can be telegenically killed is
indeed moral and tactical insanity. But it rests on a very rational premise:
Given the Orwellian state of the world's treatment of Israel (see: the U.N.'s
grotesque Human Rights Council), fueled by a mix of classic anti-Semitism,
near-total historical ignorance and reflexive sympathy for the ostensible Third
World underdog, these eruptions featuring Palestinian casualties ultimately
undermine support for Israel's legitimacy and right to self-defense.

In a world of such Kafkaesque ethical inversions, the depravity of Hamas begins
to make sense. This is a world in which the Munich massacre is a movie and the
murder of Klinghoffer is an opera - both deeply sympathetic to the killers. This
is a world in which the U.N. ignores humanity's worst war criminals while
incessantly condemning Israel, a state warred upon for 66 years that nonetheless
goes to extraordinary lengths to avoid harming the very innocents its enemies
use as shields.

It's to the Israelis' credit that amid all this madness they haven't lost their
moral scruples. Or their nerve. Those outside the region have the minimum
obligation, therefore, to expose the madness and speak the truth. Rarely has it
been so blindingly clear.

letters@charleskrauthammer.com

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


