                             1727 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 3, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Foreign banks to help U.S. fight tax evasion

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 614 words

TAXES

Foreign banksto help fight evasion

It will soon get a lot harder to use overseas accounts to hide income and assets
from the Internal Revenue Service.

More than 77,000 foreign banks, investment funds and other financial
institutions have agreed to share information about U.S. account holders with
the IRS as part of a crackdown on offshore tax evasion, the Treasury Department
announced Monday.

The list includes 515 Russian financial institutions. Russian banks had to apply
directly to the IRS because the United States broke off negotiations with the
Russian government over an information-sharing agreement because of Russia's
actions in Ukraine.

Nearly 70 countries have agreed to share information from their banks as part of
a U.S. law that targets Americans hiding assets overseas. Participating
countries include the world's financial giants, as well as many places where
Americans have traditionally hid assets, including Switzerland, the Cayman
Islands and the Bahamas.

- Associated Press

PHARMACEUTICALS

Chicago sues over opioid painkillers

Chicago sued Purdue Pharma, maker of OxyContin, and four other drug companies
for allegedly pushing consumer use of opioid painkillers, creating addicts and
driving up its costs.

"Since 2007, the city has paid for nearly 400,000 claims for opioid prescription
fills, costing nearly $9,500,000," lawyers for the city alleged in a state court
complaint filed Monday.

The complaint accused the drug companies of deceiving the public about the risks
associated with the use of painkillers while overstating their benefits. In May,
two California counties made similar accusations in a lawsuit against the same
drugmakers.

Other drugmakers sued by Chicago are Endo Health Solutions, which makes Percocet
and Percodan; Johnson & Johnson; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries; and Actavis.

Denise Bradley, a Teva spokeswoman, declined to comment on the lawsuit.
Spokesmen for the other companies didn't immediately respond to requests seeking
comment on the lawsuit.

- Bloomberg News

ALSO IN BUSINESS

l  The Institute for Supply Management  twice corrected its May manufacturing
index Monday to show that factories grew at a strong pace during the month. The
original report said manufacturers had expanded at a weaker pace. The index, a
widely followed gauge of factory activity, now reads 55.4, up from 53.2 in the
initial report. Any reading above 50 indicates expansion.

l  Quality Egg,  an Iowa company that once was one of the largest U.S. egg
producers, has agreed to pay $6.8 million in fines for selling old eggs with
false labels and the tainted products that caused a nationwide salmonella
outbreak in 2010, according to a plea agreement.

l General Motors finalized  the number of newer-model large pickup trucks and
SUVs it is recalling because the air bags may not deploy, lowering the number of
affected vehicles. The No. 1 U.S. automaker, which is dealing with the recall of
2.6 million cars with defective ignition switches linked to at least 13 deaths,
said it was recalling 344 of the trucks. Last month, GM said the number was
about 500. The affected models include 2014 and 2015 Chevrolet Silverado and GMC
Sierra pickups, and the 2015 Chevy Suburban and Tahoe, and GMC Yukon and
Cadillac Escalade SUVs.

l The Federal Aviation Administration said  it is considering giving permission
to seven movie and television filming companies to use unmanned aircraft for
aerial photography. To receive the exemptions, the companies must show that
their drone operations won't harm safety and would be in the public interest,
the FAA said.

- From news services

COMING TODAY

l Day-long:  Motor-vehicle sales for May.

l 10 a.m.:  Factory orders for April.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


