                             179 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

U.S. General Apologizes After Afghan Drone Strike

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 845 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- The American military commander called President Hamid
Karzai to apologize for a drone strike in southern Helmand Province, which the
military conceded had killed and wounded civilians, a coalition official said on
Friday.

Mr. Karzai had lashed out at his American allies after the Thursday attack,
which came at a delicate moment when talks between Mr. Karzai and the United
States over a long-term security agreement have reached an impasse. The
Americans have told Mr. Karzai that unless he signs the agreement promptly, they
will begin planning for a total withdrawal of American and NATO forces after the
end of next year.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the American and NATO commander in Afghanistan, made
a late-night phone call to President Karzai on Thursday after the president's
criticism became public. ''He talked to President Karzai directly, expressed
deep regrets for the incident and any civilian casualties, and promised to
convene an immediate joint investigation to determine all the facts of what
happened,'' a coalition spokesman said, speaking on the condition of anonymity
in line with official policy.

Mr. Karzai vowed this week, at the conclusion of a loya jirga, or grand council,
that he would cancel the security agreement completely if there was even one
more raid that killed civilians.

On Thursday, he said that in effect that moment had come. ''For as long as such
arbitrary acts and oppression of foreign forces continue, the security agreement
with the United States will not be signed,'' he said.

The loya jirga overwhelmingly approved the security agreement last week and
called on Mr. Karzai to sign it quickly. The Americans have said that would be
necessary to allow time to prepare for a longer-term mission.

Mr. Karzai said he was adding a series of new conditions beyond what he had
already negotiated and would not sign until those were satisfied. One of those
new conditions was an immediate ban on any raids on Afghan homes. While the
raids he was speaking of were primarily those carried out by Special Operations
forces on the ground, his statement on Thursday made it clear that he now
included drone strikes in his prohibition.

The coalition spokesman confirmed that two drone incidents had taken place in
Helmand Province on Thursday. The first, in the Garmsir district, targeted an
insurgent commander traveling on a motorcycle, but missed him and apparently hit
civilians. One child was reported killed, and two women were severely wounded.
The targeted man fled on foot and was killed by a later drone strike. In the
second, in the Nawa Barak Sai district nearby, another drone strike killed a
single insurgent target and caused no civilian casualties, the spokesman said.

''Neither of the strikes were directed at a house or hit a house,'' he said. The
civilian victims were apparently nearby on the road where the first attack took
place. The drones were military, but in keeping with its standard practice, the
coalition did not identify which country they belonged to. Both the United
States and Britain are believed to have drones operating in Helmand Province.

Mr. Karzai, in a statement posted on the president's website on Thursday night,
said that a NATO drone strike on a house in Faqiran, a village in the Garmsir
district, had killed at least one child and wounded two women on Thursday
morning.

''This attack shows that American forces do not respect the lives and security
of the people of Afghanistan and the loya jirga decision,'' Mr. Karzai said.
''For years, our people are being killed and their houses are being destroyed
under the pretext of the war on terror.''

In a text message Friday morning, Aimal Faizi, the president's spokesman, said,
''It makes very difficult for the president to authorize the signing of
B.S.A.,'' referring to the bilateral security agreement.

After Mr. Karzai announced that he wanted to reopen negotiations on the
agreement, President Obama's national security adviser, Susan E. Rice, told him
in a meeting here Monday that the United States had concluded negotiations and
that, unless he changed his mind, Washington would begin planning for a total
withdrawal.

The bilateral security agreement provides for a 10-year American military
presence in Afghanistan, beginning in 2015. Ms. Rice also said that financial
aid to Afghanistan's security forces would be imperiled without an agreement.

Both sides have continued to hammer home their positions in public statements.
Mr. Karzai told Radio Free Europe, in an interview on Tuesday, ''If America
wants to conclude a security agreement with us, America needs to respect the
security of Afghan homes.''

In a public meeting in the city of Herat on Wednesday, the American ambassador,
James B. Cunningham, reminded listeners that even Mr. Karzai's handpicked loya
jirga, composed of about 2,500 leaders from around the country, had urged him to
sign the agreement quickly.

''Zero is not an option for us,'' Mr. Cunningham said. ''It could be a
consequence of decisions that your government takes or doesn't take.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/30/world/asia/drone
-strike-in-afghanistan.html

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


