                             1780 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            July 16, 2014 Wednesday
                                Regional Edition

Hamas's misfire

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 568 words


SO FAR Hamas's military campaign against Israel has been a dismal failure.
Thanks in part to Israel's Iron Dome anti-missile system, some 1,200 rockets
fired at Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and other cities have caused only one Israeli death
and a few other casualties. Attempted commando attacks via the sea and a tunnel
were stopped short, and a drone that ventured into Israel was quickly shot down.
Yet Hamas on Tuesday rejected an Egyptian cease-fire proposal that was supported
by Western governments and the Arab League and had been accepted by Israel.

Why would Hamas insist on continuing the fight when it is faring so poorly? The
only plausible answer is stomach-turning: The Islamic movement calculates that
it can win the concessions it has yet to obtain from Israel and Egypt not by
striking Israel but by perpetuating the killing of its own people in Israeli
counterattacks. More than 200 people, including a number of children, have
already died in Gaza; Hamas probably calculates that more deaths will prompt
Western governments to pressure Israel to grant Hamas's demands.

So far, the tactic is not working. Secretary of State John F. Kerry on Tuesday
condemned Hamas for rejecting the cease-fire and "us[ing] the innocent lives of
civilians . . . as shields." But Hamas's commanders, who have burrowed into
underground bunkers, appear to be doubling down. They are urging civilians who
have left their homes to return, including some 15,000 who evacuated the
northern part of Gaza in response to Israeli warnings. The cease-fire proposal
was answered with a new barrage of missiles aimed at central Israel.

To be sure, the Israeli government of Benjamin Netanyahu has more incentive than
Hamas to agree to a cease-fire, even though a majority of the Israeli public
probably opposes it. Israel has little to gain from a prolonged conflict; a
threatened ground invasion of Gaza would cause heavy casualties on both sides
and, if it destroyed Hamas, leave Israel with the problem of finding a new
government for the territory. Mr. Netanyahu is seeking the renewal of the truce
that ended the last Israel-Hamas mini-war, in 2012. That would end attacks on
both sides while allowing for a gradual opening of Gaza's border for civilian
trade.

Hamas's rejection reflects its weakened position compared with two years ago.
Egypt's military government has shut down most of the cross-border tunnels that
Hamas depended on for weapons as well as revenue, making it impossible for the
Gaza administration to pay its workforce. The Islamists sought relief by forming
a unity government with the secular, West Bank-based Fatah movement, but that
did not lead to the payment of salaries or the reopening of the border with
Egypt. Following the kidnapping and murder of three Israeli teenagers last
month, Israel arrested dozens of Hamas's operatives in the West Bank, making
their release another objective of the missile attacks.

To its credit, Israel has used sophisticated technology, including targeted text
messages and dummy warning missiles, to minimize civilian casualties. But
innocent people will inevitably be killed in attacks on launchers and missile
factories that are purposely placed in densely populated areas. The right
response of the international community is not to surrender to Hamas's
despicable tactics but to continue insisting that it unconditionally accept the
cease-fire proposed by Egypt.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


