                             174 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 27, 2014 Friday 2:57 AM EST

Panel cites drawbacks of U.S. drone strikes

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 586 words


Targeted drone strikes, a centerpiece of the Obama administration's
counterterrorism policy, represent a "slippery slope" toward a state of
never-ending war, according to a new report issued by a bipartisan panel of
former intelligence and defense officials.

The 81-page report, released by the Stimson Center on Thursday, concluded that
the Obama administration has yet to conduct a "strategic analysis" of the costs
and benefits of continued drone strikes in places such as Yemen and Pakistan.

"A serious counterterrorism strategy needs to consider carefully, and constantly
reassess the balance between kinetic action and other counterterrorism tools,
and the potential unintended consequences of increased reliance on lethal
UAV's," the report concluded, using the acronym for unmanned aerial vehicles.

The panel included retired Army Gen. John Abizaid, a former commander of U.S.
Central Command, and Rosa Brooks, a law professor at Georgetown University, as
well as  other former senior military and CIA officials.

A spokeswoman for the National Security Council, Caitlin Hayden, declined to
comment on the specifics of the report but said the administration complies with
U.S. and international law.

The administration, she added, "is exploring ways we can provide more
information about the United States' use of force in counterterrorism operations
outside areas of active hostilities, including information that provides the
American people with a better understanding of U.S. assessments of civilian
casualties."

While the report was mostly critical of the Obama administration's drone
strategy, it also sought to dispel myths surrounding the use of drones.

The report noted, for instance, that drones are no cheaper than manned aircraft
and do not cause the high number of civilian casualties that some have alleged.

"UAV technologies, in fact, enable greater precision in targeting than most
other common means of warfare," the report read.

Among critics, drones are seen as having severed pilots from actual battlefield
conditions, and even some within the military see drone pilots as glorified
video-game players.

The report disputed that notion, noting that drone pilots are prone to
post-traumatic stress as a result of continuous exposure to their targets and
the ability to survey the damage inflicted after strikes.

"They may watch their targets for weeks or even months, seeing them go about the
routines of daily life, before one day watching on screen as they are
obliterated," the report said.

The report also made clear that the consequences of widespread drone use can
ripple through civilian communities, which must grow accustomed to the steady
hum of aircraft above them.

"The resentment created by American use of unmanned strikes . . . is much
greater than the average American appreciates. They are hated on a visceral
level, even by people who've never seen one or seen the effects of one," retired
Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, the former top commander of U.S. forces in
Afghanistan, said in the report.

While the report noted that President Obama acknowledged many of the same
concerns cited by the panel in his May 2013 speech at National Defense
University, it goes on to suggest that America's drone program requires both
added transparency and oversight.

Strikes should be assessed to ensure that they "are having a positive effect on
US National security and not trading short-term gains for more negative
longer-term strategic consequences," the report said.

thomas.gibbons-neff@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


