                             178 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 29, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Leader Lashes Out After Report of Drone Strike

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 692 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- President Hamid Karzai lashed out at his American allies
again on Thursday after word came that at least one, and possibly two, NATO
drone strikes had killed civilians in southern Afghanistan.

The attacks came at a delicate moment, when talks between Mr. Karzai and the
United States over a long-term security agreement had reached an impasse. The
Americans have told Mr. Karzai that unless he signs the agreement promptly, they
will begin planning for a total withdrawal of American and NATO forces after the
end of next year.

Mr. Karzai vowed this week, at the conclusion of a loya jirga, or grand council,
that he would cancel the security agreement completely if there was even one
more raid that killed civilians.

On Thursday, he said in effect that that moment had come. ''For as long as such
arbitrary acts and oppression of foreign forces continue, the security agreement
with the United States will not be signed,'' he said.

The loya jirga overwhelmingly approved the security agreement last week and
called on Mr. Karzai to sign it quickly. The Americans have said that was
necessary to allow time to prepare for a longer-term mission.

Instead, Mr. Karzai said he was adding a series of new conditions beyond what he
had already negotiated and would not sign until those were satisfied. One of
those new conditions was an immediate ban on any raids on Afghan homes. While
the raids he was speaking of were primarily those carried out by Special
Operations forces on the ground, his statement Thursday made it clear that he
now included drone strikes in his prohibition.

Asked about the drone strikes, a spokesman for the International Security
Assistance Force, the American-led coalition, did not have an immediate comment
but said a statement would be released soon. A Western official, speaking on
condition of anonymity because the information had not yet been officially
released, said there were apparently two coalition drone strikes in Helmand
Province on Thursday that might have caused civilian casualties.

It is not known whose drones were involved. Both British and American forces use
drones in the Helmand area, and on the American side both the Central
Intelligence Agency and the military carry out drone strikes.

Mr. Karzai, in a statement posted on the president's website on Thursday night,
said that a NATO drone strike on a house in Faqiran, a village in the Garmsir
district, had killed at least one child and wounded two women on Thursday
morning.

''This attack shows that American forces do not respect the lives and security
of the people of Afghanistan and the loya jirga decision,'' Mr. Karzai said.
''For years, our people are being killed and their houses are being destroyed
under the pretext of the war on terror.''

In a text message on Friday morning, Aimal Faizi, the president's spokesman,
said, ''It makes very difficult for the president to authorize the signing of
B.S.A.,'' the bilateral security agreement.

After Mr. Karzai announced that he wanted to reopen negotiations on the
agreement, President Obama's national security adviser, Susan E. Rice, told him
in a meeting here Monday that the United States had concluded negotiations and
unless he changed his mind would begin planning for a total withdrawal.

The bilateral security agreement provides for a 10-year-long American military
presence in Afghanistan, beginning in 2015. Ms. Rice also said that financial
aid to Afghanistan's security forces would be imperiled without an agreement.

Both allies have continued to hammer home their positions in public statements.
Mr. Karzai told Radio Free Europe, in an interview Tuesday, ''If America wants
to conclude a security agreement with us, America needs to respect the security
of Afghan homes.''

In a public meeting in Herat on Wednesday, the American ambassador, James B.
Cunningham, reminded listeners that even Mr. Karzai's handpicked loya jirga,
composed of some 2,500 leaders from around the country, had urged him to sign
the agreement quickly.

''Zero is not an option for us,'' Mr. Cunningham said. ''It could be a
consequence of decisions that your government takes or doesn't take.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/29/world/asia/afghan-leader-lashes-out-at-us-alli
es-after-nato-drone-strike.html

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


