                             1726 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 2, 2014 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

An unpredictable ride lasts long after the final moves

BYLINE: Sarah Kaufman

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 500 words


The directness of Christopher K. Morgan's work hooks you from the first move.
The transcendence of it keeps you hooked, even after the last moves are over.

It's an unusual thing in dance to experience a fast-paced kinetic charge that
has emotional content, too. This was the power of Morgan's "By the Inch," a
program of four extraordinary works at American Dance Institute this weekend.
The performances flew by - the program lasted scarcely longer than an hour,
including an intermission - and left you rather breathless. That's a tribute to
the excellent dancers, all of whom (Morgan included) have a rolling, luxurious
and large-scale quality of movement. But it was Morgan's talent for combining
moves into great waves of corporeal expression at once primal and poetic that
made you forget about less significant things like exhaling.

The roller-coaster ride launched without delay in the first work, "In the Cold
Room," a world premiere featuring Giselle Alvarez (fondly remembered from the
Washington Ballet's Studio Company), Tiffanie Carson and Amanda Engelhardt.
Morgan didn't waste them on the mundane. A circling, spiraling current spun
through them, like some mystical cyclone; they arced and swooped as if something
unseen were in control, whipping them off-axis, pushing them to the very edge of
their ability to stay upright. Their unease was nameless and big, and it held
the imagination.

Over in the corner, a musician named Wytold was whipping up his own windstorm on
an electric cello. Live music was a classy touch, and a mark of Morgan's
attention to detail, which also was clear in the sensitive lighting by Jason
Wells. Wytold brought shifting emotional tones into the second world premiere,
"Bruised," a testosterone-fueled duet for Washington Ballet members Corey
Landolt and Andile Ndlovu. Tenderness crept in near the end - each man tried to
lay his head on the other's shoulder - but was abruptly cut short. Here, as in
"In the Cold Room" and in a solo for Carson, "Selling Out," the dancers often
seemed at war with themselves. Established rhythms were interrupted by sudden
impulses that wrenched their bodies into jagged, off-kilter shapes.

Morgan doesn't seem interested in folks with seamless personalities and no
drama. His autobiographical 2004 solo, "The Measure of a Man," which capped the
evening, provided a clue as to why. There are so many stories inside a fractured
person - one who is scarred, with the pain still fresh, and who is tough enough
to revisit it. Morgan's exploration of varieties of manhood - the cheesy pickup
artist ("Do you believe in love at first sight, or should I walk by again?"),
the office drone, the ballet prince and the majestic queen in pleather hot pants
- was a hilarious suite of spot-on impressions. It was also a searing portrait
of someone on the outside looking in. But as his other works showed, belonging
to a group is overrated. Conformity is boring. Messy individuality is so much
more interesting.

sarah.kaufman@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


