                             1784 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 18, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T23

LENGTH: 3467 words

Capital Fringe

Mini Reviews

 A check mark (g) denotes a show recommended by our critics. For more
information, call 866-811-4111 or visit www.capitalfringe.org. Tickets cost $17,
plus a one-time purchase of a $7 Fringe Festival button.

gA DREAM WITHIN A DREAM

At Union Stylus through July 26

This visually smart, absorbing project unfolds over two floors of an empty
building. It's a sort of haunted house and a scavenger hunt as a small audience
of no more than 10 is guided from station to station, listening to lunatic
ravings and hunting for clues about Edgar Allan Poe's last wishes. The hour-long
experience makes references to lots of Poe, but literature isn't the hook.
"Dream Within a Dream" is all about atmospherics. The cavernous spaces on both
floors are dimly lighted to create an ominous hollow effect, yet each small
gallery area is meticulously rendered, sometimes with video projected on the
walls. You can lose the story amid all this mood; at times the melancholy rants
really are incoherent. But you may not notice or care much, especially after the
mystery is solved.

- Nelson Pressley

Saturday at 7:30, 8:45 and 10, Sunday at 5, 6:15 and 7:30. 629 New York Ave. NW.


gCONTRAFACT OF FREEDOM

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Sunday

Good new history plays are hard to find, but the New York-based Hunger & Thirst
Theatre Collective has one in its backstory behind our impossible-to-sing
national anthem. This information-packed play by Alex Pappas depicts Francis
Scott Key - Frankie, as he is often called here - as pleasant and apolitical,
until the War of 1812 forces choices on him. Pappas depicts this by degrees in
nicely written scenes that illustrate Key's home life, the escalating military
conflict and his sketchy poetic abilities. Some of Pappas's dramatic exchanges
are bracingly smart, especially a negotiation between British and American
officials in which the moral high ground shifts several times. The program notes
claim a large degree of historical accuracy as the plot steadily makes its way
toward Fort McHenry and the night that Key feverishly penned the lyrics to the
tune of an English drinking song. Pappas deftly weaves music through the story,
making it easy to track how the idea for the anthem gets into Key's head.
Director Sarah Hankins and the well-drilled, easygoing ensemble make a real
virtue of that, playing piano, mandolin, violin, flute, and percussion while
creating their own sound effects. It's one of the sharpest performances of the
festival so far.

- N.P.

Saturday at 12:15, Sunday at 2:30. 1333 H St. NE.

gCROSS THE LINE

At the Shop at Fort Fringe through July 25

The idea behind producer-director Jenna Selby's project is simple: Too often we
are too busy or too defensive to really connect with the people around us. Once
the performance begins, the cast addresses us directly, introducing themselves
and then playing all kinds of roles as they reenact true tales, both lofty and
earthy, of reaching out. A man crying in public gets consoled by a little girl
who sings to him. The hungry get fed. The lonely find company. This celebration
of random acts of kindness would seem perfectly natural as a documentary film,
but Selby does surprisingly well making it work as theater. The 50-minute show
unfolds with style and purpose. In form and content, "Cross the Line" has a
1960s impulse, and it comes across as a certain kind of church. It insists that
for just less than an hour, anyway, you check your snark and irony at the door.

- N.P.

Sunday at 6:15, Tuesday at 8. 607 New York Ave. NW.

DECADES

At Gearbox through July 27

Ready to time-travel? 4&9 Productions takes unscripted theater to the 1950s,
'60s, '70s and '80s. Sadly for nostalgia-minded comedy lovers, the conceit never
quite reaches light speed. Ideas for each show come from the audience members,
who are invited to choose a family-friendly topic of conversation and an
occupation that attracts men and women. Improvisational comedy is a high-wire
act. Just avoiding dead air for a solid hour is an accomplishment. The best
scene of a recent performance featured three characters smoking weed in a park
(in the '60s, of course). Costumes were also a high point, with suits that ran
the gamut from British Invasion velvet to disco leather to glam-rock spandex.
The show-ending improvised song also was a highlight. Inventing a musical number
on the fly is even more of a challenge than standard improv. Here the risk pays
off with a flight of fancy that's truly transporting.

- Rachel Weiner

Friday at 11, Sunday at 6:45, Thursday at 6. 1021 Seventh St. NW.

DISTRICTLAND

At Redrum at Fort Fringe through July 27

"Districtland" opens with a recitation of familiar D.C. cliches and spends the
next 90 minutes lovingly skewering them. The play focuses on a crew of
archetypal Washington roommates. There's Frank, a harried unpaid Hill intern;
Maria, a Rhodes scholar with a job in the State Department and a cellphone glued
to her ear; Charity, a returned Peace Corps volunteer who works for a nonprofit
but dreams of writing poetry; and Dave, an unemployed recent law school graduate
with a trust fund and a penchant for "networking." Over the course of a day, the
four play out a series of equally stereotypical experiences. Though
"Districtland" is well-stocked with all the key components of a Dupont happy
hour, it struggles to piece them together into a story. But in its best moments,
"Districtland" hilariously taps into the kinds of D.C. experiences that only a
Washingtonian will understand. These are the moments that will have audience
members with tears in their eyes - either because they're laughing so hard, or
because it's all a bit too real.

- Sarah Kaplan

Saturday at 2:15, Wednesday at 9. 612 L St. NW.

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?

At Warehouse through July 26

Although there's no couch or bearded shrink, the six lead comics use stand-up,
sketch comedy and improv much as they would a therapist's office: to talk
through their feelings on dating, their parents, sex, race, gentrification and
the sources of inspiration for their comedy. The jokes don't always stand up to
the weighty topics they address, but the show, which consists of a series of
individual stand-up routines that are then acted out by the other cast members,
has a number of sketches that get the entire audience laughing. Best of all is a
sketch about a dating game show that's won by a giant panda - yes, there is a
furry black-and-white suit involved, and no, his ideal date does not involve a
trip to the zoo. Much like the subjects of a therapy session, some of the
routines in "Do You See What I See?" could use some working through. But for
people who need more stand-up, improv and panda costumes in their lives, this
variety show offers all three in abundance.

- S.K.

Sunday at 12:30. 645 New York Ave. NW.

DREAM LOVE

At the Shop at Fort Fringe through July 26

Ryan Tumulty's piece follows a familiar path with the story of a love triangle
among Milo, his girlfriend, Lia, and his best friend, Daemon. Each of these main
players also has a confidante. These relationships offer a bit more context to
what at first seems like a pretty straightforward case of girl leaves boyfriend
for best friend. In truth, none of the dialogue is nearly as illuminating as the
portions of the production that are merely movement. Many of the verbal
exchanges occur simultaneously. It can feel a bit gimmicky and without offering
time to let the words land, the approach only highlights how relatively
unimportant words are here. But the dance is exceptional. The choreography,
ranging from explosively acrobatic to gracefully balletic, telegraphs real
emotions.

- Stephanie Merry

Friday at 8:15, Saturday at 10:45, Wednesday at 6. 607 New York Ave. NW.

gTHE HELLO GIRLS: UNKNOWN HEROINES OF WWI

At Caos on F through July 26

With the sunny demeanor of a favorite high school teacher, Ellouise Schoettler
talks about American women who served in uniform at the front in 1917 and 1918
as bilingual switchboard operators. They were needed to speed up and clarify
messages transmitted between the trenches among the English- and French-speaking
allies. Soldiers and officers called them the Hello Girls. Apart from the
excitement, danger and patriotic thrill of it, one aspect of the story got
Schoettler's goat: It took decades for the women to receive proper recognition
for their wartime service. Although the operators were sworn into the Army, put
in uniform and sent near the front, says one of the women she profiles, they
were denied proper discharge papers and medals honoring their battlefield
service until nearly 60 years after the fact. Schoettler's "who knew?" look at
women in the Great War does what she no doubt intends. It makes you want to
learn more.

-  Jane Horwitz

Sunday at 5:30. 923 F St. NW.

gHEY, HEY, LBJ!

At Goethe-Institut through Friday

A 70-minute trip through David Kleinberg's experience as a combat correspondent
in Vietnam, the one-man show is as polished and moving a piece of theater as
Fringe is likely to see this year. With judicious use of historical news clips,
'60s rock and his own footage of Vietnamese fleeing a bombed-out village,
Kleinberg traces his transformation from a patriotic war supporter who thinks
he's just too old to serve to an ardent opponent who's seen a year of combat in
Chu Chi. "Hey Hey, LBJ" is a reminder that every war story has its own potent
humor and horror. Forty years on, parody songs begging the Viet Cong not to kill
non-vital artists and writers are still funny, as is an evocative account of a
"s***-burning duty" fiasco that serendipitously reveals an enemy tunnel. The
bloodshed that follows is still sickening. And the complaints of a soldier with
PTSD who, 32 years later, is still battling Veterans Affairs over disability are
hardly old news at all.

- R.W.

Today at 6. 812 Seventh St. NW.

I F---ED YOUR COUNTRY

At Goethe-Institut through July 27

Twanna Hines has a lot to deliver here - she promises sex ed for adults and
prizes to win, as well as thrilling, true tales of her loving 'round the world.
Fun sex education and analysis is Hines's game, as writer/proprietress of the
Web site Funky Brown Chick and expert interviewee for TV spots. Hines checked
off finished bits on her notecards, adding to the unguarded, improvisational
feel of the evening. Her stories, too, wandered, and seemed not terribly
well-rehearsed. But that allowed some of the night's best moments - such as
Hines's truly impressive ad-lib when a phone rang in the audience. Some things
are more enjoyable unrehearsed. The sexual travelogue in particular could
benefit from some editing and rehearsal for a little more payoff. I was
expecting more countries, more details and more lessons learned, though I did
learn more than I expected to about condoms. There has also got to be a story
about how Hines, a self-described 22-year-old virgin with her legs "nailed
shut," became an internationally syndicated sex columnist and educator sharing
her losing-it story with a laughing audience. But that just might mean there's
plenty of material for Hines's second time.

- Rachel Manteuffel

Saturday at 8:15 and Thursday at 6:30. 812 Seventh St. NW.

THE INAUGURAL ELECTION FOR PRESIDENT OF MRS. JACOBSON'S SIXTH GRADE CLASS

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through July 26

Dirty tricks start early in politics - very early in this windily titled Fringe
show that is as innocent as it sounds. Yes, there are betrayals and
backstabbing. But things can only get so venal in a plot that kickstarts with a
deceased classroom hamster, a tragedy that inspires an election. The goal: to
teach the students something about individual responsibility and democratic
process. Writer-director Kevin Finkelstein's script has the directness of those
old instructive after-school specials, but the tone is light and amiable as
seven adult actors engagingly play the sixth-graders and grownups navigating the
inevitable high jinks and crises of a campaign. All six kids run for president,
but quickly there are scandals - an inappropriate picture on a cellphone, a
funny revenge setup that knocks out the popular boy, etc. "And then there were
four," intones Jenny, an energetic girl who wears her ambition on her sleeve.
The show is presented by the resonantly named Federal Theatre Project. It's ripe
for the middle-school crowd.

- N.P.

Saturday at 8:30, Sunday at 4:45. 1333 H St. NE.

gMEDEA'S GOT SOME ISSUES

At Warehouse through July 27

Don't worry, Euripides. Sure, you come in for some gleeful skewering in this
witty solo show that No Rules Theatre Company and Spain Arts & Culture have
brought to Capital Fringe. But this spoof, penned by Emilio Williams, also takes
aim at other targets, including academia, "A Streetcar Named Desire," the
institution of the Greek chorus and the D.C. theater scene. Channeling all this
satire is an energetic Lisa Hodsoll, who stalks a stage archly decorated with
giant phalluses and miniature Greek columns. Hodsoll portrays both an
exasperated Medea - the Euripides protagonist who killed her kids to spite her
unfaithful husband - and an exasperated version of an actress playing Medea. The
former is peeved at men - especially her ex, Jason, who ditched her after she
helped him steal the Golden Fleece. The latter is peeved at a theater industry
that has relegated her to a black-box Fringe venue. "Medea's Got Some Issues" is
funniest when it get most meta - when Hodsoll drenches two dolls in ketchup
while chatting to the audience about how crowd-pleasing Medea's infanticide
scenes always are.

- Celia Wren

Saturday at 12:30. 645 New York Ave. NW.

THE MONSTER SONGS

At Gearbox through July 27

Can you be sinister and winsome at the same time? Yes, if you are a married
couple skilled at clowning and music, and you put together a droll 45 minutes'
worth of ambitious yet kid-friendly tunes. This is "The Monster Songs," and it
comes from Toby Mulford and Rachel Spicknall Mulford, regulars with the D.C.
commedia dell'arte troupe Faction of Fools. He plays the slightly severe Dr.
Dour, who egotistically presumes he's the natural center of attention. She plays
Peach, the chipper assistant whose warm smile counters Dour's pallid, powdered
face. He plays a complicated 10-string touch guitar. She plays cello, and for
one song, a banjo. The idea is that Dour is, in his words, "an
ethno-crypto-zoo-musicologist," specializing in the study of monsters. They
weren't always on top of their game during a recent performance, which had its
musical and comedic fits and starts. But that winsomeness is potent, and they
finished strong with a whimsical Western number that was amusing and smart.

- N.P.

Sunday at 10:15, Wednesday at 9:45. 1021 Seventh St. NW.

THE OLD MAN NEVER LET IT GO

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through July 26

Hemingway without the language? In "The Old Man Never Let It Go," deaf actor
Hector J. Reynoso proves that it's doable. You mine the story for action and
keep the stage buzzing with vivid imagery and moody music. Vistas include
sparkling beaches and scorching sun, but there is a dreamy quality, too,
although as Reynoso rows around the stage in a little boat against a glistening
ocean to a lightly jazzy Spanish guitar tune, the performance drifts
uncomfortably toward bland music video doldrums. The book resists the stage a
little, but then Reynoso's 30-minute take is more a poetic distillation than a
full-bodied adaptation. The bearded, bushy-haired Reynoso is charismatic as the
old man, padding about in baggy trousers and a rumpled hat. Comfortably
enveloped by the compelling technical design, he pantomimes a simple life and
then the epic, solitary struggle at sea. The brief show winds up as a limited
but likable portrait of deep pride and passion.

- N.P.

Friday at 8, Wednesday at 6. 1333 H St. NE.

gPERFECT LIARS CLUB

At the Goethe-Institut through Sunday

Storytelling, one of the oldest forms of entertainment, is as popular as ever.
In addition to SpeakeasyDC and Story League, "Perfect Liar's Club" has become a
cult hit with performances that sell out in minutes. The once-a-month show at
Dupont Circle bar Science Club features four storytellers, three of whom are
regaling the audience with true tales, while one is spinning a total
fabrication. During its run at Fringe, the show will feature different stories
(though some of the same storytellers will return with new tales), so this
review reflects only one recent performance. During that show, Cara Foran told
of a dangerous trip to the Serengeti; Pedro Alcocer discussed a robbery in Rio;
Kevin Boggs reminisced about a rock concert that changed his life; and Pierce
McManus took us back to his prom night in the late '80s. After the four told
their stories, host and charming "Club" mastermind Layla McCay gave the audience
a few minutes to talk among themselves, after which we were able to interrogate
the storytellers. After another brief stint of conversation, the audience then
voted on who was the liar. As far as the stories went, some were more polished
than others. But "Perfect Liars Club" is a worthwhile evening of entertainment,
especially among Fringe productions that can so often be a crapshoot.

- S.M.

Saturday at 10, Sunday at 7:15. 812 Seventh St. NW.

THE PROGRAM ASSISTANT

At the Redrum at Fort Fringe through July 27

Charlie and Laura are GWU graduates and best friends who just moved into their
first "big-kid apartment," and both women are searching for work. What unfolds
then is two paths in parallel as Laura does the 9-to-5 thing and comes to terms
with being an underemployed office drone, and Charlie takes a job waitressing.
Both women are miserable at work, but they're also sad at home. The play has
some kinks, not the least of which is the tendency for performers to swallow
their lines. The dialogue is great, but a couple of the actors have trouble
projecting. More distracting still are the countless scene changes, all of which
require some amount of set alterations.

- S.M.

Saturday at 10:45, Sunday at 3:30. 612 L St. NW.

gWAITING FOR ARMAGEDDON

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through July 25

In the early stages of "Waiting for Armageddon," Ron Litman looks like a
freaked-out monk. Let's be clear: Litman is fabulous at this. He also has an ace
partner in keyboardist-composer Tom Pile, who helps Litman pepper this show with
funny and infectious protest songs. Litman, 64, sustains a pace that's best
described as controlled frenzy: The words come in crisp torrents, and the dances
that go with the songs are nicely wacky. In fact, critical selling points of
Litman's act are his sly humor and a healthy Strangelovean sense of the absurd.
Spiritually, this rabble-rousing performance belongs on a busy corner or in a
public park: It's old-school, high-energy street theater. Dudes: Amen.

- N.P.

Friday at 9:30 and Saturday at 6:45. 1333 H St. NE.

WALKEN IN HIS SHOES

At Redrum at Fort Fringe through Saturday

There is something wonderful about five Christopher Walken impressionists
interacting at once. Essentially, that's the point of this light comedy, and
weirdly enough it works. The play is an hour's worth of the exploits of the
Christopher Walken Club, a group of five earnest admirers of the American icon
and movie star. We've got a Southern, queenly homosexual, an awkward guy, a
Mexican American, a woman and a guy who talks a lot like Jar Jar Binks. The
jokes built around each persona don't land nearly as well as their Walken riffs,
which are splendid. At the end, the plot gets thrown out altogether so the whole
cast can perform a crowd-pleasing power ballad; it's the right choice. The play
is great when it sticks to the Walken impressions, which provide superbly odd
clang and dissonance. More cowbell, please.

- R.M.

Saturday at 12:30. 612 L St. NW.

WHAT WOULD TINA AND AMY DO

At the Bedroom at Fort Fringe through Saturday

Invoking Tina Fey and Amy Poehler raises hopes of something frisky and sharp, or
maybe a loopy, campy takeoff. Instead, this extremely conventional play is a
gentle two-woman buddy dramedy. Adjust your expectations accordingly. The script
is by Mikaela Saccoccio and Larissa Kruesi, with Kruesi playing one of two
23-year-old women at loose ends in love and life. Kruesi is Tinley, who's
unhappy as a receptionist. Catie Carlton is Annie, a dancer who's not getting
her chance to shine. They try to take charge of their destinies by asking the
titular question, with particular reference to the "SNL" skit that had Fey and
Poehler embracing the "b" word. So what could come between them? A dopey
(unseen) boyfriend, of course. The upside is the acting. Kruesi and Carlton are
bubbly and loose; they don't push the material, and when the script allows
laughs, the actors find them. Their rapport is winning. It's the story that
stalls out.

-  N.P.

Saturday at 2:45. 612 L St. NW.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Montgomery County

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


