                             1708 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                               May 5, 2014 Monday
                                Regional Edition

Mr. Coffee creator, who didn't drink brew

BYLINE: Stephen Miller

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 391 words


Edmund Abel, whose patented design for the Mr. Coffee machine changed the way
millions of households brewed their morning beverage, died April 21 at his home
in Rocky River, Ohio. He was 92.

His niece, Holly Bundy, confirmed the death but did not specify a cause.

Introduced in 1972, Mr. Coffee soon dominated the U.S. home-brew coffee market,
as the trim glass decanter and drip brewing unit replaced percolators in
kitchens nationwide. Former baseball star Joe DiMaggio pitched the product in
advertising for more than 15 years nearly from the start.

Mr. Abel, a largely self-trained engineer who held patents in film developing
and aviation, was hired by the owners of Cleveland-based North American Systems
to develop an automatic drip coffee appliance. At the time, most drinkers used
percolators, which had a reputation for making bitter coffee.

The process Mr. Abel developed produced a mellower brew by using water at a
lower temperature than percolators.

The final product worked more than twice as fast as its nearest competitors,
making a cup in 30 seconds or 10 cups in five minutes, according to ads. Mr.
Coffee also was twice as expensive as a typical percolator, selling for $39.99
each when it was introduced.

By the late 1970s, the automatic drip machine drove North American Systems
annual sales to $150 million as the company captured over half the U.S.
coffeemaker market, according to a 1979 Forbes article. Imitators also began
arriving in stores. Today, Mr. Coffee is manufactured by Boca Raton, Fla.-based
Jarden Corp.

Edmund Angel Abel Jr. was born May 12, 1921, in Cleveland. In high school, he
became a radio hobbyist and student pilot and got mechanical and electrical
experience working for an uncle, a home builder, he said in a 2011 interview
posted on the Web site of the Benjamin Rose Institute on Aging.

During Army service in World War II, he built remote-controlled flying drones
used for target practice. Later, he studied aeronautical engineering on the G.I.
Bill and worked for companies in the Cleveland area.

Although Vincent Marotta, co-owner of North American Systems, often portrayed
Mr. Coffee as his brainchild in interviews, it was Mr. Abel who patented the
machine.

Mr. Abel attributed his long life to a natural diet bolstered by grapefruit seed
extract, and never drank coffee, Bundy said.

- Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


