                             1777 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Danes plant a field of dreams in Iowa

BYLINE: Andrea Sachs

SECTION: TRAVEL; Pg. F03

LENGTH: 959 words


The Elk Horn phone book is filled with Andersens, Christensens, Petersens,
Eskovs, Clausens, Sorensens, Madsens, Mortensens and Jacobsens. There's only one
Jones.

"I'm 100 percent Danish," a resident told me as I passed her house on the Museum
of Danish America's trail in southwest Iowa. "I'm a Hansen and I married a
Jensen."

The Hansen-Jensen home overlooks an Iowan scene spilled from Grant Wood's
paintbrush: prairie grass, corn fields, infinite blue sky. But it also sits in
the middle of the Danish heartland, where about half the town's population of
650 claims Danish descent.

The "Danish Villages" of Elk Horn and Kimballton, three miles north, represent
the largest rural Danish settlements in the United States. Lille ("Little")
Denmark draws visitors with ancestral connections (investigate your Viking roots
at Elk Horn's Family History and Genealogy Center), Legophiles (erect a plastic
metropolis at the museum), Hans Christian Andersen bedtime readers (visit the
Little Mermaid statue  and her literary pals in Kimballton's sculpture garden)
and just-off-the-plane Danes. The TV documentary "Denmark on the Prairie," which
aired in Denmark last year, stirred interest abroad.

"Visitors from Denmark told me, 'You're doing more in Elk Horn to keep your
Danish heritage than we do in Denmark,' " said mayor Stan Jens, whose
great-great-grandfather emigrated from the Scandinavian country.

Elk Horn's Danish pride is prominent. On the road into town, a giant sign reads,
"Velkommen to Elk Horn." Danish flags flap along the main street, and paintings
of the red-swatch-and-white-cross motif cover benches outside storefronts. A
60-foot-tall windmill causes a brief sun eclipse with its 66-foot-long sails.
And, no, the Dutch have not invaded Elk Horn. Danes also use windmills, to grind
grain. One can only hope that the refined ingredient ends up as a kringle or a
dansk lagkage, a Danish layer cake.

The town is pickled in immigrant tales, from its first settler (Christian
Jensen, 1868) to its most famous transplant (Norre Snede windmill, 1974). The
Museum of Danish America  (4038 Main St., 712-764-7472, www.danishwindmill.com)
dedicates substantial wall, floor and drawer space to the country and its
immigrants. A 2000 Census map, for example, shows the Danish spread in the
United States, with California garnering the largest number of Danish Americans
(207,030), the District the smallest (1,047) and Iowa in the middle with 66,954.
The Hawkeye State's rolling hills (I swear, not all of Iowa is flat) and
available farmland appealed to the new arrivals. By the mid-1800s, Elk Horn had
established the country's first Danish folk school, published a Danish-language
newspaper and built a Lutheran church. Just like home - except for one (sea-ho!)
difference. "There's no ocean here," Brandt said. "But when the wind blows
through the prairie grasses, it looks like waves."

To capture the Atlantic on Midwestern land, the museum created the Jens Jensen
Prairie Landscape Park, which pays tribute to the Danish American landscape
architect and colleague of that other prairie-style guy, Frank Lloyd Wright. The
Friend's Trail ribbons through the park, passing the Jens Dixen House, a
homesteader's cabin from the early 1900s, and leads to the doorstep of the
Bedstemor's House, built by Jens Otto Christiansen in 1908.

On my walk, I followed the trail into town, then hooked a right to the  Danish
Inn  (4116 Main St., 712-764-4251, www.danishinnrestaurant.com) and the  Danish
windmill  (4038 Main St., 712-764-7472, www.danishwindmill.com). The restaurant
serves Danish specialties, many of which are brown, meaty and unpronounceable
(flaeskesteg, rullepolse, skinke) and appear on the all-you-can-eat buffet. At
dinner, I missed by minutes a sighting of an authentic Danish couple, who told
owner Verne Kline that "the frikadeller is exactly like they have in Denmark."
My friend Clint, who grew up in a nearby town, has no Danish blood but plenty of
Iowan soul. He ate two servings of the veal-and-pork meatballs and washed them
down with a Bud Light.

Next door to the restaurant is the 166-year-old windmill, a combination museum,
gift shop (featuring such imports as Queen Dagmar crosses, Royal Copenhagen
dishes and Lakrids licorice) and adventure climb. According to a small exhibit,
the windmill owes its second chance to Harvey Sornson, an Elk Horn farmer who,
on a trip abroad, felt a pang of sadness for the noble structures decaying in
the countryside. In the 1970s, he found a windmill whose owners were willing to
sell (going rate: $11,000) and returned home to rally the townspeople to adopt
it. They gave him their full support, raising $100,000 and enlisting more than
300 volunteers to help reconstruct the only authentic working Danish windmill in
the country.

After a short video and debriefing, a museum employee set us free to climb the
narrow wooden ladders and explore the machinery on multiple levels. From the
wraparound balcony, I had a drone's-eye view of the grounds: the Viking hut
(VikingHjem), where helmet-horned reenactors shack up; the Little Chapel, a
four-seat Lutheran church; a bronze bust of Hans Christian Andersen; and the
mayor riding up on his Harley.

Back on solid footing, I asked Jens what he hoped visitors would gain from the
Danish villages. For folks with Danish backgrounds, he said, "I hope they feel
stronger about their culture and are inspired." And for non-Danes?

"Hopefully, they'll get a little taste of Denmark," he answered. "And hey, we
can always adopt them and turn them a little Danish."

And so with the mayor's blessing, I now felt qualified to buy a "Kiss Me I'm
Danish" souvenir. Though I'm not Danish, I've been to Elk Horn and earned my
kiss.

andrea.sachs@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


