                             1742 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Can Obama help Iraq's new fight? Not really.

BYLINE: Daniel Byman

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1296 words


In the fight against jihadist insurgents across the planet, the United States
can offer its partners a lot of help: arms and intelligence, training for local
security forces, economic aid, and in extreme cases, air strikes to take out the
bad guys.

It is the allies, of course, that get to do the actual fighting and dying.

After more than a decade of conflicts in which American ground forces served in
harm's way, the United States is moving to a more hands-off approach in its
fight against insurgents with ideological or operational ties to al-Qaeda. In
Afghanistan, President Obama has announced a major drawdown of troops, and in
Nigeria, Pakistan , Somalia and Yemen, the United States intervenes mainly via
drones or small numbers of troops training local forces.

Now, with the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) sweeping through major
Iraqi cities , the Obama administration is weighing increased military
assistance - though not, the president emphasized Friday, combat forces - for a
country that Americans thought we'd already left behind.

This approach seems to strike a balance between risk and action, one the
president highlighted in his recent West Point speech when he spoke of
"empowering partners." It is the national governments, after all, that would
seem to have even stronger interest than the United States in defeating the
insurgencies raging in their countries. American assistance should help make
their militaries more efficient, strengthen their economies and advance
political reform - all of which, in theory, would weaken the insurgencies.

Unfortunately, there is a deep flaw in this strategy. Quite often, the allies
we're seeking to help are themselves deeply flawed: corrupt, sectarian and
repressive. And even worse, they are so by design - their problems are
fundamental to the functioning of their politics. In such cases, U.S. assistance
can help only on the margins. And that is precisely the case with Iraq today.

The presence of an insurgency is not random. Such movements emerge not only
because of  their grievances and ideologies but because of the weakness of their
countries' governments. The political leadership, even if democratically
elected, is usually considered illegitimate by at least one large segment of the
population. Yemen's government, for instance, excludes southerners and
systematically discriminates against the country's Zaydi religious community -
and both groups have taken up arms against the regime.

Similarly, some groups, whether defined by ethnicity, tribe, geography or
religion, get to feast at the government trough, enjoying educational
opportunities and lucrative contracts, while others are shut out. Politicians
rely on corruption to reward their supporters and at the same time ensure their
loyalty by compromising them.

Some governments may even prefer a low-level insurgency because it keeps
supporters unified and allows the regime to continue drawing foreign aid. Former
Kyrgyz prime minister Kurmanbek Bakiyev, for example, once declared the U.S.
military presence in his country to be a "gold mine."

U.S. officials may regard insurgents as the biggest threat to security in a
given country, but many political leaders feel more threatened by possible coups
launched by their own military forces. (In Egypt, Indonesia, Mali, Pakistan,
Yemen and other countries dealing with jihadists, military officers have seized
power from civilian governments at various times.) To protect themselves,
civilian leaders fill top military positions with loyalists. In Saudi Arabia,
for example, many senior officers are members of the royal family, while others
have close ties by marriage. Competent, popular and independent military figures
are a threat to the civilian leadership. In a country such as Iraq, an
Eisenhower from the opposition would be jailed, not revered. Rivalry among
military leaders is encouraged, making it unlikely that units can coordinate
their operations. This may be a smart way to prevent a coup, but it's not the
best way to defeat an insurgency.

In these scenarios, politicians rely on a few chosen military units to ensure
their hold on power; the rest are more likely to sell their weapons to
insurgents and desert or even defect rather than defend the regime when the
shooting starts. The chosen units, drawn from loyal communities, are often
regarded as hostile by the broader population. When suppressing the Punjab
insurgency in the early 1980s, for example, Indian forces focused on protecting
only local Hindus, wrongly regarding ordinary Sikhs as part of the enemy and
thus alienating them. No surprise, the units loyal to the regime are often
brutal and consider the hostile population an existential threat. The repression
leads to increased support for the insurgency.

By encouraging democratic reforms in these circumstances, the United States
threatens the national government's power. By encouraging minority rights, we
undermine the privileges and biases of the dominant community. By calling for an
end to corruption and for transparency in government, we threaten the leader's
ability to control and reward his base. And by pushing military reform, we risk
making the military the only functioning institution in a weak country and
making a coup more likely.

However, if the allied government does not reform, the insurgency is likely to
continue, and the United States is accused - correctly, if unfairly - of
supporting a dictator.

All of these problems are evident in Iraq today. Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki
has systematically excluded moderate Sunni politicians from power, making that
community far more sympathetic to extremists who paint him as an
Iranian-controlled anti-Sunni fanatic. Out of 177 countries assessed by
Transparency International last year, only six were ranked more corrupt than
Iraq. The Maliki government has politicized the army - after years of U.S.
efforts to improve the quality of the officer corps - fearing that it would
become a base for rival groups. The military was brutal when suppressing unrest
in Sunni areas  last year. As one Iraqi in Mosul told the New York Times this
week: "They are not the Iraqi Army; they are the militia of Maliki." The mass
desertions we've seen in recent days in the face of the ISIS onslaught are what
happen when officers are corrupt and lose the faith of the men they command.

Yes, the United States can and should offer more help to Iraq in exchange for
social and electoral reforms. In the end, though, such efforts are likely to
fail. What government will wholeheartedly carry out reforms that threaten its
own power? Training and education for national forces can at times prove
beneficial and help allies fight insurgencies, but the impact is usually
limited. And no matter what rhetoric accompanies our aid, we will be painted as
helping one side in a civil war. In Iraq's case, U.S. aid to the
Shiite-dominated government will be portrayed as helping Iran and its Shiite
allies consolidate power in the Middle East.

Historically, Americans are skeptical of taking steps to protect limited
interests overseas. To gain domestic support for any action, the president must
stress that vital U.S. interests are at stake and otherwise play up the threat.
This gives foreign leaders leverage, because they know it makes it harder for
the United States to walk away from any deal.

Obama has made scaling back U.S. military involvement in the Middle East a key
achievement of his presidency. If he chooses to involve the United States in
Iraq once more, he should recognize that he is choosing between bad guys and a
bad government.

Twitter: @dbyman

Five myths about Iraq

Ten years after the invasion, did we win the Iraq war?

Read more from Outlook and follow our updates on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


