                             1737 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 359 words


Praise for responders  Officers who confronted the shooter at the Navy Yard in
September were honored in a ceremony. B1

Senate passes VA bill  Bipartisan legislationwas approved as the FBI opened a
criminal investigation into the scheduling scandal. A3

the nation

 The shooter at an Oregon high school who killed a fellow student and himself
had a semiautomatic rifle. A4

Shaun Donovan appeared  before two Senate panels for confirmation hearings that
got him a step closer to leading the Office of Management and Budget. A21

Artisanal cheesemakers were in an uproar after an FDA safety official questioned
the practice of aging products on wood. A23

The TSA released  figures about the number of people who try to bring weapons
through airport security. B1

the world

 A reported  U.S. drone strike killed at least six suspected militants in a
restive district of northwest Pakistan, local officials said. A12

Ashraf Ghani , a former World Bank executive and Johns Hopkins professor,
distanced himself from his time in the United States in his campaign to be
Afghanistan's next president. A12

A Russian diplomat admitted the country has been sending humanitarian aid to
eastern Ukraine via pro-Russian separatists. A18

the economy

 Apple drew praise for its plan to undermine a system that stores use to analyze
their customers' shopping habits. A19

Travel-booking company Expedia said it is accepting online payment in bitcoin
currency for hotel stays. A20

A major security vulnerability  temporarily shut down TweetDeck, the popular
social media management tool. A20

the region

 The Virginia General Assembly  planned to vote Thursday on a new budget
stripped of Medicaid expansion and most new spending. B1

A Washington Post poll showed Del. Jon S. Cardin and state Sen. Brian E. Frosh
locked in a tight Democratic primary battle for Maryland attorney general. B1

OBITUARIES

 Spanish-born conductor Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos guest-performed with many of
the world's leading orchestras, including the National Symphony Orchestra. He
was 80. B5

Eric Hill, 86, wrote a  popular book series about the mischievous dog Spot that
sold tens of millions of copies. B6

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


