                             1707 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                               May 5, 2014 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: May 4, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 708 words

SYRIA

Rebel infighting leaves dozens dead

Intense clashes between rival Islamist rebel groups in eastern Syria have killed
62 fighters and forced tens of thousands of people to flee their homes,
activists said Sunday.

Meanwhile, talks continued over allowing rebels to leave the besieged Old City
in Homs.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the rebel infighting
- involving the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria and Jabhat al-Nusra - has killed
62 people in four days in the oil-rich Deir al-Zour province near the Iraqi
border.

In Homs, a cease-fire held for a second day Sunday, but the planned evacuation
of rebel fighters has not started, activists and a government official said.
Rebels in Homs had agreed to cede the territory in exchange for safe passage to
other opposition-held areas.

- Associated Press

Assad to face 2 rivals in presidential vote

President Bashar al-Assad will face two other candidates in next month's
presidential election in Syria, the Supreme Constitutional Court announced
Sunday, a vote he is widely expected to win amid the country's raging civil war.

The court found 21 other candidates ineligible to run, spokesman Majid Khadra
said on state television. He did not elaborate.

Assad, who is seeking a third seven-year term, will face Hassan bin Abdullah
al-Nouri, a 54-year-old lawmaker from Damascus, the capital, and 43-year-old
Maher Abdul-Hafiz Hajjar, a lawmaker from the northern city of Aleppo.

- Associated Press

YEMEN

43 militants killed in south, military says

Fighting and airstrikes in an al-Qaeda stronghold in southern Yemen killed six
suspected militants and four soldiers Sunday, the military said, part of an
ongoing offensive that also killed 37 fighters overnight.

The government's U.S.-backed operation in Shabwa province is part of a rolling
campaign against al-Qaeda hideouts in Yemen. Washington considers Yemen's
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula the most active branch of the terrorist
network and has assisted the Sanaa government with logistics, training and drone
attacks.

The military said Sunday that troops backed by air support stormed a hideout of
the group in Naqba hills in Shabwa and that six suspected militants were killed.
Earlier in the day, the Defense Ministry said airstrikes and clashes killed 37
suspected al-Qaeda fighters overnight in the nearby town of Meyfaa.

- Associated Press

3 dead in explosions in Nairobi:  Three people were killed and at least 60 were
wounded when two homemade bombs exploded on buses along one of the busiest
highways in Kenya's capital, Nairobi, authorities said, as this East African
nation struggles to stem a wave of terrorist attacks. The explosions occurred a
day after two blasts along the Kenyan coast killed four people.

Libyan parliament picks new premier:  Libya's parliament swore in an
Islamist-backed businessman as the interim prime minister after a disputed vote
and a walkout by secular lawmakers, the latest political turmoil in a country
where powerful militias hold sway years after its civil war. Ahmed Matiq,
educated in Britain, runs a group of hotels and is involved in construction.

Panama's vice president wins presidential race:  Vice President Juan Carlos
Varela was declared the victor of Panama's presidential election Sunday,
thwarting an attempt by President Ricardo Martinelli, a former ally, to extend
his grip on power by electing a handpicked successor. Varela will take office
July 1.

Mauritania opposition plans to boycott election:  A coalition of Mauritania's
leading opposition parties says it will boycott next month's presidential vote,
complaining that the June 21 election date was chosen unilaterally despite
government-initiated talks between the two sides.

Indian police kill 3 suspected of role in ethnic violence:  Police said they
killed three suspected rebels and arrested eight forest guards for alleged
involvement in the killings of 31 Muslims in the worst ethnic violence in
India's remote northeast in two years. Authorities have said that the attackers
belonged to a faction of the National Democratic Front of Bodoland, which has
been fighting for a separate homeland for the ethnic Bodo people for decades.
The rebel group denies any role in the killings.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


