                             177 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 22, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drone Strikes a Seminary in Pakistan

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN; Salman Masood and Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed
reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 502 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Missiles believed to have been fired by an American drone
struck an Islamic seminary in northern Pakistan on Thursday, in a rare strike
outside the country's volatile tribal regions.

The attack, in the Hangu district of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, killed six
people and wounded five, including several members of the Haqqani militant
network, according to a senior Pakistani security official.

The attack came as Pakistani officials and politicians from across the political
spectrum have intensified criticism of the American drone attacks, particularly
after a strike on Nov. 1 killed Hakimullah Mehsud, the leader of the Pakistani
Taliban, and disrupted the government's plan to open peace negotiations with the
militants.

The drone fired missiles into the seminary, near the border with Afghanistan,
around 4:30 a.m. on Thursday, Iftikhar Ahmad, a local police officer, said in a
telephone interview. Local officials said that drones had been flying over the
area since Monday.

''The bodies have been mutilated and burned beyond recognition,'' he said. ''We
are investigating the matter.''

A senior government official in Peshawar said the seminary belonged to Qari Noor
Mohammad, who was affiliated with the Haqqani network.

The network, which operates on both sides of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border, is
one of the most lethal groups of the Taliban insurgency. This month,
unidentified gunmen killed Nasiruddin Haqqani, a son of the group's founder and
one of its chief fund-raisers, in Pakistan.

Another security official said that four of those killed were Afghan militants
belonging to the Haqqani network, including Ahmad Jan, a senior network leader
who also looked after finances for the group. The two others killed in the
strike were students at the seminary, which was in a small Afghan refugee camp
in Tandora.

The drone strike on Thursday happened a day after Sartaj Aziz, the national
security adviser to Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, told a senate foreign affairs
committee in Islamabad that the United States had assured Pakistan that it would
halt such strikes during negotiations with Pakistani militants.

Mr. Aziz did not give a time frame for when the proposed peace talks with
militants in the tribal region might begin. Earlier talks broke off after the
strike that killed Mr. Mehsud.

The Tehreek-e-Insaf Party, which governs Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, had
already called for a protest on Saturday to pressure Mr. Sharif to halt NATO
supplies destined for Afghanistan to get the United States to stop drone
strikes.

Speaking at a news conference in Islamabad on Thursday, Imran Khan, the former
cricket star who leads the party, sharply criticized both the United States and
the Pakistani government.

Mr. Khan said his party would stage a mass protest against drones in Peshawar,
the provincial capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, and reiterated his vow to block
NATO supplies. ''I urge all people to gather in Peshawar on Saturday and show
that we are honorable people,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/22/world/asia/drone
-strike-reported-outside-pakistans-tribal-region.html

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Pakistani seminary that was hit on Thursday by what was said
to be an American drone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABDUL BASIT/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


