                             1710 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             May 7, 2014 Wednesday
                                Regional Edition

A climate of contradictions

BYLINE: Dana Milbank

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 766 words


On the eve of the Obama administration's release Tuesday of a report warning
about grave consequences of climate change, presidential counselor John Podesta
went into the White House briefing room and crowed about fossil-fuel production
in words that could have been penned by Dick Cheney.

"The United States is now the largest producer of natural gas in the world and
the largest producer of gas and oil in the world," Podesta declared. "It's
projected that the United States will continue to be the largest producer of
natural gas through 2030. For six straight months now, we've produced more oil
here at home than we've imported from overseas."

Podesta went on to say that as part of the "big increase" in oil and gas
production, "we're back on track to produce more oil and gas in the Gulf" of
Mexico. As for environmental concerns related to all this production, "that can
be dealt with through the proper application of the best practices to produce
that oil and gas."

It was a jarring juxtaposition: a new warning Tuesday about threats to life,
health and commerce posed by carbon emissions, preceded by a boast Monday about
record levels of carbon-fuel production. This is the contradiction at the heart
of President Obama's climate-change policy.

The president has made serious progress with renewable fuels and with energy
efficiency (a new rule limiting carbon output at existing power plants, due next
month, will be another big step) but this is being offset by increased
production and export of fossil fuels.

"I don't see how you can square it," says Joe Romm, a physicist who used his
Climate Progress blog at the liberal Center for American Progress to question
Obama's "Jekyll and Hyde" approach. "If we constrain our carbon emissions a
little bit but we still produce more and more fossil fuels and then we sell them
to other people who burn them, then that doesn't solve the problem.  Obama is
not pulling any punches on the climate science, but he's touting an energy
policy which basically assumes the climate science doesn't exist or it's not
true."

Those words are particularly noteworthy because Romm worked for Podesta, who
founded and ran the Center for American Progress before joining the Obama White
House. And the sentiment is widespread. Leaders of 18 prominent environmental
groups wrote to Obama this winter, saying that what the White House calls its
"all of the above" energy strategy "accelerates development of fuel sources that
can negate the important progress you've already made on lowering U.S. carbon
pollution, and it undermines U.S. credibility in the international community."

Similar contradictions can be seen in other policy areas. Obama set out to rein
in Bush administration overreach but has presided over a record number of drone
strikes. He advocates for a more humane immigration system but has deported a
record number of illegal immigrants.

Often, Obama has been more pragmatic than his conservative critics give him
credit for; he has, for example, taken into account the economic and national
security benefits of more domestic oil production. But his pragmatism also means
he hasn't advanced his own policies as forcefully as he could, even though he is
maligned by conservatives as if he had.

Podesta, articulating Obama's all-of-the-above strategy, told reporters Monday
that the administration is "firing on all cylinders when it comes to producing
more energy, cleaner energy, and more energy efficiency, as well as combating
climate change."

After Podesta's presentation, a reporter observed that it seemed like "a
wholehearted endorsement of fracking" (an increasingly popular method of
producing natural gas) and that Obama had similarly lauded the technique.

Podesta responded by endorsing natural-gas fracking "as a bridge, if you will,
from a world in which there's still a need for fossil fuels to power our
economy."

But Romm, the climate-change expert, says industry has been using the "bridge"
argument for three decades. There's now some evidence that methane leaked in the
transport and production of "clean" natural gas              could erase the
carbon advantage it has over coal.

"The science says you're going to need to leave most of the carbon, the fossil
fuels, in the ground if you don't want to render large parts of the planet
uninhabitable," he argues. Yet the Obama administration proceeds with fracking,
new coal production leases and export terminals and drilling in the Arctic - an
all-of-the-above strategy that "used to be the Republican mantra."

Now it's not a mantra. It's a contradiction.

Twitter: @Milbank

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


