                             1775 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 12, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

BYLINE: - Adam Taylor

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1038 words

Israelis, Palestinians and lopsided death tolls

In the current conflict between Israel and militants in the Gaza Strip, both
sides have attempted to harm the other. Hundreds of rockets have been fired from
Palestinian territory at Israeli civilians, while Israeli military strikes have
hit hundreds of targets in the Gaza Strip.

There's at least one clear asymmetry to the conflict, however. By Friday
morning, about 100 Palestinians had died as a result of Israeli military action,
according to the Palestinian Health Ministry, with hundreds more wounded. To
date, there have been zero reports of Israeli deaths due to Palestinian rocket
fire, though Magen David Adom, Israel's national emergency medical service, said
Wednesday that 123 people have been treated - 80 percent of them for shock or
anxiety.

These are not surprising figures. During 2012's Operation Pillar of Defense, 167
Palestinians were killed by the Israeli military, according to human rights
group B'Tselem, which said that less than half of that number were believed to
be taking part in hostilities. The same report said six Israelis died: four
civilians and two members of the Israeli security forces. The pattern also was
evident in the 2008-09 Gaza war. According to numbers released by the Israel
Defense Forces, 1,166 Palestinians died during that conflict, 709 of whom the
IDF said were "Hamas terror operatives." Thirteen Israelis died, three of whom
were noncombatants.

The core takeaway: When Israelis and Palestinians fight, Palestinians are far
more likely to die than Israelis are. Here are four factors that help explain
why:

The weapons

In conflicts like the current one, militants in the Gaza Strip fire a large
number of rockets into Israeli territory. According to the IDF, about six
rockets are being fired at Israelis every hour. However, many are not
sophisticated, and they either fail to land in populated areas or lack the
firepower to cause casualties when they do: Sometimes, the payloads are removed
from missiles in a bid to increase their range.

The original Qassam rockets, named after the Izzedine al-Qassam Brigades, the
armed branch of Hamas, and fired during the Second Intifada, were rudimentary
affairs, designed to be made cheaply and easily, but were crudely effective
within a limited range. While these missiles are still produced inand fired from
Gaza, Palestinian militants in recent years have been able to get their hands on
better equipment: The IDF announced this week that an M-302 missile,
manufactured in Syria, had landed near Hadera, 70 miles north of Gaza. Such a
missile has a range that allows it to strike anywhere in Israel, though its
accuracy is limited and its use appears to be rare so far. Hamas also is
believed to possess surface-to-air missiles that could be used against Israeli
military aircraft.

Despite these new weapons, Israel clearly outguns Palestinian fighters. Israel
has F-16 fighter jets, Apache attack helicopters and armed drones, all capable
of firing into Gaza with remarkable firepower and considerable accuracy.

The defense systems

Over the years, Israel has invested significant amounts in protecting its
civilians. Most buildings are required by law to have bomb shelters, and warning
sirens tell people when to head to them. In communities near the Gaza Strip,
extra fortifications are in place, including bus stops with concrete roofs for
those caught out in the open when sirens sound. In recent years, there has also
been "Iron Dome," Israel's missile-defense system, which can shoot down threats
while they're still in the air. The IDF says about 90 percent of the system's
targets have been shot down, vastly diminishing the risk to Israeli civilians.

Palestinians don't have anything like Iron Dome. They don't even have much in
the way of bomb shelters. William Booth, The Washington Post's Jerusalem bureau
chief, who is in the Gaza Strip, says that "sometimes people can see and
certainly hear an incoming missile, but it doesn't give them time to run, and
since missiles are guided - run where?" Israel has often criticized Hamas for
not doing a better job of protecting its own citizens and failing to provide
more bomb shelters.

The Israeli military does make some efforts to warn the occupants of buildings
it is targeting - either with a phone call or a warning missile, a practice
known as "roof knocking" - but those warnings are not always successful.

The terrain

The Gaza Strip is a relatively small area, just 139 square miles in total.
However, it contains 1.8 million people, according to a CIA World Factbook
estimate. For reference, it's roughly twice the size of the District of
Columbia, with three times the people.

While the population density of the Gaza Strip is perhaps exaggerated (it may
not be comparable to Manhattan or Hong Kong, for example), it clearly plays a
role. Many of the targets of Israeli strikes in the strip live in densely
populated areas such as Gaza City or Khan Younis. Israel does make efforts to
avoid civilian casualties and has said that Hamas hides its weapons caches and
launchpads in civilian areas. The IDF has accused Hamas of using "human
shields."

Conversely, many of the rockets fired from Gaza into Israel fail to hit
anything. The southern part of Israel is the most sparsely populated area of the
country, largely consisting of the Negev desert. The main target for Palestinian
missiles in previous years was the relatively nearby city of Sderot, with a
population of about 24,000, although new mid- and long-range missiles may mean
that more populous cities such as Tel Aviv are targeted more frequently.

The attitude

As noted, the Israeli military does go to some lengths to avoid causing
unnecessary deaths. Unfortunately, it doesn't always work out. For example, when
the Israeli military recently "knocked on the roof" of a building in Khan
Younis, a group of young men apparently ran into the building.

The men may have been hoping to protect the building by their presence, a tactic
that has reportedly been tried before. They may have been hoping to be martyrs.
Either way, their presence did not stop the building from being destroyed. Hamas
said seven people, including three minors, died in the attack.

- Adam Taylor

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


