                             1770 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             July 5, 2014 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

What symbolizes America? For a true-blue comedian, 'Mambo No. 5' is a start.

BYLINE: Jessica Contrera

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 531 words


Dan St. Germain is a true American. He's often seen wearing plaid. He has a
beard. He lived in New York and is moving to Los Angeles. But mostly, he put up
with a barrage of questions about the good old US of A.

St. Germain is spending his Fourth of July weekend in the District to perform at
Saturday's Summer Comedy Series at the Black Cat. The 14th Street nightclub is
hosting a number of up-and-coming comedians, including St. Germain, who has
appeared on Comedy Central, "Late Night With Jimmy Fallon" and "Best Week Ever."

Black Cat owner Dante Ferrando said his goal is to get people out in the world
to try something new. "You might be catching someone who is going to be
completely huge a few years from now," Ferrando said.

And what would be more American than that?

In the spirit of patriotism, we asked St. Germain everything he knows about his
native land. Below is a lightly edited transcript of the conversation.

Which is better: yelling " 'MERICA!" or the "U-S-A! U-S-A!" chant?

I like when it's just one fat redneck yelling " 'MERICA!" That's my favorite.
But if you're at a pro wrestling match or something, then definitely "U-S-A."

When would be the best possible time to start chanting "U-S-A?"

If Hulk Hogan body-slams someone . . . someone from another country.

Who is the most American American you know?

If you wrap a drone with an American flag. No wait. If we could deep-fry Ted
Nugent, that would be the most American thing ever. You would get diabetes
biting into him.

You can only eat one of the following for the rest -

Pizza! Oh sorry, go ahead.

One of the following for the rest of your life: hot dogs, corn on the cob or
red-white-and-blue Popsicles. Which do you choose?

Hot dogs. You can put some vegetables on top and that's like two meals. But also
because I'm fat so I like hot dogs better.

What song gets you pumped up about America?

"Mambo No. 5."

But why?

Because every time I hear it I just think of like, liberating people. Democracy.

What's the most American thing you've ever done?

I shot some guns with my friend in New Jersey. He's a Democrat, but he bought a
bunch of guns because he thought Obama was going to take them away. I don't
understand his rationale there. I don't know if you've ever shot a shotgun, but
. . . I still believe in background checks. This is not a political statement. .
. .

Also seeing "Transformers" before reading the book. That's American.

Okay, to wrap up, can you tell me an American joke?

You're really going at this theme. Now the whole wrong kinda person is going to
show up at my show, just guys in the back yelling " 'MERICA, YEAH!"

But I don't know. Our society in America right now, we were so much better off
in the '90s. In the '90s, everybody's favorite show was "Friends." It was like,
'What's going to happen with Ross and Rachel?' And now? Everyone's favorite show
is "The Walking Dead," and we're like, shoot the bodies! Something happened to
our psyche. I don't know. God bless you, and God bless the United States of
America.

jessica.contrera@washpost.com

Dan St. Germain, with Evan Williams, Brian Duss and Sean Joyce, 9 p.m. Saturday,
Black Cat, 1811 14th St. NW. $10; proceeds benefit We Are Family.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


