                             1849 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           August 27, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

U.S.: No joint eâ[0/00] ort with Syria to strike militants

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 927 words


The Obama administration has ruled out the possibility of coordinating U.S.
airstrikes in Syria with President Bashar al-Assad's government, forcing U.S.
officials to design a campaign that would evade Syrian air defenses or
coordinate it with Assad through a third party.

Despite the shared U.S. and Syrian interest in defeating Islamist militants in
the region, there will be no cooperation with Assad, State Department
spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Tuesday.

"We're not going to ask for permission from the Syrian regime," she said.

With top U.S. officials describing the Islamic State militant group as a growing
threat to international security, some form of stepped-up U.S. action appears
increasingly likely and could include an expansion of American airstrikes from
Iraq into Syria. Whether done in concert with Assad or not, such strikes would
be a strategic benefit to Assad more than three years after the start of the
uprising against his rule.

Airstrikes, even if officially opposed by Assad as a violation of Syrian
sovereignty, would also put Obama and Assad on the same side of a war Obama has
been loath to join.

The White House stressed Tuesday that Obama has made no decision on whether to
conduct airstrikes in Syria, even amid signs of stepped-up U.S. activity in the
region, including his authorization of surveillance flights there.

Syria's foreign minister                 warned              Monday against
unilateral U.S. strikes but welcomed a broader regional approach to fighting the
militants, opening the possibility that the administration could rely on
partners to coordinate any attacks. U.S. officials said that there has been no
such coordination to date and that none is planned, although they did not rule
it out.

Any unilateral action would mean testing Syria's air defenses or the response of
Assad's forces.

While the U.S. military has penetrated Syrian airspace on at least one occasion
since the start of the civil war - during a failed bid this year to rescue
journalist James Foley and other Americans being held by the Islamic State -
that raid involved the use of modified Black Hawk helicopters.

The helicopters are designed to fly into hostile airspace and conceivably could
have been flown at very low altitudes to avoid radar detection. Surveillance
aircraft, however, fly high and slow, and they could be shot down by both the
Syrian air force and the country's air defense grid.

In addition to having a moderately capable air force, Syria possesses advanced
surface-to-air missile systems such as the SA-22 Greyhound, according to
Military Balance, a publication issued by the International Institute for
Strategic Studies that documents military capabilities. The SA-22 can hit
targets up to 65,000 feet, believed to be the maximum altitude of the Global
Hawk surveillance drone.

The Pentagon has begun identifying potential targets, but it is not clear how
soon any U.S. airstrikes might come.

"This is a serious threat from a serious group of terrorists, and we need to
stay mindful of doing what we need to do to protect American citizens at home
and abroad," a Pentagon spokesman, Rear Adm. John Kirby, said Tuesday.

"We're not going to hold ourselves to geographic boundaries in order to
accomplish that job."

Asked whether Syrian air defenses had been degraded over the past year, Kirby
indicated that they had not. "There has been no change in our assessment of
Syrian air defense capabilities," he said.

Any U.S. operation would most likely focus on Islamic State leadership in the
group's main haven around Raqqah, in Syria's north, and along the long Iraqi
border, analysts said. U.S. planes are operating at the invitation of Iraqi
leaders next door and could use Iraq's airspace to launch long-range weapons
into Syria.

Still, "without some degree of coordination, the risks for armed intervention in
Syria will be hard to control and manage. There's greater room for
miscalculation and human error," said Ramzy Mardini, a nonresident fellow at the
Atlantic Council who has studied the strengths and weaknesses of the Islamic
State.

The United States should be wary of using allied rebels to coordinate
airstrikes, Mardini added. "There's a conflict of interest and an incentive to
pull the U.S. into direct conflict with the Assad regime."

Julien Barnes-Dacey, a Middle East analyst at the European Council on Foreign
Relations, said public U.S.-Syria coordination is out of the question
politically for the United States and probably for Assad. Despite the two
countries' being strange bedfellows, Assad would probably welcome strikes if
they were coordinated between the two governments, Barnes-Dacey said.

"Assad's biggest foe today is Islamic State," and the Obama administration now
identifies the group as an instant threat, Barnes-Dacey said. "That inevitably
draws them together in spheres of action."

U.S. policy has been to support political moderates and their affiliated rebel
army, but the United States has been reluctant to offer much military help to
the rebels because of the fear that militants would benefit. Meanwhile,
U.N.-sponsored peace talks fell apart almost as soon as they were convened this
year.

The United States long ago abandoned hopes that Assad could be an Arab reformer,
and Obama demanded his ouster just months into the rebel uprising in 2011.

"There are no plans to change that policy, and there are no plans to coordinate
with the Assad regime," White House press secretary Josh Earnest said.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Craig Whitlock contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


