                             184 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 6, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Using Google Autofill to Gauge the Economy

BYLINE: By CONOR DOUGHERTY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; BITS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 752 words


If you were looking for a national collective conscience, you could do worse
than to check out Google's autofill feature -- when Google's search engine tries
to guess what you're looking for by ''autofilling'' a few letters of a query
into a fully formed question.

Take a recent search for ''Who Is?'' The autofill suggests that Americans are
very interested in ISIS, the brutal group of Sunni militants in Iraq and Syria,
as well as The Bachelor, the reality TV show in which a group of women compete
to marry some guy they don't know.

With the third quarter now behind us, Nicholas Colas, chief market strategist at
ConvergEx Group, a New York broker-dealer, used autofill and other ''off the
grid'' indicators, including Google Trends, to see how Americans feel about the
economy.

''Every quarter we take a break from all the standard economic indicators to
look at a range of alternative data,'' he wrote in a note to clients. ''The
purpose here is to pose the question: Does the consensus view of the economy
square with what real people do in their daily lives?''

Some conclusions from autofill: Don't be surprised if Dad comes home with a new
drone and one kidney.

Mr. Colas has been tracking Google autofill data for a while, and for most of
the last three years the top three positions for completing the query, ''I want
to buy...'' have been won by ''a house,'' ''a car'' and ''stock.''

The fourth spot tends to vary with the news cycle, and in past quarters has
included things like ''a gun,'' ''a dog'' and ''Facebook stock.''

''Gun'' has jumped around and in the past had the top spot, but hasn't reached
the top four in a year. Last year, the top spot in the fourth quarter went to
''a drone''; in the second quarter, it was ''something.''

Maybe that shouldn't be surprising, given the number of drones in the news
lately. Google announced a drone delivery effort dubbed Project Wing in the
third quarter. The New York Times also reported on NASA's efforts to create an
air-traffic control system for drone aircraft.

And the prospect of drones landing in backyards and peering into bedroom windows
has freaked a lot of people out. Speaking about drones in September, Supreme
Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor told an Oklahoma City audience, ''That type of
technology has to stimulate us to think about what is it that we cherish in
privacy and how far we want to protect it and from whom.''

One thing people do not seem to cherish are their kidneys; ''kidney'' was the
third autofill option -- after ''car'' and ''house'' -- for the query ''I want
to sell my ...'' This could simply be morbid curiosity. In an interview, Mr.
Colas said ''hair'' has also ranked high in past quarters.

''The point is not so much to develop an alternative paradigm of economic
analysis as it is to poke and prod at the consensus we all embrace,'' Mr. Colas
wrote. ''After all, can the U.S. economy be doing all that well if (I want to
sell a) 'Kidney' is a common autofill?''

Looking beyond autofill to Google Trends data, Mr. Colas found that interest in
gold coins, which hit at a post-financial-crisis low, suggests people are
feeling much better about the nation's financial system. But many Americans are
still worried about money and food, as interest in food stamps ticked higher
from earlier in the year.

Mr. Colas's analysis included other oddball economic indicators like an
inflation measure called the Bacon Cheeseburger Index (up about 6%), which
measures how much it would cost to make a bacon cheeseburger at home.

He also looked at government data of how often people are quitting their jobs.
The quits rate has become something of a mainstream indicator in the wake of the
Great Recession. Quits are a good thing, since people don't usually leave their
jobs unless they have another gig lined up or at least feel confident they can
find something.

All in all, alternative indicators point to an economy that continues to mend,
but has mended so slowly that people still have severe anxieties about the
future. That's the same conclusion you would come to by looking at more
traditional indicators like consumer confidence or the government's monthly jobs
report, which in September showed the unemployment rate falling below 6 percent
for the first time since July 2008.

''But it feels like we got here by drone, with a different perspective of the
same picture,'' Mr. Colas concluded. ''At least we didn't have to sell our
kidney to see it.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/10/02/drones
-vs-kidneys-google-autofill-on-the-economy/

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The news cycle can affect Google users' searches. In the fourth
quarter of 2013, the top ''I want to buy'' query was ''a drone.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY
SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


