                              18 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 27, 2014 Saturday 12:50 AM EST

White House plans to require federal agencies to provide details about drones;
The Pentagon and key departments would be required to reveal details about their
surveillance capabilities.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 1267 words


The White House is preparing a directive that would require federal agencies to
publicly disclose for the first time where they fly drones in the United States
and what they do with the torrents of data collected from aerial surveillance.

The presidential executive order would force the Pentagon, the Department of
Justice, the Department of Homeland Security and other agencies to reveal more
details about the size and surveillance capabilities of their growing drone
fleets - information that until now has been largely kept under wraps.

The mandate would only apply to federal drone flights in U.S. airspace. Overseas
military and intelligence operations would not be covered.

President Obama has yet to sign the executive order, but officials said drafts
have been distributed to federal agencies and that the process was in its final
stages. "An inter-agency review of the issue is underway," said Ned Price, a
White House spokesman. He declined to comment further.

Privacy advocates said the measure was long overdue. Little is known about the
scope of the federal government's domestic drone operations and surveillance
policies. Much of what has emerged was obtained under court order as a result of
public-records lawsuits.

"We're undergoing a quiet revolution in aerial surveillance," said Chris
Calabrese, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. "But we
haven't had all in one place a clear picture of how this technology is being
used. Nor is it clear that the agencies themselves know how it is being used."

Most affected by the executive order would be the Pentagon, which conducts drone
training missions in most states, and Homeland Security, which flies
surveillance drones along the nation's borders around the clock. It would also
cover other agencies with little-known drone programs, including NASA, the
Interior Department and the Commerce Department.

Military and law-enforcement agencies would not have to reveal sensitive
operations. But they would have to post basic information about their privacy
safeguards for the vast amount of full-motion video and other imagery collected
by drones.

Until now, the armed forces and federal law-enforcement agencies have been
reflexively secretive about drone flights and even less forthcoming about how
often they use the aircraft to conduct domestic surveillance.

Security officials are generally reluctant to disclose operational methods and
techniques. But drones are in a special category of sensitivity, given the
top-secret role they've long played in CIA and military counterterrorism
missions. There's also evidence that federal agencies simply have been unable to
develop internal guidelines and policies quickly enough to keep up with rapid
advances in drone technology.

"Federal use of drones has gone way up, but it's hard to document how much,"
said Jennifer Lynch, an attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a San
Francisco-based group that has sued the Federal Aviation Administration for
records on government drone operations. "It's been in­cred­ibly difficult."

Even Congress has struggled to uncover the extent to which the federal
government uses drones as a surveillance tool in U.S. airspace.

In March 2013, lawmakers directed the Defense Department to produce a report,
within 90 days, describing its policies for sharing drone surveillance imagery
with law-enforcement agencies.

Eighteen months later, the Pentagon still has not completed the report. Air
Force Lt. Col. Thomas Crosson, a Defense Department spokesman, said officials
hoped to provide an interim response next week and a full version "in the coming
months."

Department of Justice officials have also been reluctant to answer queries from
lawmakers about their drone operations. The FBI first disclosed its use of
small, unarmed surveillance drones to Congress in June 2013 and subsequently
revealed that it had been flying them since 2006.

The Justice Department Inspector General reported last fall that the FBI had not
developed new privacy guidelines for its drone surveillance and was relying
instead on old rules for collecting imagery from regular aircraft.

Since then, Justice officials have said they are reviewing their drone
surveillance policies but have not disclosed any results. An FBI spokesman did
not respond to a request for comment.

The FBI has resisted other attempts to divulge details about the size of its
drone fleet and its surveillance practices.

Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW), a nonprofit group
that pushes for transparency in government, sued the FBI last year under the
Freedom of Information Act for records on its drone program. Although the FBI
has turned over thousands of pages of documents, many have been redacted or only
provide limited insights.

"They've been dragging their feet from the outset, and it's been enormously
frustrating," said Anne Weismann, CREW's chief counsel. "I don't know if it's
because they don't want to expose the fact that they've been operating without
any clear guidance or if they just don't like to talk about it."

Another section of Obama's draft executive order would instruct the Commerce
Department to help develop voluntary privacy guidelines for private-sector drone
flights. The intent is to shape non-binding industry standards for commercial
surveillance instead of imposing new regulations by law.

The executive order is an attempt to cope with a projected surge in drone
flights in the United States.

For years, the FAA has enforced a de facto ban on commercial drone flights and
only permits government agencies to fly drones under tightly controlled
circumstances.

Under a 2012 law passed by Congress, however, the FAA is developing rules that
will gradually open the skies to drones of all kinds. The drone industry, which
lobbied Congress to pass the law, predicts $82 billion in economic benefits and
100,000 new jobs by 2025.

On Thursday, the FAA approved requests from six Hollywood filmmakers to fly
small camera-equipped drones on movie sets, the first time businesses will be
allowed to operate such aircraft in populated areas. About 40 companies,
including Amazon.com, have filed similar requests with the FAA. Amazon's chief
executive, Jeffrey P. Bezos, owns The Washington Post.

Federal lawmakers have introduced several bills in recent years to regulate the
use of drones by law-enforcement agencies and strengthen privacy protections,
but none has passed.

No department flies more drones than the Pentagon, which has about 10,000 of the
aircraft in its inventory, from 4-pound Wasps to the 15-ton Global Hawk.

While many are deployed overseas, Defense Department documents show that the
military is making plans to base drones at 144 sites in the United States.
Pentagon officials have said they soon expect to fly more drones in civilian
airspace in the United States than in military-only zones.

The Department of Homeland Security also conducts extensive surveillance with
unarmed drones. Its Customs and Border Protection service has nine large
Predator B models, which account for about three-quarters of all drone flight
hours reported by federal civilian agencies.

Customs and Border Protection drones patrol a 25-mile-wide corridor along the
nation's northern and southern borders, as well as over the Caribbean Sea and
Gulf of Mexico.

Records obtained by the Electronic Frontier Foundation show that the border
patrol has also outsourced its drones on hundreds of occasions to other
law-enforcement agencies throughout the United States. Details of most of those
operations remain secret.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


