                             1866 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Obama offers resolve and a strategy - within limits

BYLINE: Dan Balz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1189 words


During his time on the national stage, President Obama has spoken against war
and in favor of war, but rarely has he faced as complex a challenge as he did
Wednesday night in putting the country on a new and risky path to intensified
conflict in the Middle East.

This was not a moment in which Obama's principal task was to rally a reluctant
country behind some kind of military action against Islamic State terrorists.
Fresh opinion polls this week showed both universal public alarm over the threat
posed by the militants and a sharp spike in support for precisely what the
president outlined: continued U.S. airstrikes in Iraq and an expansion of those
strikes into Syria.

But if the public had reached a conclusion that military action is needed, those
same polls also revealed the depth of the doubts many Americans have about the
commander in chief and his leadership. At a time of chaos and violence in the
Middle East and turbulence in other parts of the world, the president's to-do
list Wednesday night certainly included putting those doubts to rest as much as
possible.

It was just two weeks ago that Obama uttered the lines, "We don't have a
strategy yet" to deal with the Islamic State, just as Americans were recoiling
over the gruesome Islamic State video showing the beheading of American
journalist James Foley. Days later came another video of a second American
journalist, Steven Sotloff, being executed in the same horrific way.

The president used a rare prime-time speech to try to reassure his critics and
doubters that neither he nor his advisers underestimate the threat posed by the
Islamic State and that they have an answer. He outlined a four-part strategy and
said, "Our objective is clear: We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, ISIL
through a comprehensive and sustained counterterrorism strategy."

But that strategy comes not only with resolve but also with boundaries.
Americans may want retaliation and a plan to destroy the Islamic State, but they
have a distinctly limited appetite for a new and potentially prolonged
engagement in a region of tangled alliances and potential quagmires. The new
polling shows that there is as much opposition to U.S. ground forces going back
into the Middle East in large numbers as there is support for strikes from the
air.

Obama also had to reassure the country that he understands those limits. He said
the United States would lead a broad coalition to deal with the Islamic State.
He pledged that this effort will be different from the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan. He described his policy as a counterterrorism strategy, not the
start of a new Middle East war. He said that others would shoulder the
responsibility for fighting on the ground but that the United States would
partner with those forces.

Obama also sought to emphasize that the United States will not go it alone.
"American power can make a decisive difference," he said, "but we cannot do for
Iraqis what they must do for themselves, nor can we take the place of Arab
partners in securing their region." At the same time, he described the United
States as indispensable to bringing stability and security to the world's most
troubled spots.

In emphasizing America's role, Obama drifted toward the end of his speech from
the topic of the moment to a broader description of a country that demonstrated
resilience after the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, and has rebounded from the
terrible economic shocks of 2008. It seemed like something of a digression at a
time when Americans express growing concerns about the world around them and
aren't as convinced as some economic indicators that the economy is generally
good.

The balancing reflected Obama's own understanding of the complexities of what he
is taking on and the risks and uncertainties that come with any military mission
in that part of the world. It reflects as well the unanswered questions about
what comes next and what constitutes success. And, not incidentally, it reflects
his own sense that he is a president, as he has often said, who was elected to
end wars, not to start them.

That posture served Obama well as a candidate in 2008 when he promised a new
direction and approach than that of the incumbent president, George W. Bush, who
led the country into a war in Iraq under false pretenses and whose
administration was criticized for its penchant for unilateralism. In office,
Obama has acted on that assurance, displaying a decision-making style that at
times has been almost the complete opposite of the man who as president often
referred to himself as "the decider."

Obama has made decisions, sometimes very difficult ones, as he did in launching
the mission that killed Osama bin Laden with inconclusive evidence that the
al-Qaeda leader really was in the compound in Pakistan. He has been aggressive
in authorizing drone attacks aimed at killing terrorists. But he has sometimes
spent what has seemed like an inordinate amount of time reaching decisions, as
in the months-long process about whether to send substantially more forces into
Afghanistan in 2009.

Over time, as world events have spiraled into conflict, criticism of the
president has increased and the list of particulars has grown. He declined to
arm moderate rebel forces in Syria over recommendations of some of his top
national security advisers.

A year ago, he threatened and then pulled back from launching airstrikes against
Syria after the regime of Bashar al-Assad used chemical weapons against his own
people, although Obama was successful in forcing Syria to give up those chemical
weapons.

In recent months, as the world has watched Russian President Vladimir Putin
annex Crimea and move into eastern Ukraine, Obama sought to gain broader support
in Europe for tougher sanctions.

Republican elected officials in particular have branded Obama as weak and his
policies as unsuccessful. The latest Washington Post-ABC News poll showed
Obama's foreign policy approval dropping eight points in the past three weeks to
38 percent, the lowest of his presidency. The survey found that 53 percent of
Americans say Obama has been too cautious in dealing with international affairs.
Only 10 percent say he has been too aggressive, while a third say he has been
about right.

The president's advisers dismiss much of the criticism, particularly that coming
from Republicans. They point to Bush and argue that the former president's style
and policies are what helped create some of today's problems. Obama, they argue,
is looking at a longer horizon, making decisions not to please cable television
pundits but for the long term. He would rather take his time to factor in all
the complexities than rush to respond to his critics. If he sustains some
short-term damage, they claim not to be overly worried.

Obama has now set in motion a conflict without a definable timetable, a struggle
that could last through the remainder of his presidency and beyond. The ultimate
judgment about this mission is well into the future. For Obama, it is one of the
most difficult tests of his presidency, one that turns him in a new, unexpected
and uncertain direction.

dan.balz@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


