                             1888 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 15, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 805 words

BASEBALL

Friedman leaves Rays to join Dodgers' brass

Fresh off another early playoff exit, the Los Angeles Dodgers overhauled their
front office Tuesday. They hired  Andrew Friedman  for the new position of
president of baseball operations, while current General Manager  Ned Colletti
will stay on in a new role as a senior adviser to team President and CEO  Stan
Kasten .

Friedman comes from the Tampa Bay Rays, where he was executive vice president of
baseball operations for nine years after being hired at age 28.

"As I embark upon my next journey, I have only thanks and gratitude to the Rays
organization and the Tampa Bay region," Friedman said in a statement.

Kasten called Friedman "one of the youngest and brightest minds in the game
today." Friedman guided the Rays to four postseason appearances, including
division titles in 2008 and 2010, while overseeing one of the leagues' lowest
payrolls. . . .

The Rays acted swiftly to replace Friedman as the team's president of baseball
operations, saying longtime club president  Matt Silverman  will fill the
position. . . .

Bench coach  Tim Bogar , the Rangers' interim manager for the final 22 games
after  Ron Washington 's sudden resignation, is among three finalists for the
managing job with Texas. Pittsburgh Pirates bench coach  Jeff Banister  and
Cleveland Indians bullpen coach  Kevin Cash  are the other finalists announced.

SOCCER

 Jozy Altidore  scored in his return to his home town, and the United States
wasted a late lead for the second time in in five days in a 1-1 tie against
Honduras in Boca Raton, Fla.  Maynor Figueroa  got away from  Jermaine Jones  to
score on a header off  Mario Martinez 's free kick from a flank in the 86th
minute after a foul by  Mix Diskerud . . . .

Fans roared when  Neymar 's name was read during the pregame introductions, and
the Brazilian star didn't disappoint in Singapore. The 22-year-old scored four
goals in an international match for the first time in Brazil's 4-0 exhibition
rout of Japan. . . .

In Belgrade, Serbia, a small drone dangling an Albanian banner and circling the
field touched off fighting between Serbian and Albanian players and fans,
forcing a European Championship qualifier to be called off. The referee halted
the match in the 41st minute when a Serbian player grabbed the banner and
Albanian players tried to protect it. Several Serbian fans ran onto the field
and clashed with Albanian players.

GOLF

 Tiger Woods  and  Phil Mickelson  were among 11 players, captains and PGA of
America officials who were appointed to the "Ryder Cup Task Force" that will
look at everything from qualifications to captain's picks and even practice
schedules during the matches. Europe has won the Ryder Cup eight of the last 10
times, including a comfortable victory last month at Gleneagles that was
remembered as much for Mickelson indirectly criticizing U.S. captain  Tom Watson
's leadership style in the closing news conference.

MISC.

The adviser for the family of  Jameis Winston  has asked Florida State why it
has chosen now to engage in the Title IX process and accuses the school of
trying to protect its own interests and responding to media pressure. . . .

Southeastern Conference Commissioner  Mike Slive  will retire next summer after
13 years leading the league to unprecedented success and prosperity. The
74-year-old Slive said his retirement will take effect July 31, and announced he
plans to begin treatment for a recurrence of prostate cancer. . . .

NASCAR fined  Brad Keselowski  $50,000 and  Tony Stewart  $25,000 for their
roles in the fracas at Charlotte Motor Speedway over the weekend. Both drivers
also were placed on probation, with NASCAR saying the penalties "are about
maintaining a safe environment following the race." . . .

NFL Commissioner  Roger Goodell  and players' union chief  DeMaurice Smith
agreed to continue discussing changes to the league's personal conduct policy
following a four-hour session in New York. In an e-mail to player
representatives afterward, Smith says he made it clear to the league that the
union wants due process. . . .

Dallas Cowboys running back  Joseph Randle  has been arrested on a shoplifting
charge, accused of taking $123 worth of cologne and underwear from a suburban
Dallas department. . . .

Knowshon Moreno  went on injured reserve with a knee injury, two days after the
running back hurt his anterior cruciate ligament in the Miami Dolphins' loss to
Green Bay.  The Dolphins also got suspended defensive lineman  Derrick Shelby
back as he was reinstated after his arrest on misdemeanor charges of resisting
arrest and trespassing at a nightclub. . . .

The Budweiser Clydesdales will once again headline the Military Bowl parade on
Dec. 27.  Game-day activities kick off at 8:15 a.m. with the inaugural Military
Bowl 5K.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


