                             1856 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 9, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Hagel visits Turkey to coordinate efforts

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: ANKARA, TURKEY


ANKARA, Turkey - As it builds a coalition to confront the Islamic State, the
Obama administration is showering renewed attention on Turkey, which has had
chilly relations with Washington of late but whose cooperation is vital to
combat the Islamist extremists in Iraq and Syria.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel landed here in the Turkish capital Monday to
strategize with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and other top officials - just
three days after the Pentagon chief and President Obama met with Erdogan at a
NATO summit in Wales and persuaded him to join a U.S.-led coalition against the
Islamic State.

The sudden burst of high-level diplomacy is striking because Turkey and the
United States had been giving each other the cold shoulder over the past 18
months. During Obama's first term in office, he and Erdogan were on chummy
terms, speaking almost monthly. But the relationship soured last year after
Erdogan ordered blunt force to disperse massive street protests and clamped down
on political opponents.

Hagel canceled a trip to Turkey in January. His visit Monday was the first by a
U.S. defense secretary since December 2011 - an unusually long stretch given the
long-standing military ties between the two countries and their status as NATO
allies for more than half a century. The Pentagon also has an Air Force wing
stationed at Incirlik Air Base in Turkey.

"Yes, we've had our ups and downs in that relationship, but what's interesting
is it's never broken," Hagel told reporters Monday. The emergence of the Islamic
State, he added, has prompted the allies to patch up differences.

Turkey signed up for Obama's "core coalition" against the Islamic State on
Friday at the NATO summit - the only Muslim country in the group. But its
leaders have indicated that they are reluctant to take a visible role, worried
that any overt Turkish military action could endanger 49 Turkish citizens whom
the extremist group is holding hostage.

Although Turkey does not publicly acknowledge the activity, the U.S. military
has been flying unarmed surveillance drones over Iraq from Incirlik Air Base.
Turkey has been holding the line at authorizing airstrikes or combat missions
from its territory.

Obama has said that the United States needs Turkey to help control the flow of
foreign fighters who have swelled the ranks of the Islamic State; many travel
from Europe or North Africa to Turkey and then to Syria and Iraq.

Militarily, U.S. officials said they need more help in the region with refueling
flights, airlifting equipment and supplies, and providing assistance to moderate
Syrian rebel groups.

The purpose of Hagel's visit was "really to see how far they're willing to go,"
a senior U.S. defense official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to
discuss military planning. "Turkey, by the fact of its geography, is inevitably
a partner. It's got to be a partner. It won't work without Turkey."

In his meetings with Erdogan and other Turkish leaders, Hagel said, they
explored what roles Turkey might fill, though he declined to give details.

"Turkey has its specific concerns and issues," he said. "Each country has its
own separate limitations, its own separate political dimensions. We have to
respect those."

Turkish leaders have said that they are already bearing an enormous burden from
instability in Iraq and Syria, including hosting about 800,000 Syrian refugees.
Officials in Ankara also worry that the Islamic State could shift its focus from
Iraq and Syria and launch attacks on Turkish territory.

Erdogan has said that Turkey has cracked down on foreign fighters but needs
better intelligence from capitals in Europe and other places where the recruits
come from. Turkish officials have also griped that Obama has been slow to act in
Syria, enabling President Bashar al-Assad to survive the long-running civil war
there.

Another source of disagreement has been the U.S. push to arm Kurdish fighters
battling the Islamic State in northern Iraq; Turkey has a large Kurdish minority
and is afraid that the weapons could end up in the hands of Kurdish guerrillas
it has fought for decades.

Overcoming differences between Washington and Ankara has been made tougher by
the absence of a U.S. ambassador to Turkey for the past two months. Obama
nominated John R. Bass, a career diplomat, in early June. Bass is still awaiting
confirmation from the Senate, where Republicans have held up a long list of
would-be ambassadors as part of a larger political squabble.

To fill the void, the State Department announced late last week that it would
send Ross Wilson, a retired U.S. diplomat and former ambassador to Turkey, back
to Ankara to fill in temporarily. Wilson arrived Saturday, just in time to
escort Hagel to his meetings.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


