                             183 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones Kill 5 as Pakistan and U.S. Target Tribal Belt

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and
Declan Walsh from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 859 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- An American drone strike killed at least five people in
North Waziristan on Wednesday, Pakistani officials said, as the Pakistani
military continued its offensive against militants in that tribal district.

The officials said that two drones fired at least six missiles on a compound
near Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, as tens of thousands of
civilians fled in anticipation of intense fighting.

The missile strikes underlined the resumption of America's contentious drone
campaign, after a hiatus of almost six months, and introduced a new element into
an already volatile situation.

Since declaring the much-anticipated operation in North Waziristan, the
country's main jihadist hub, the Pakistani military has deployed troops, tanks
and fighter jets for a campaign against the Pakistani Taliban and allied
international militant groups.

So far, the army has mainly carried out airstrikes on militant bases that it
says killed about 200 people, although that number could not be confirmed
independently. Now, for the first time in years, Pakistani strikes in the tribal
belt are occurring at the same time as American ones.

Residents of Miram Shah reported six blasts in short succession Wednesday
morning. ''We heard one blast after another, just as we were offering prayers,''
said one resident by phone, speaking on the condition of anonymity for fear of
reprisals.

A senior Pakistani security official said the compound that was the target of
the drones was located next to a seminary run by the Haqqani network, the
militant group that has carried out numerous attacks on Americans in Afghanistan
and held the American Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl hostage.

But it was not clear, he added, whether any Haqqani network fighters had been
killed.

Elsewhere in North Waziristan, civilians took advantage of a break in curfew to
flee the district, often amid frantic scenes, as the military operation,
Zarb-e-Azb, an Urdu phrase for Strike of the Prophet's Sword, entered its fifth
day.

A senior government official told Agence France-Presse that about 30,000 people
arrived in Bannu, a town just outside North Waziristan, on Wednesday alone, and
that about 90,000 residents had left their homes since the first airstrikes last
month.

But Tariq Hayat Khan, a federal government official charged with coordinating
assistance to refugees from North Waziristan, said that 67,000 people had
registered for assistance so far. Many were reluctant to enter government-run
camps, he added.

''Only the poorest of the poor would go to a camp in such hot and humid
weather,'' said Mr. Khan, who has served as a political agent in North
Waziristan.

Tribal residents appeared to see the break in curfew on Wednesday as a sign that
intensified fighting was approaching, and long traffic jams formed on roads
leading into the adjoining settled areas. ''Hundreds of vehicles are lining
up,'' said one resident of North Waziristan, speaking by telephone. ''The
process is too slow.''

Some said the initial barrage of airstrikes had killed civilians as well as
militants, though Pakistani officials reported only the deaths of militants. The
last humanitarian crisis of such magnitude in northwestern Pakistan occurred in
2009, when the army mounted a major drive to flush the Taliban from the
picturesque Swat Valley. Hundreds of thousands of people fled the valley for
crowded refugee camps on the plains around Peshawar, or relatives' homes.

But while that operation was a short-term military success, the army failed to
capture the local Taliban leader Maulana Fazlullah, who last year become the
leader of the overall Taliban organization in Pakistan.

One major difference this time is that the army operation will take place along
with the American drone campaign, although it is unclear how much, if any,
cooperation exists between American and Pakistani officials.

In the past, the two countries have clashed sharply over North Waziristan.

Americans have accused the Pakistanis of having an uncomfortably close
relationship with the Haqqani network, which is seen as a proxy for Pakistani
interests in Afghanistan.

In an apparent reference to worries that the current army operation will avoid
Haqqani forces, the Pakistani army chief, Gen. Raheel Sharif, has insisted that
all militant sanctuaries will be attacked ''without discrimination.''

In any event, overt cooperation over the drone campaign was seen as unlikely.
After the latest strikes the Pakistani Foreign Ministry issued a statement
condemning what it called a violation of the country's ''sovereignty and
territorial integrity.''

In private, though, some Pakistani officials have said that the resumed American
drone campaign enjoys a strong degree of Pakistani military cooperation. (The
Central Intelligence Agency has never publicly acknowledged any drone attacks in
Pakistan, though at least 385 have occurred since 2004 according to the Bureau
of Investigative Journalism, which monitors the strikes.)

In the rest of Pakistan, the gathering momentum of the Waziristan operation has
created an air of trepidation, with security officials bracing for possible
violent reprisals in major cities.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/19/world/middleeast/drones
-kill-as-pakistani-and-us-forces-target-tribal-belt.html

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Pakistani girl in Bannu, Pakistan, on Wednesday, where tens of
thousands were said to have fled to escape intense fighting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY B.K.
BANGASH/ASSOCIATED PRESS) MAP: North Waziristan is the country's  main jihadist
hub.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


