                             1892 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 19, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

A portrait of the whistleblower as a young man

BYLINE: Steve Dollar

SECTION: SUNDAY ARTS; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 1190 words


Nothing in her career as a documentary filmmaker could quite prepare Laura
Poitras for an encounter in a luxury hotel room in Hong Kong in June 2013. It
was there, amid absolute secrecy and after months of encrypted communications,
that she met Edward Snowden. The once-anonymous contractor for the National
Security Agency was about to become the world's most famous whistleblower,
leaking classified documents that exposed the unprecedented global and domestic
reach of the agency's surveillance programs.

"Being in the hotel room, I had an experience I had never had before," said the
filmmaker, who spoke after introducing a screening of "Citizenfour" at the New
York Film Festival, where the film premiered Oct. 12 to a long, loud standing
ovation. "There were things I filmed that I couldn't remember that I filmed, and
I saw them later in the footage. I just blocked them." Although she remains
behind the camera, Poitras was joined in the sessions by journalists Glenn
Greenwald - to whom Snowden had likewise reached out and the filmmaker persuaded
to participate - and Ewen MacAskill of the Guardian. They would become the
conduits for the release of Snowden's explosive revelations. (Many of the
further revelations came in a series of Pulitzer Prize-winning stories written
by Barton Gellman that appeared in The Washington Post.)

"There's a conversation when Glenn talks to Snowden about coming forward, and
the camera goes back and forth, and I actually didn't remember I filmed that,
and for me it's the most powerful scene in the film," said Poitras, 52, a poised
figure in jeans and a black jacket that would allow her to blend into any
Manhattan crowd. In the scene, Snowden insists he will go public as the source
of the NSA leaks that the journalists will release  regardless of the
consequences. It's a palpably electric sequence, which would be the core of any
fictional drama. In this case, though, the action is perilously real, and the
camera isn't only capturing a historical event, it's part of the making of it.

"The choice that he's making could end his life," Poitras said. "I've worked in
war zones with bombs going off, and I know, 'Okay, that's the moment.' I know
that's the one where all the emotion is contained. In this case, my brain,
whatever those defenses were, just blocked it out. I felt we were in a state of
free fall, not knowing what kind of landing we'd encounter."

When "Citizenfour," which takes its title from a codename used by Snowden to
identify himself to Poitras, opens Oct. 24, it will introduce audiences to a
mild-mannered and quick-witted computer expert who is variously considered a
traitor or a hero but whose image has been inevitably distorted by much of the
news media. "I think there's enough evidence on the table you can make your own
decision," said Poitras, whose measured approach frames in intimate and
vulnerable terms what might have been sensationalized. "We wanted not to be
influenced or feed into the frenzy around us but stay true to material and the
human drama. It's really about Snowden and what he chose to do."

It also is often quite funny, as Snowden's tech-geek mannerisms underscore some
of the absurdity that comes with living in a real-life Jason Bourne thriller. At
one point, as a rational paranoia compels him to hide his laptop as he types, he
throws a blanket over his head. He calls it "my mantle of power," causing
everyone to break up laughing. Such instances eased the tension. Though Poitras
said she felt much safer once they began releasing Snowden's information, she
had no illusions they hadn't been tracked.

"They look at flight manifests," she said. "The intelligence communities knew by
that point. But I think one of the reasons the story had the impact it had is
Glenn worked at a really fast pace. The U.S. government couldn't respond in
time. We caught them a bit on their heels. They didn't expect Snowden would
reveal his identity, so we controlled the narrative for a while."

The film completes a trilogy of documentaries about America after 9/11 that
include the Academy Award-nominated "My Country, My Country" (2006) and "The
Oath" (2010), films that took Poitras first to U.S.-occupied Iraq and into
contact with Abu Jandal, a Yemeni taxi driver who had once been a bodyguard for
Osama Bin Laden. The filmmaker would find herself on a secret terrorist watch
list that would lead to multiple detainments whenever she tried to enter the
United States. "I'm certainly not carrying any footage across the border with me
or any source material or any notes," Poitras said of her recent trips to the
United States from her adoptive home in Berlin. "I've learned my lesson." It was
her persistence in the face of these actions, which had been publicized by
Greenwald and other journalists, that suggested to Snowden that he could trust
her.

"She is taking on the most powerful nation in the world and has been repeatedly
targeted for doing so," said Jeremy Scahill, a co-founder with Poitras and
Greenwald of the Intercept, an online investigative journal, and writer-producer
of the Academy Award-nominated documentary "Dirty Wars." "This boils down to the
power of one woman's camera against the entire national security state."

Poitras already was at work on a film about that security state when Snowden
first contacted her in January 2013. That material includes footage of former
NSA official and whistleblower William Binney, speaking out against the
surveillance state, and of the construction of the massive, NSA-managed Utah
Data Center near Bluffdale. The film establishes tension from its opening
glimpses of encrypted data on a black screen and computer messages between
Poitras and a yet-unidentified Snowden. Sinister, minimalist music composed by
Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (Academy Award winners for their  score on "The
Social Network"), fills the soundtrack, instilling a sense of nervous unease
that accompanies the road to Hong Kong.

"Laura exemplifies that delicate intersection of art and journalism that the
best non-fiction films often occupy," said David Wilson, co-director of the
True/False Film Fest, a leading documentary-oriented festival based in Columbia,
Mo., which showcased the filmmaker's work in 2010. "It's telling that Edward
Snowden picked Laura to trust in revealing his secrets, though, as he says, she
chose herself. She did that by being honest and brave and willing to go to any
length to tell a story correctly."

"Citizenfour" concludes with a final Snowden encounter - and a personal note:
His girlfriend, Lindsay Mills, is revealed to have joined him in Moscow, where
he lives on a three-year visa after fleeing there from Hong Kong.

"I make films about people," Poitras said. "I don't know if films about people
change policy. I would hope that our elected officials would respond in terms of
increased transparency and accountability for these actions, and not just around
surveillance but other things like drone strikes. The government has moved in
directions that are pretty radical. The level of secrecy that we have is very
frightening."

style@washpost.com

Dollar is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


