                             1829 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 15, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Chippingaway at the Islamic State

BYLINE: David Ignatius

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 805 words


The Obama administration's Iraq policy seems premised on the idea that the
terrorist Islamic State is so toxic that it will be self-limiting and ultimately
self-defeating. But that's not the view of U.S. intelligence officials.

In a briefing for journalists Thursday, a panel of five U.S. intelligence
officials summed up their assessment of an organization that has shown a
remarkable durability because it is "patient," "well-organized," "opportunistic"
and "flexible." Under the leadership of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the group has
rebounded from about 1,500 fighters in 2010 to more than 10,000 today - becoming
a global jihadist organization that communicates in many languages.

"We don't assess this as something that will collapse on its own," said one of
the officials, who commented based on an agreement that their remarks would not
be attributed. "But with pressure and alternatives [that might draw away its
Sunni supporters], it could collapse over time." The intelligence experts
cautioned that counterterrorist tools, such as drone strikes and other air
attacks, wouldn't be sufficient "to defeat it rather than just ratchet it back."

The officials expressed skepticism that Baghdadi could be deterred from striking
the United States by the threat of pulverizing attacks. "We assess that the
group sees conflict with the U.S. as inevitable," said one official. Although
the group is preoccupied with its battles in Iraq and Syria, another official
noted a chilling Internet statement several months ago: "America, we have not
turned our gaze away from you."

The briefing was a rare example of intelligence officials sharing information
about a problem that policymakers are still debating. The group skirted direct
policy questions but not their context. Asked, for example, whether the Islamic
State can be contained if its bases in Syria aren't bombed, one official said
that such cross-border havens have been "a perennial challenge" in fighting
insurgencies since 1945.

The portrait of Baghdadi and his Islamic State was chilling. Under its original
name, al-Qaeda in Iraq, the group ferociously battled U.S. forces. Most of its
leading fighters were imprisoned by U.S. occupation troops, but incarceration
was a school for jihad, and they emerged tougher, better connected and more
dedicated.

Baghdadi's fighters began to evolve from al-Qaeda's traditional terrorist
tactics to the skills needed to hold ground, as in their self-proclaimed
caliphate in Iraq. An early sign came in Syria, where the group's suicide
bombers would seize government facilities and hold them for a few hours before
detonating their vests.

Baghdadi styles himself as the true successor to Osama bin Laden, although he
has defied bin Laden's warnings against declaring a caliphate too quickly.
Because of his deviations, Baghdadi's group was expelled by al-Qaeda leader
Ayman al-Zawahiri in April. The Islamic State has begun to peel away some
violent jihadists, including nine members of core al-Qaeda, and some members of
the North African affiliate, al-Qaeda in the Maghreb. The leadership of
al-Qaeda's potent, Yemen-based affiliate, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, has
mostly stayed loyal to Zawahiri.

The Islamic State seems younger, quicker and more nimble with social media than
was the old al-Qaeda. The officials noted heavy use of Twitter, for example,
with accounts not just in Arabic and English, but also in German, Indonesian,
Russian and other languages. The global reach is boosted by the several thousand
foreign fighters from Europe, the United States and Asia who have moved through
the group's camps, mostly by going across the Turkish border into Syria.

"Some of them are going home, with or without orders, to start cells," an
official warned.

Al-Qaeda's weakness in the past was partly that it burned so hot that it made
enemies wherever it tried to take root. But Baghdadi's group "has learned
lessons from the past," one of the officials said, and isn't so alienating to
other Muslims. "If they take over a town, they let locals run it," rather than
pushing them around needlessly.

A "vulnerability" for the Islamic State, said the official, is that it may be
overextended. He noted that the group is "fighting on so many fronts" and is
"clearly outnumbered." If its forces were pounded by U.S.-backed Iraqi and
regional forces, then Sunni supporters might "begin peeling away."

My takeaway from this unusual briefing was that the Obama administration needs a
broad strategy that gradually degrades this group back to its earlier size. That
won't be quick or easy: Baghdadi has benefited from all of the failures of rival
Muslim and secular revolutionaries in the Arab Spring. The Islamic State won't
implode because of its own mistakes. It will have to be fought, patiently and
subtly.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


