                             1839 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Iraqi forces engage militants in effort to recapture Tikrit

BYLINE: Liz Sly

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: IRBIL, IRAQ


IRBIL, Iraq - The Iraqi army launched a fresh offensive Tuesday to recapture the
central city of Tikrit, seeking to build on the success of U.S.-backed
government forces in seizing Mosul Dam, their first significant defeat of
Islamic State militants this year.

Initial reports suggested, however, that the offensive had stalled in the face
of stiff resistance from the militant fighters, who swept into the home town of
former dictator Saddam Hussein in June with significant support from its
residents, who are overwhelmingly Sunni.

American airstrikes played a decisive role in routing the extremist fighters
from Mosul Dam, which was fully under government control Tuesday. The recapture
of the dam in northern Iraq came after a two-day battle waged on the ground by
Iraqi special-operations forces and Kurdish pesh merga fighters, backed by
American bombers, drones and fighter jets.

A total of 35 U.S. attacks on Islamic State positions destroyed more than 90
targets, Pentagon officials said, enabling the joint Kurdish-Iraqi force to move
swiftly into the vital facility. The dam provides electricity to much of
northern Iraq, and sabotage of it by the militants could have triggered
catastrophic flooding.

The U.S. intervention has been confined to areas bordering the semiautonomous
Iraqi region of Kurdistan that were overrun by the Islamic State in the first
week of August, prompting President Obama to authorize airstrikes to halt the
militant advance.

But the intervention appeared to have energized Iraqi forces further south of
the vast stretch of territory across Iraq and Syria conquered by the Sunni
extremist Islamic State over the past year.

Iraqi security forces backed by Shiite militias pushed toward Tikrit in a
three-pronged offensive starting after dawn Tuesday, Iraqi officials said.

Fighting continued late into the night Tuesday, according to a resident
contacted by telephone who reported explosions and gunfire in the vicinity of
the provincial council building, the headquarters of the local government. The
resident spoke on the condition of anonymity for security reasons.

Capt. Firas Sami of the Iraqi army said government forces were close to
regaining control of the headquarters. Fighters with the Shiite Asaib Ahl al-Haq
militia joined the offensive alongside the Iraqi army, Sami said. Their presence
underscored the complications that would arise if the U.S. military were to
extend its help to government forces battling the Islamic State further to the
south.

The Iranian-backed Asaib Ahl al-Haq was responsible for multiple bombings
against U.S. forces during their eight-year presence in Iraq and in the last
years were identified by American commanders as a bigger threat to the lives of
U.S. troops than al-Qaeda.

Tikrit is a Sunni-dominant town, regarded as a stronghold of the militants, and
two previous attempts by the Iraqi army to recapture it failed dismally.

An Iraqi army spokesman, Lt. Gen. Qassim al-Moussawi, told reporters in Baghdad
that he expected this latest push to be "slow and gradual."

"There are still a lot of challenges and difficulties ahead of us," he said at a
briefing broadcast on state TV.

"The war needs time, but we are determined to annihilate the Islamic State
[militants] and to liberate all the areas they occupy - even if we suffer heavy
causalities, because we have no other choice," he said.

Tikrit was overrun by the Islamic State in early June after its push into the
northern city of Mosul sent Iraqi army soldiers fleeing, discarding their
uniforms as they ran. The militants' sweep took them to within 60 miles of
Baghdad, and although the Iraqi security forces have since managed to halt their
advance, they have had few successes in reversing their gains.

liz.sly@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


