                             1832 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 16, 2014 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Local digest: Woman killed when moped is hit by truck in District

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 422 words

THE DISTRICT

Woman killed when moped is hit by truck

A woman on a moped was fatally injured in a collision with a truck Friday on
Connecticut Avenue NW, D.C. police said.

She was identified as Nadia Sophie Seiler, 36, of Wheaton.

The incident occurred about 8:30 a.m. in the 4900 block of the avenue. The truck
driver stayed at the scene; Seiler died at a hospital, police said.

She was headed south, and the truck was making a left turn from the northbound
lanes, police said.

- Peter Herman and Martin Weil

Man, 25, dies after Wednesday shooting

D.C. police said a man who was shot Wednesday night in Northeast Washington has
died.

He was identified by authorities as Dexter Motley, 25, of Southeast.

Police said Motley and another man were struck by gunfire about 9:30 p.m. at
46th Place and Central Avenue NE.

The other man was not seriously injured.

- Victoria St. Martin

VIRGINIA

Children robbedat lemonade stand

Two Loudoun County 12-year-olds operating a lemonade stand in Round Hill were
robbed Thursday by a teenager, according to the Loudoun County sheriff's office.

The children had set up a stand to sell lemonade and snacks across the street
from Round Hill Elementary School, near the intersection of Park Heights Circle
and Evening Star Drive, authorities said.

Between 1 and 2 p.m., an unknown male teenager approached the stand, appeared
interested in making a purchase and asked the pair if they could make change for
a $20 bill, Troxell said.

One victim  took out a small cash box and began to count bills, and the teen
offered to help count. But he  pocketed the cash, told the two children not to
say anything to anyone and walked away, Troxell said. He said the investigation
was ongoing.

- Caitlin Gibson

Drone research gets underway at Va. Tech

State and federal leaders Wednesday marked the start of research on unmanned
aircraft systems being done at Virginia Tech.

Federal Aviation Administration Administrator Michael Huerta, Gov. Terry
McAuliffe (D) and others visited the Blacksburg campus for the Mid-Atlantic
Aviation Partnership's first flight. The visit included a demonstration of an
unmanned aircraft gathering information at the scene of a mock auto accident.

Last year, Virginia Tech was selected by the FAA as a research site.

The Mid-Atlantic-based component of the national effort will also involve the
University of Maryland and Rutgers University in New Jersey. The research will
help guide the agency as it works to introduce commercial versions of the
unmanned aircraft into U.S. airspace.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


