                             181 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 26, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

With 'Drone to Home' Service, Netflix Uses Satire Against Amazon

BYLINE: By NOAM COHEN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 351 words


[Video: Netflix Drone To Home Watch on YouTube.]

Netflix on Tuesday released a satirical video promising ''Drone to Home''
delivery of DVDs to customers, taking an obvious swipe at Amazon's plan to
deliver items to consumers via small octocopters, a.k.a. drones.

The Netflix video quickly bounded across the Internet, passed along on Twitter
and Facebook.

Barely a minute long, the video purports to show a Netflix warehouse with cute
little copters flying off carrying the distinctive red Netflix DVD envelopes.
''Unlike other companies trying to rush unproven technology to market, we have
literally spent days working out most of the bugs,'' the narrator says, as one
woman tries to run away from a drone following her, and another explodes in the
background.

Even when the DVDs are delivered successfully, the delivery is a little too
all-knowing -- through the open sunroof of a car, to a person camping, even to a
man standing at a urinal.

Netflix has lately had fun taking jabs at rivals, including HBO and now Amazon,
whose Prime Instant Video streaming service is competing for viewers who watch
TV and movies online. In Air Prime, the name for Amazon's drone delivery plan,
Netflix has an easy target -- the idea is widely parodied online, with one
popular version from the Taiwanese animators who make a living riffing on the
news.

Close observers of the tech world took note of an ad in January for Amazon
Prime, which includes free two-day shipping and video streaming, that referred
indirectly to Netflix, saying, ''Who needs to subscribe to another video
service? You get video, great movies right there on-demand as part of Prime.''

The Amazon plan came to light on ''60 Minutes'' in a rare interview with the
company's founder, Jeff Bezos, who took the reporter Charlie Rose to a secret
room where the drones were being tested. In the interview, which promoted the
speed and applicability of drones to do many of the deliveries Amazon makes, Mr.
Bezos alluded to the need to get everything right. ''Look, this thing can't land
on someone's head while they are walking around -- that's not good.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/26/business/media/with-drone
-to-home-service-netflix-uses-satire-against-amazon.html

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


