                             1821 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 14, 2014 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

Our bad options in Iraq

BYLINE: Robert H. Scales

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 779 words


In the winter of 1951, President Dwight Eisenhower reluctantly allowed the
French army to employ American napalm against the Viet Minh at the Battle of
Vinh   Yen. The effect was electric. Enemy soldiers were petrified:

"The bomb falls closely behind us, and I feel its fiery breath," a Viet Minh
officer recounted in a diary passage quoted in Bernard Fall's history "Street
Without Joy." "The men are now fleeing in all directions. . . . I stop at the
platoon commander . . . his eyes were wide with terror. 'What is this? The atom
bomb?'"

In a short time, however, the psychological impact of the pyrotechnics of
burning gel waned. To the Vietnamese, napalm became just another kind of bomb,
deadly and destructive to be sure, but no more frightening than any other
air-delivered weapon. The French increased the use of napalm in subsequent
battles, but by the time the French army surrendered in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu,
the Viet Minh had learned that napalm, like all airstrikes, could be avoided
through concealment, dispersion and entrenchment.

Right now, the Islamic State is going through this same evolutionary process
along the western border of Kurdistan. As one can see from the grainy
black-and-white "gun camera" tapes released by the Pentagon, the U.S. airstrikes
of the past week have mostly succeeded. Lazy and overconfident Islamic State
forces positioned their artillery and mortars in the open. Their convoys were
bunched together and tended to travel along established highways, where they
could easily be spotted by drones. As planes approached, fighters cowered in
fear or ran away.

Expect them to learn quickly from these mistakes. Many Islamic State commanders
are former Baathist officers who have seen U.S. firepower in action and
understand how to respond to it. Some are veterans of almost three years of
Syrian bomb strikes and are comfortable with quickly taking cover at the first
sight of aircraft overhead. Recent images show they are dispersing their newly
acquired U.S. tanks, Humvees and artillery. They also are beginning to hide
their command posts in villages and digging in their small units. Their supplies
are being stuffed into houses, where they cannot be spotted from the air. It's
an old tactic that works. Just ask the Israelis.

Recent history suggests there will be strategic consequences from seeking to
blunt the Islamic State advance through airpower alone. First, the effectiveness
of pinpoint strikes will diminish quickly; it generally takes only a few weeks
for a disciplined force to become inured to the psychological effects of such
firepower.

Second, as the enemy becomes harder to kill, a greater investment will be needed
to get the same results. Soon "targeted strikes" by only one or two aircraft
will become meaningless, and more bombs will be needed. This will require a
proper air campaign, which will increase the density of aircraft overhead and
the concurrent risk to pilots. We saw this happen in the Balkans in 1999.

Third, as targets get harder to locate from the air, it will become necessary to
push ground reconnaissance units forward to find and flush Islamic State units
into the open. This task will involve greater risk not just to Kurdish pesh
merga fighters, but also to U.S. special forces units that must accompany them.

Fourth, as we increase our killing power and the Islamic State retreats into
towns and cities, images of dead children - and questions of moral
proportionality - will emerge in the global media. Eventually, terrible as it
is, the Islamic State narrative will begin to trump the U.S. narrative. When
that moment arrives, we will have no other option but to turn the aircraft
carriers around and go home.

Fifth, and most frightening, would be the terrible consequences of the Islamic
State's managing to shoot down a piloted U.S. aircraft. Remember, these are
clever and well-equipped soldiers who have downed many Syrian fighter jets over
the past three years. Terrible images of a captured U.S. flier on an Islamic
State Web site would inflame the conflict.

The bottom line is simple. In a firepower approach to war, escalation and
mission creep are both inevitable and necessary. As the enemy grows more
skilled, we will be left with two unattractive alternatives: Escalate until
tragedy occurs or accept battlefield stasis until the American people tire of
these "targeted strikes." And when we fly away with the Islamic State still
dominant on the battlefield, the terrorists will proclaim to the world that the
United States is a cowardly country that has been beaten again.

Robert H. Scales, a retired Army major general, is a former commandant of the
U.S. Army War College.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


