                             1865 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

RadioShack's clock is ticking

BYLINE: Sarah Halzack

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 817 words


In recent years, RadioShack has made a long list of changes to try to save its
ailing electronics business: In 2009, it tried unsuccessfully to rebrand as "The
Shack," in hopes that ditching the name of a dated technology would increase the
company's cool factor. About four years ago, it pivoted its focus to
smartphones, only to face headwinds as the market for those gadgets became more
saturated.

In its latest turnaround effort, RadioShack is hoping that giving customers a
hands-on experience will persuade them to linger in stores longer and to open
their wallets.

But the company indicated Thursday that it is running out of time.

RadioShack said it may have to file for bankruptcy as sales at stores open at
least a year fell 20 percent in the most recent quarter. It is seeking fresh
capital and exploring several measures to save itself, including restructuring
its debt, consolidating stores and cutting costs.

Analysts say the comeback strategy and a cash infusion might not be enough for
RadioShack to mount a comeback. "It's rearranging the deck chairs on the
Titanic," said Anthony Chukumba, senior equity research analyst at BB&T Capital
Markets. "It's not enough to move the needle."

Surging technology usage has made for choppy waters for the company. Evidence of
its struggle has been plentiful: RadioShack's stock has plunged about 96 percent
over the past decade, closing at $1.02 a share Thursday after falling as low as
55 cents in August.  The company, headquartered in Fort Worth, announced in
March that it planned to close 1,100 stores, only to have to scale back that
plan as its lenders would not approve the closure of more than 200 stores per
year over the next three years.

This comes as the company remakes some of its outposts into "highly experiential
concept stores" that allow customers to have a more hands-on experience with its
merchandise.

The company is pitching the remodeled stores as "interactive," a word that seems
ubiquitous these days as many bricks-and-mortar retailers try to create a unique
experience in their shops to help ward off online competitors. At the outpost on
Seventh Street NW in the District's bustling Gallery Place neighborhood, the
company has added a sleek headphone-demonstration station where shoppers can try
out gear from brands such as Beats by Dr. Dre and Skullcandy.  A "speaker wall"
allows customers to sample many of the speakers sold in the store by controlling
them from an iPad.  Gadgets such as the iPhone and iPad are displayed so
customers can play with them, a set-up that marks a change from before, when the
shop only showed printed renderings of what the devices looked like when taken
out of the box.

"It's really just all about improving the customer experience and delivering on
their expectations for us as a brand," said Jennifer Warren, RadioShack's chief
marketing officer.

Although these additions might mark a step forward for RadioShack, the ability
to test gadgets has long been available at competitors such as Apple and Best
Buy. Also, RadioShack plans to remodel only 100 stores by the end of the year -
a small fraction of its 4,000 locations.

"They're right now effectively catching up to what others have done," said Will
Frohnhoefer, an equity research analyst at BTIG.

RadioShack says its new concept stores have had higher-than-expected revenue
growth for mobile phones and higher sales of items including headphones and
portable speakers.

But that may not be enough, analysts said.

"Are [the new stores] interesting? Are they better? Certainly. But they have a
small number of them," said Chukumba. "They don't have nearly enough of them in
terms of their overall result."

RadioShack has long sought to position itself as a destination for
do-it-yourself tinkerers, and the redesigned stores show that the company is
doubling down on those efforts.   Ray Stevens, manager of the RadioShack store
in Gallery Place, said the company is now offering customers project ideas. In a
nod to the modern do-it-yourself ethos, the new stores also prominently display
a 3D printer. At Gallery Place, the $1,400 printer sits in a glass cube, and
store associates program it to churn out items such as cellphone cases and
figurines of Pokemon characters so shoppers can see how the cutting-edge
technology works.

"It's something that our customer is very interested in," Warren said. "They
might not be ready to go out and buy one tomorrow, but they're interested in
seeing how it works."

The revamped stores are one pillar of a broader strategy the company is
undertaking to improve its business. This year, it launched RadioShack Labs, a
joint venture with hardware developer and manufacturer PCH to allow start-ups to
bring innovative products into its stores more quickly. For the holiday season,
the company is promising a "more comprehensive gift strategy," one that includes
app-based toys and a line of drones.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


