                             182 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

South Korea Tests Missile Able to Strike Most of North

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 503 words


SEOUL, South Korea -- Amid rising military threats from North Korea, South Korea
conducted its own recent missile test, successfully launching a newly developed
ballistic missile capable of striking most of North Korea, the South Korean
Ministry of National Defense announced on Friday.

The new missile, with a range of 310 miles and able to carry a warhead of up to
2,200 pounds, was launched on March 23 from a test site in Taean, a coastal town
southwest of Seoul.

The test came a day after North Korea raised tensions by test-firing 30
short-range rockets off its east coast on March 22. Kim Min-seok, a spokesman
for the South Korean Defense Ministry, declined to say when South Korea planned
to deploy the new missile.

South Korea has been developing new missiles since Washington and Seoul revised
their defense treaty in 2012 to allow it to extend the range of its ballistic
missiles from 186 to nearly 500 miles to cope better with North Korea's
increasingly sophisticated missile and nuclear programs.

Despite its decrepit economy and chronic food shortages, North Korea has
deployed short- and medium-range missiles, and is developing an intercontinental
ballistic missile.

Pyongyang has rekindled regional tensions in recent weeks by launching a series
of short- and medium-range rockets and missiles and threatening to conduct a new
nuclear test. On Monday, the two Koreas exchanged artillery shells across a
disputed western sea border.

On Friday, Mr. Kim said that South Korea had reached a tentative conclusion that
two drones recently discovered in South Korea were flown from North Korea. A
small surveillance drone crash-landed in Paju, a town north of Seoul, on March
24, and another was discovered on Monday on a South Korean island near the
western waters where the two militaries exchanged artillery fire.

From the memory chip of a digital camera mounted on the first drone, South
Korean officials retrieved 193 aerial photos, some showing the presidential Blue
House in Seoul. But the quality of the pictures was poorer than aerial photos
available on Google Earth, and the drone lacked equipment to transmit them
wirelessly, officials here said.

Mr. Kim said that the two drones, though primitive, showed that North Korea was
developing smaller drones in addition to a ''fairly large'' fleet of bigger
unmanned aerial craft. In Parliament on Friday, South Korea's defense minister,
Kim Kwan-jin, said that North Korea might try to develop the surveillance drones
into small and hard-to-detect ''suicide bombers.''

The fact that one of the surveillance drones flew over Seoul undiscovered until
it crash-landed raised concern in South Korea. Seoul said it planned to deploy a
new radar system that could detect small low-flying drones.

Go Myong-hyun, a research fellow at the Seoul-based Asan Institute for Policy
Studies, said the lesson from the drone discoveries is ''not North Korea's
backward technology'' but its determination to develop weapons of ''small cost''
that can breach South Korea's defenses.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/05/world/asia/south-korea-tests-missile-that-can-
strike-most-of-north.html

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


