                             1837 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Obama hails progress made against Islamic State

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Liz Sly

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1136 words


President Obama said Monday that Iraqi and Kurdish forces, aided by U.S.
airstrikes, had made "important progress" against Islamic State fighters,
including recapturing a strategic dam and reversing militant advances toward the
Kurdish capital, Irbil.

Although those successes appeared to fulfill the immediate security goals he set
in authorizing airstrikes 11 days ago, however, Obama left the door open for
further U.S. action.

"The United States military will continue to carry out the limited missions that
I've authorized - protecting our personnel and facilities in Iraq in both Irbil
and Baghdad, and providing humanitarian support as we did on Mount Sinjar," he
said.

In northern Iraq, fighting continued Monday on the western bank of the lake at
the head of the Mosul Dam, and government troops were unable to enter the
facility because retreating militants had booby-trapped it, officials said.

At Badriya, in Iraq's Kurdistan region on the northernmost edge of the
battlefield, plumes of smoke could be seen rising from the dam.

Iraqi and Kurdish officials said that Islamic State was on the run after the
weekend offensive. "Our soldiers are now relaxing, swimming in the lake," said
Brig. Gen. Abdulwahab al-Saidi, commander of Iraqi special forces.

The U.S. Central Command said its forces have carried out 68 airstrikes since
Aug. 8 with a mix of fighter jets, bombers and drones. More than half, 35, took
place over the past three days in support of Iraqi and Kurdish ground forces
that on Monday retook the dam, near the Turkish border.

Earlier strikes targeted Islamic State forces that were pushing toward Irbil and
that had surrounded members of the minority Yazidi sect on a mountaintop near
the northern town of Sinjar. Separate militant advances toward Baghdad have been
stalemated for weeks about 60 miles short of the Iraqi capital.

"The threat against which airstrikes were authorized still exists," a senior
defense official said. "It's too soon to say" that there will be no more strikes
as part of humanitarian missions or to protect U.S. personnel, said the
official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to expand on the president's
remarks.

"These guys have achieved all these things," the official said of the joint
Iraqi, Kurdish and U.S. operation, "but ISIL is not done." The Islamic State is
also referred to as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, or ISIL.

Although some U.S. military personnel who were deployed to Iraq last week for a
possible rescue mission on Mount Sinjar have been withdrawn, the Pentagon said
that 749 troops remain, distributed among joint operations centers with the
Iraqis in Irbil and Baghdad, and protecting the U.S. Embassy as well as the
airport in Baghdad.

Those numbers do not include about 100 military personnel who previously had
been assigned to the embassy office of security cooperation, and the protection
of an estimated several hundred Americans at the embassy and a consulate in
Irbil.

Obama interrupted his two-week family vacation on Martha's Vineyard, Mass., to
return to Washington for a meeting with his top national security aides on
Monday morning. He held an afternoon meeting with domestic policy advisers on
the crisis in Ferguson, Mo.

Iraq has taken major steps toward the formation of a new, more inclusive
government with the naming of Prime Minister-designate Haider al-Abadi to
replace Nouri al-Malaki, Obama said, "but we're not there yet."

"I told my national security team today, and I will say publicly, that we want
to continue to communicate to politicians of all stripes in Iraq: Don't think
that because we have engaged in airstrikes to protect our people that now's the
time to let the foot off the gas and return to the same kind of dysfunction that
has so weakened the country generally," he said.

Abadi has said he expects to form a government within the next 15 days.

"When we see a credible Iraqi government," Obama said, "we are then in a
position to engage in planning" for the future. Working with Iraq and partners
in the region and beyond, he said, "we can craft the kind of joint
counterterrorism strategy" that will ultimately defeat the militants.

Asked whether he is worried about an expanding U.S. military mission, Obama said
that "if we have effective partners on the ground, mission creep is much less.
Typically, what happens with mission creep is when we start deciding that we're
the ones who have to do it all by ourselves. . . . But it's not sustainable.
It's not lasting."

"I have been firm from the start that we are not reintroducing thousands of U.S.
troops on the ground to engage in combat," he said. "We're not the Iraqi
military, we're not even the Iraqi air force. I am the commander in chief of the
United States armed forces, and Iraq is going to have to ultimately provide for
its own security.

"On the other hand," Obama said, the United States has a national security
interest in containing the Islamic State, "because, ultimately, it can pose a
threat to us."

He said he was encouraged by what appeared to be the first operational
cooperation between Iraqi and Kurdish forces, known as pesh merga, in retaking
the dam. If they continue to work together, "they will have the strong support
of the United States of America," he said.

The ground offensive to reclaim the dam, which was captured Aug. 7 in an Islamic
State swoop against a wide swath of Kurdish-controlled territory, was aided by
an additional 15 U.S. airstrikes Monday. Government forces moved rapidly toward
the facility and routed militant fighters in villages around it, but booby traps
and mines slowed their advance.

Some Islamic State fighters also were holding out at a separate dam facility on
the western edge of the structure called the Industrial Dam, said Farhad
Atrushi, the governor of Kurdistan's Dahuk province. The facility is high and
gives the defenders an advantage against the attacking forces, he said.

The rest of the dam is under government control, however, the governor said.
There also has been some scattered resistance from the militants in the town of
Tal Kayf, about 25 miles southeast of the dam. Kurdish forces have entered the
town, but groups of fighters are still circulating in the area.

However, he said, "there is almost no resistance. They are running away."

A pesh merga fighter at Badriya expressed awe for the booby traps they had left
behind.

"They are the smartest terrorists I have ever seen," said Alan Ali Mustafa,
pointing to a street lamp, a berm and an oil drum as examples of places bombs
had been found.

No Kurdish troops have been killed, but some fighters have been injured by
roadside bombs, Kurdish officials said.

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

liz.sly@washpost.com

Sly reported from Badriya. Loveday Morris in Baghdad and Craig Whitlock in
Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


