                             1871 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 16, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Ukraine's president oâ[0/00] ers deal to separatists as truce frays

BYLINE: Anthony Faiola

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: KIEV, UKRAINE


KIEV, UKRAINE - President Petro Poroshenko on Monday proposed a series of major
concessions to end the uprising by pro-Russian rebels in restive eastern
Ukraine, offering the separatists a broad amnesty and special self-governance
status for territories they occupy.

The proposal also includes protections for the Russian language and would allow
the separatist-controlled regions to elect their own judges, create their own
police forces and cultivate deeper ties to Russia - while remaining part of
Ukraine.

It would effectively formalize a concession of power to the rebels after
sweeping military setbacks in August and September forced Poroshenko to sue for
peace. Although Ukraine appeared on the verge of ending the rebel uprising weeks
ago, a reinvigorated separatist campaign - which Ukraine and NATO claim has been
backed by Russian arms and troops - left the Ukrainians facing devastating
losses. Russia denies aiding the rebels.

Contained in a draft bill that Poroshenko has submitted to parliament, the
proposal fleshed out a cease-fire deal reached with the rebels this month and
provided the most complete view yet of how far Kiev may be willing to go to end
an uprising that has cost almost 3,000 lives since April.

Poroshenko's offer came as the truce, which entered its 10th day Monday, was
fraying, with intense fighting in pockets of the east threatening to destroy the
cease-fire. On Monday, mortar rounds continued to strike residential
neighborhoods in the city of Donetsk a day after two vehicles carrying
international observers were struck by shrapnel.

Some of the elements of Poroshenko's plan resembled the so-called frozen
conflicts in which Russian-backed partisans have seized control of territories
in Georgia and Moldova, thus giving Moscow leverage over those countries and
complicating their efforts to join NATO. But Poroshenko defended his proposal,
insisting that despite the broad concessions, it would succeed in maintaining
the rebel-held territories within the boundaries of Ukraine and prevent their
independence.

"There is nothing more important for us than peace," Poroshenko told Ukrainian
political leaders Monday. "These are the key positions that will ensure it."

But the proposal also put Poroshenko on a likely collision course with
pro-Western activists and politicians in Kiev, who think he might be conceding
far too much to the Russian-backed rebels. In turn, some separatists - a band of
aligned militias that have called for creating an independent state called "New
Russia" - offered highly skeptical assessments of the offer, and others
dismissed it outright.

"We will take care of our land by ourselves," Alexander Zakharchenko, the
self-declared prime minister of the separatists' Donetsk People's Republic, told
Ukraine's Vesti news Web site. "On our land, it will be our people and our laws.
There have been no discussions about staying within the territory of Ukraine."

Poroshenko called for new local elections Nov. 9 in the rebel-controlled
regions. Miroslav Rudenko, an official with the Donetsk People's Republic, told
the Interfax news agency that such a ballot would "be held only if the situation
at the front becomes stable and if these elections unfold in compliance with the
laws of the people's republics, not Ukraine." He vowed that "neither Poroshenko
nor Ukrainian state institutions will have anything to do with these elections."

Although the special self-governance status would be guaranteed for only three
years, it appeared to allow the separatists a chance to solidify theirpower in
theregions where they have seized control, allegedly with the aid of Moscow.

Poroshenko's proposal - which must still be debated and approved by parliament -
came after a decision by Kiev to postpone Ukraine's full entry into a trade
treaty with Europe, a move that fueled further concerns of  among pro-Western
groups in Ukraine that the government is sacrificing too much. Although
Poroshenko said the worst offenders in the conflict would not be given amnesty,
critics said he was effectively rewarding violence and leaving thugs in charge
in the east.

"This is a bad proposal," said Ekaterina Butko, a leader of the Maidan movement
that toppled Ukraine's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, in February.
"It goes too far. After so many people have died, so many houses destroyed, so
many lives ruined, this would reward the people who did this."

In the east, the fragile truce has been shaken in recent days by escalating
violence. Ukrainian military spokesman Andriy Lysenko accused the rebels Monday
of having attacked checkpoints and other positions in intensified fighting over
the weekend. The Ukrainian military, he said, was forced to respond.

"The attacks of Russian mercenaries have become more active to provoke our units
to retreat from their positions," he said.

For their part, the rebels charged Monday on their Web site that Ukraine had
"repeatedly violated the cease-fire." They said the Ukrainian military fired on
separatist militias as well as residential targets in Donetsk, killing 20.

Russia's envoy to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is observing the cease-fire in Ukraine, accused the Ukrainian
military of shelling rebel and civilian positions. On Sunday, two OSCE vehicles
were damaged when observers were caught in the shelling.

"OSCE observers obtained vivid evidence that the Ukrainian military violates the
cease-fire and shells civilians with heavy weapons," the envoy, Andrei Kelin,
told Interfax.

Lysenko, however, denied that the Ukrainian military had shelled "any
residential areas and settlements" and claimed that rebels had committed
hundreds of cease-fire violations over the weekend, including an assault by more
than 200 rebels near the Donetsk airport.

Ukrainian officials also said two drones were spotted over the weekend, one
traveling toward the strategic port city of Mariupol, where heavy fighting was
recently reported.

Russia still has about 25,000 troops along its long border with Ukraine and more
than 3,000 soldiers inside the country, according to the Ukrainian government.

The United States and other NATO countries started military exercises in western
Ukraine on Monday. Ukraine has recentlysought to join the NATO alliance, but
given the uproar such a move would provoke in Moscow, there is almost no chance
of that happening.

anthony.faiola@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


