                             1844 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 22, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Gaza factories hit hard in conï¬[#x201a]ict

BYLINE: William Booth

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1336 words

DATELINE: GAZA CITY


GAZA CITY - The owners of the largest factories in Gaza, whose operations were
destroyed by artillery shells and airstrikes, say Israel intentionally targeted
the industrial sector to bring Gaza's economy to its knees.

Their charge could be difficult to prove, but hundreds of factories - including
producers of ice cream, paver tiles, soft drinks and cardboard cartons - appear
heavily damaged in a wave of destruction greater than in the past two wars in
Gaza combined.

Israeli military officials say they targeted only factories that were sources of
hostile fire, but they have yet to produce detailed evidence to bolster the
claim.

Private-sector leaders braced themselves for further losses Wednesday as Hamas
and Israel vowed to continue to fight.

At his food cannery last week, Ayman Hamada walked through the charred remains
of his life's work. He employed 150 people and produced the most popular tomato
paste in Gaza. The $5 million factory was still smoldering.

"I'm 45 years old. To be honest, I always thought of the Israelis as having
morals and good sense. This time, I am positive, they hit our factories with
intent, with a clear eye," Hamada said. "The Israelis don't make these kinds of
mistakes."

During the war, Hamada's house was damaged by an errant Israeli round. He said
he got a phone call from one of his contacts in the Israeli military's economic
division apologizing. His sister was killed in Gaza City in an airstrike. "They
didn't call about her," he said.

At his offices in downtown Gaza City, he fast-forwarded through hours of
time-stamped video taken by his five security cameras.

"You see it is completely quiet. No fighters are inside my factory. No rockets
are being launched. I make tomato sauce, not rockets. Now, wait for it, here,"
he said as he slowed the recording to show bright explosions and then raging
fire.

Hamada was mourning his sister - and his business. "I am a rich guy. Believe me,
I have money, a nice house, a fancy car. Everything you could want," he said.
"But I don't care anymore. Kill me. Drop a bomb on my head."

Leaders of the private sector in Gaza say they are squeezed between a hostile
Egypt, militants in Hamas and Israel, which enforces trade and travel
restrictions and prohibits Gaza from operating an airport or seaport. Gaza has
so few exports that they are not worth counting.

The economy already was choking before the Islamist militant group Hamas began
firing rockets. The top U.N. envoy in the Middle East, Robert Serry, said
destruction here is three times as great as it was in the 2009 war between Hamas
and Gaza. The Gaza Chamber of Commerce warns that unemployment could soar to 50
percent.

Israeli military officials insist that factories were legitimate "military
targets" because the facilities produced munitions, served as fire bases, or
harbored weapons or combatants. Gaza industries are massed alongside the border
with Israel, which became the front line.

"We did not have a policy of hitting factories," said Lt. Col. Eran
Shamir-Borer, head of the strategic affairs branch in the international law
department at the Military Advocate General's Corps. "You can't just hit the
economy of the enemy."

Shamir-Borer said such targeting could be a violation of international law and a
war crime. The Israeli military organized fact-finding assessment teams that are
reviewing "dozens of cases" with high numbers of civilian deaths, for example,
or a strike at a "sensitive site" such as a school, hospital or factory.

International law requires belligerents to take into account the principle of
"proportionality," meaning an army must weigh a military objective against
possible collateral losses.

Israel has not offered proof that the large factories it hit produced munitions.
Maps released by the Israel Defense Forces show multiple "combat posts" and
"hideouts" allegedly used by Hamas but do not include enough detail to show
whether the targets were inside or abutting factories.

Israeli surveillance drones were overhead throughout the conflict, and such
evidence may be forthcoming. Israel is also preparing to defend itself before
international investigations that already have begun. It is not a war crime to
make a mistake.

Israeli military officials blame the high number of civilian deaths on Hamas,
which operates its militia in a dense urban environment, and according to the
Israelis, employs "human shields."

In its latest count, the United Nations reports that 1,975 people were killed by
Israeli fire, most of them civilians. UNICEF says that 457 of the dead were
children. Israeli military officials say they killed approximately 900
"terrorists."

On the Israeli side, 64 soldiers and three civilians, including one foreign
worker, were killed.

Much of the world's focus has been on civilian deaths, but factory owners say
that without work, Gaza will slip further into despair, which will bolster
extremists.

"The economy was a target," said Ali El Haik, chairman of the Palestinian
Businessmen Association. "In the third week of the war, the Israelis shifted
fire to the industrial sector."

Haik waved a list of 202 factories hit but said it was incomplete. He estimated
that the final number could double. He declined to share his list with a
reporter.

"This was not an accident. This was a plan," said Hatem Hassouna, manager for
his family's contracting and trade company.

"You could argue damage to a few factories is normal in a time of war. But look
at the numbers. The strategic assets," Hassouna said.

His family's $6.5 million factory employed 230 workers and produced road pavers
and cement. Hassouna said none of the company's cement was diverted to Hamas
tunnels, which he said were constructed with materials smuggled into Gaza from
Egypt.

"We do not produce military items. Our owners do not support any political
party. Our customers are U.N. organizations and projects approved by the
Israelis," Hassouna said.

The Hassouna factory was occupied by Israeli forces on the first day of the
ground offensive. "We felt the factory was safe because they felt safe inside
it," he said.

When a cease-fire was announced, they went to their factory. "We were in shock,"
he said. "The destruction was complete. Not only tanks. They brought bulldozers
to finish the job."

Avi Segal, an authority in security studies at Ben-Gurion University in Israel,
expressed surprise that many factories were hit.

"The goal of the Israeli bombs is to cause pain, to bleed, so to speak. But the
question is who. In my opinion, it is possible this was meant to harm those
people so that they would pressure Hamas," Segal said, referring to Gaza's
factory owners.

Mohammed Al Telbani, who owns the largest industrial plant in Gaza, said his
factory was hit by 40 shells over several days, until it was consumed by fire
when tons of butter, plastic and fuel ignited.

Al Awda factory employed 450 workers and made ice cream, cookies and chips.
Telbani walked to the third floor and pointed to where Israeli shells entered
one side and exited the other. The smell was enough to make him gag.

He denied that hostile fire came from his shop. "I never allow anyone near us.
Not within a kilometer. My life is the factory. I live inside. I go to sleep at
night listening to my production lines," Telbani said. "There is no one like me
in Gaza."

"I was a symbolic target," he said.

Like prominent business people in Gaza, Telbani is a "trusted traveler," with
permits to come and go through Israel and maintain close trading relations with
Israeli counterparts.

Telbani denounced what he saw as the recklessness of the war. He said Israel is
wrong to believe that business owners can sway Hamas to change course when the
Arab League and Palestinian Authority have not been able to do so.

"Ask the Israelis what Mohammed Al Telbani ever did to them," he said. "You say
there were rockets fired from my cookie factory?" He was shaking with anger.
"Prove it."

william.booth@washpost.com

Riham Abdul Karim in Gaza and Orly Halpern in Jerusalem contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


