                             1899 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 24, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

In new book, 'Fight Club' author meets his match

BYLINE: Lily Burana

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 625 words


Chuck Palahniuk is something of a devilish demigod in gross-out social satire.
Over the years, his signature attention to minutiae and his generous hand with
carnal humor in books such as "Fight Club" and "Choke" have broadened his fan
base to include geeks and bros alike. One might call him the king of red Solo
cup literati.

In "Beautiful You," Palahniuk turns his gimlet eye to the subject of female
pleasure and the ways in which it can be manipulated to affect society and boost
the bottom line. At the center of the novel is Penny Harrigan, a 20-something
Queens-dwelling Nebraska transplant and law-office drone. She represents the
urban Everywoman who is stuck on the corporate ladder and otherwise adrift. In
the grip of a quarter-life crisis, she wonders where those years of studying
gender politics in college have led her.

"With apologies to Simone de Beauvoir," Palahniuk writes, "Penny didn't want to
be a third wave  anything. . . .  She didn't want to replicate the victories of
Susan B. Anthony and Helen Gurley Brown. She wanted a choice beyond: Housewife
versus lawyer. Madonna versus whore. An option not mired in the lingering
detritus of some Victorian-era dream. Penny wanted something wildly beyond
feminism itself."

Instead, Penny finds herself in the grip of something far more retro: a romance
with a devious cad who pretends to have her best interests - and deepest
gratifications - in mind. Their relationship begins when Penny falls down in the
law office of mega-mogul tech genius C. Linus Maxwell, and he gives her a hand
up into a radically different life as "the Nerd's Cinderella." This glamorous
but geeky playboy begins courting her heavily, and the story (clumsily) unfolds
from there.

Penny quickly realizes that she's less paramour than unwitting research
assistant as Maxwell, a.k.a. "Climax-Well," attempts to build a line of
irresistible female sex toys based on his expert manipulations of her pleasure
centers. This is an intriguing enough concept, but as Palahniuk tries to trace
Penny's trajectory from mousey nothingburger to bedroom-bound lab rat, he makes
a number of fumbles. For instance, although the book ostensibly is set in the
present, Penny charges a dress at Bonwit Teller, a store that has been out of
business since 1990.

At one of their swanky restaurant-of-the-moment rendezvous, someone orders
chicken divan, a dish that hasn't been fashionable since the "Mad Men" era. In a
story that aims, among other things, to critique current fads and fashion, these
gaffes, and others like them, are mood killers.

The plot, in which civilization topples as women abandon their responsibilities
in favor of another quick buzz, feels just as sloppy - a haphazard,
battery-operated "Brave New World." Even a hail of projectile sex toys shrieking
through the air like so many silicone scuds doesn't provide sufficient comic
relief. And the climax (sorry) revealing the motivation behind Maxwell's product
innovation never rises above "meh." Penny ultimately makes her post-feminist
vision come true, but in a way that is disappointingly primitive.

In a book so heavily invested in the pursuit of the female orgasm, it's hard to
resist the criticism that Palahniuk appears to be faking it. "Beautiful You"
feels phoned-in, a master satirist's dip in standards. The success of a comedy
such as this - however broad - depends on characters who are immediately
recognizable and plot twists that make us sit up rather than shrug. Be they big
or small, God lives in the details, even when the devil tells the tale.

bookworld@washpost.com

Burana is the author of three books, most recently, "I Love a Man in Uniform: A
Memoir of Love, War, and Other Battles."

BEAUTIFUL YOU

By Chuck Palahniuk

Doubleday. 224 pp $25.95

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


