                             1816 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 10, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Aug. 9, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 802 words

EGYPT

Muslim Brotherhood party is disbanded

Egypt's highest administrative court Saturday dissolved the political party of
the banned Muslim Brotherhood and ordered its assets liquidated in the latest
move against the 86-year-old Islamist group.

The decision against the Freedom and Justice Party precedes parliamentary
elections expected this year and prevents the group from trying to rejoin
politics a year after its leading member, Mohamed Morsi, was ousted from Egypt's
presidency by the military.

After President Hosni Mubarak was deposed in a popular uprising in 2011, the
party was founded by the Brotherhood, Egypt's historic Islamist movement, which
was created in 1928. The party went on to dominate subsequent legislative
elections.

The Middle East News Agency said the decision by the Supreme Administrative
Court cannot be appealed.

Many members of the Brotherhood and its Freedom and Justice Party have been
jailed or have fled Egypt to evade prosecution, part of the government's
crackdown against the Brotherhood that included drying up its finances and
freezing its public outreach programs.

The government declared the Brotherhood a terrorist group late last year,
accusing it of orchestrating a wave of destabilizing violence after the military
overthrew Morsi in July. The Brotherhood denies it has adopted violence as a
tactic, saying the government is scapegoating it.

- Associated Press

LEBANON

Villagers said to repel militants from Syria

Fighters identified as Islamist militants crossed into Lebanon from Syria on
Saturday, triggering an exchange of fire with Lebanese villagers who forced them
back across the border, Lebanese security sources and a villager said.

The gun battle near the village of Kfar Qouq followed a battle between gunmen
and Syrian security forces on the other side of frontier, the sources said. It
was not immediately clear whether there were any casualties.

Kfar Qouq is near the Bekaa Valley town of Rashaya and 60 miles south of the
border town of Arsal, which was seized Aug. 2 by Islamist militants who crossed
from Syria. That incursion was the most serious spillover yet of Syria's
three-year-long civil war into Lebanon.

Dozens of people were killed in five days of fighting between the army and
militants who included Islamists affiliated with the Islamic State, which has
seized territory in Syria and Iraq. The militants pulled out of Arsal to the
mountainous border zone Thursday, taking with them 19 captive soldiers.

- Reuters

UGANDA

Gays hold parade after court voids law

Scores of Ugandan homosexuals marched through sprawling botanical gardens in the
lakeside town of Entebbe on Saturday, their first pride parade since a Ugandan
court invalidated a controversial anti-gay law.

Many marchers wore masks, signaling they did not want to be publicly identified
in a country where homosexuals and their supporters face severe discrimination.

Although organizers had expected more than 500 people to attend the event, fewer
than 200 turned up, said gay activist Moses Kimbugwe, who noted that many feared
violence after a court's decision this month to overturn an anti-gay law that
had wide support among Ugandans.

"We are here to walk for those who can't walk, who are afraid to walk," Kimbugwe
said. "We are here to celebrate our rights."

Uganda's Constitutional Court ruled that the anti-gay law enacted only five
months ago was illegal because it was passed during a parliamentary session that
lacked a quorum. Some lawmakers have pledged to try to reintroduce the same
legislation when parliament resumes this month.

- Associated Press

Pakistani cleric says supporters were killed in clash: Fighting between
Pakistani security forces and supporters of a fiery anti-government cleric
killed seven people as they were heading toward a planned demonstration in the
eastern city of Lahore, the cleric claimed. Authorities have disputed
Tahir-ul-Qadri's assertion and put the death toll from clashes at two, including
a police officer. Qadri, who led anti-corruption protests in January 2013 that
paralyzed Pakistan's capital, has a network of mosques and religious centers
across the country. His supporters briefly abducted six police officers in the
fighting, which began Friday in Punjab province and continued into Saturday
morning.

Yemeni al-Qaeda suspects killed in U.S. strike:  A U.S. drone strike on a house
in central Yemen killed three suspected al-Qaeda militants, Yemeni security
officials said. The officials said the aircraft struck the house in the Obeida
Valley in Marib province, where al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula has a strong
presence. A Web site affiliated with the Yemeni al-Qaeda branch meanwhile
confirmed earlier reports that militants killed 14 soldiers Friday near the city
of Shibam in the eastern province of Hadramawt.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


