                             1897 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 23, 2014 Thursday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Syrian fighters to fill only a defensive role

BYLINE: Rajiv Chandrasekaran

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1386 words


The Syrian opposition force to be recruited by the U.S. military and its
coalition partners will be trained to defend territory, rather than to seize it
back from the Islamic State, according to senior U.S. and allied officials, some
of whom are concerned that the approach is flawed.

Although moderate Syrian fighters are deemed essential to defeating the Islamic
State under the Obama administration's strategy, officials do not believe the
newly assembled units will be capable of capturing key towns from militants
without the help offorward-deployed U.S. combat teams, which President Obama has
so far ruled out. The Syrian rebel force will be tasked instead with trying to
prevent the Islamic State from extending its reach beyond the large stretches of
territory it already controls.

"We have a big disconnect within our strategy. We need a credible, moderate
Syrian force, but we have not been willing to commit what it takes to build that
force," said a senior U.S. official involved in Syria and Iraq operations who,
like others cited in this report, spoke on the condition of anonymity because he
was not authorized to discuss the training program.

Military commanders are reluctant to push Syrian fighters into full-scale
battles with well-armed militants if they cannot summon close air support and
medical evacuations, mindful of how fledgling forces in Iraq and Afghanistan
crumbled without that assistance during the early years of the wars in those
nations. But U.S. military aircraft cannot provide that aid without American or
allied troops in close proximity to provide accurate targeting information on
secure radio channels.

Military officials also want U.S. and allied special operations troops to advise
opposition forces if those forces are thrust into combat, helping them to fight
effectively and reducing the chances that the new units will disintegrate in the
heat of battle.

"You cannot field an effective force if you're not on the ground to advise and
assist them," said a senior U.S. military officer with extensive experience in
training the Iraqi and Afghan militaries.

Obama's unwillingness to deploy ground combat forces is rooted in concern that
American troops would be drawn into a long, bloody war in the Middle East.

In announcing the campaign to confront the Islamic State, the president said the
United States would "strengthen the opposition as the best counterweight to
extremists." The Pentagon subsequently announced that the U.S. military would
seek to train as many as 5,000 Syrian fighters a year, aiming to build what
Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel called an "effective opposition force, not just a
hit-and-run group of rebels."

The Obama administration's plan calls for U.S. Special Operations troops to
recruit moderate Syrian opponents of the Islamic State from refugee communities
in Jordan, Turkey and other nations. They will be flown to Saudi Arabia, trained
for about eight weeks, and then sent into the small enclaves of Syria already
controlled by the Free Syrian Army and other moderate opponents of the Islamic
State. The first units are expected to be deployed in roughly six months.

"The plan is for them to safeguard cleared areas," said a senior official of an
Arab nation that is part of the U.S.-led coalition and who has been briefed on
the training program. "They will end up being a defensive force more than an
offensive force."

Lt. Gen. William Mayville, the director of operations for the Pentagon's Joint
Staff, said the opposition fighters would receive "basic training to secure
their villages." The force, he said, "will have some effect," but he
acknowledged that the fighters "won't have the decisive effect" in the battle
against the Islamic State.

A defensive opposition force also could allow President Bashar al-Assad's
government to regain territory it has lost to the Islamic State, which has been
pummeled - but remains far from defeated - by hundreds of U.S. and coalition
airstrikes over the past month.

The administration has made little secret of the fact that reversing Islamic
State gains in Iraq is the primary goal of its military strategy in the region.
Airstrikes in Syria, senior administration officials have said, are not designed
to push out the militants but to destroy the infrastructure, sources of revenue
and command structure that have enabled them to operate successfully in Iraq.

Those officials maintain that it is premature to focus on the question of
whether U.S. advisers should deploy with the new Syrian force. A more pressing
concern, they contend, is the challenge of recruiting willing, competent
fighters from Syrian refugee communities. U.S. officials do not want to pull
away members of the Free Syrian Army who already are fighting in Syria, but they
worry that many of those who have fled the country as refugees may not want to
return to their war-ravaged homeland.

The officials said they intend for U.S. troops to use the basic training
sessions, which will focus on unit discipline and elementary combat skills, to
identify promising candidates for more advanced courses. Those individuals could
be schooled to engage in more offensive missions.

"We will evolve and learn as the program proceeds," said a senior Defense
Department official. For now, the official said, "there is an enormous focus on
building leadership structure."

The first phase, Mayville said, "is identify and vet them, create a relationship
and give them basic training." Then, he said, they will "go back and protect
their communities."

Thus far, senior military leaders have concurred in public with Obama's decision
not to send ground combat troops to Syria and Iraq, but the country's top
military officer, Gen. Martin Dempsey, has said that if he determines that it is
necessary for U.S. advisers to accompany local forces on attacks against Islamic
State targets, he would make such a recommendation to the president.

Administration officials say technological advancements will allow the U.S.
military to provide a degree of air support to Syrian forces without having to
stand shoulder to shoulder with them. They note that in Iraq, U.S. commanders
recently employed surveillance aircraft, including drones, to identify Islamic
State militants near the Mosul Dam, striking them in proximity to Kurdish
forces.

But military officials regard those Kurdish forces as far more seasoned than the
newly assembled Syrian fighters will be. "This isn't just about coordinating
airstrikes," the senior military officer said. "It's about keeping up morale,
attending to injuries, ensuring order within the ranks. You can't do that from
afar."

U.S. officials are talking to the governments of Jordan, Qatar and Turkey about
opening additional training camps in those nations, should the volume of
recruits exceed capacity in the two facilities that are being established in
Saudi Arabia.

Skeptics of the administration's policy within the Pentagon and in Congress
worry that the recruitment effort will be hindered by a lack of a clear U.S.
commitment to assist the new force. They also argue that the administration's
unwillingness to commit to toppling Assad - Obama has said he wants to see a
"political solution" to the civil war in Syria - will lead many moderate
opponents to sit on the sidelines.

"It's immoral to ask these young men to fight and die when we're not going to
protect them from Bashar Assad's barrel bombs or from ISIS," said Sen. John
McCain (R-Ariz.), a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, referring to
the Islamic State by a common acronym. "You're not going to get people to
volunteer to do that."

The senior Defense Department official said the administration is "committed to
making sure these forces succeed." Other officials said those steps could
involve the use of covert operatives and private contractors reporting to the
CIA, not the Pentagon, who could provide combat advice to Syrian forces and
summon air support. Another option under consideration is to ask Arab nations
that have participated in airstrikes on Islamic State targets to send some of
their special operations units to Syria.

But the senior Arab official said such a request would be unlikely to receive an
enthusiastic response among coalition members if the United States did not also
commit troops.

rajiv.chandrasekaran@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


