                             1867 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 337 words


The hunt for Spinosaurus  The National Geographic Museum will unveil a replica
of the world's first semiaquatic dinosaur.  B1

Ruling in Pistorius case  The double-amputee Olympian was found not guilty of
murder but could be convicted of a negligent killing.  A7

the region

 A high-tech entrepreneur who dropped out of the University of Maryland pledged
a record $31 million gift. B1

The 200th anniversary of the song that became the national anthem is cause for
celebration at Fort McHenry, where the banner yet waves. B1

Alexandria detectives looked for any links between the killings of a D.C.
corrections official and a Falls Church cafe worker. B6

Officials blamed the weekend death of a Towson University student on head and
neck injuries incurred when she fell against a sliding glass door. B6

The estimated cost of building a light-rail Purple Line in the Maryland suburbs
has risen by $56 million, to $2.43 billion, a report said. B6

Montgomery County officials have purchased several drones for a year-long study
of their potential for monitoring fire scenes and other emergencies. B3

Federal prosecutors in the District  said they will launch the first unit of its
kind in a U.S. attorney's office to identify potential wrongful convictions. B5

obituaries

 Richard Kiel, 74, was the hulking 7-foot-2 actor best remembered as the James
Bond villain Jaws. B7

the economy

 Lululemon, the retailer that helped put yoga pants on the fashion map, reported
flat quarterly sales. A17

Data soon will disappear  from the Recovery.gov Web site because the government
board that oversees the site is not renewing its license with Dun & Bradstreet.
A20

RadioShack said it could have  to file for bankruptcy. A16

Military academies and technology schools get high marks for salaries of recent
graduates, beating the Ivies. A15

A bill that would turn over the assets of employee pension plans to insurance
companies gained support. A16

the world

 The United States and the European Union  announced stricter sanctions against
Russia. A6

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


