                             1817 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             August 10, 2014 Sunday
                                Regional Edition

Hidingbehind [redacted]

BYLINE: Dana Milbank

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 804 words


If the CIA spends half as much energy finding terrorists as it has spent
fighting Congress, we should feel very safe.

The spooks, taking a break from the mundane work of protecting the nation, have
lately been turning their spycraft against the lawmakers who are supposed to be
overseeing them. The not-so-secret mission: to block the Senate Intelligence
Committee's report on tortu--, uh, enhanced interrogation methods.

First, CIA officials broke into computers that were being used by the committee
- a clear constitutional violation - and then, using false information, tried to
have committee staffers prosecuted. CIA Director John Brennan apologized for
spying on the senators' activities. President Obama, in a news conference on
Aug. 1, said the intelligence committee was free to issue its report, "the
declassified version that will be released at the pleasure of the Senate
committee."

But Brennan's apology must not have been sincere, and the committee, to its
displeasure, learned that the CIA has "redacted" - read: censored - key elements
of that report. Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), chairman of the committee,
said this week that she couldn't release the report because the CIA had
attempted to redact key details that "eliminate or obscure key facts that
support the report's findings and conclusions."

James Clapper, the director of national intelligence who has already admitted
giving false information to Congress about the National Security Agency's
activities, defended his efforts to undermine the torture report. "More than 85
percent of the committee report has been declassified," he said in a statement,
"and half of the redactions are in footnotes."

Clapper's word-count defense can be summarized in one word: dubious. The
"footnotes" are not mere afterthoughts in such reports; that's where the
evidence is. And the administration's claim that it has struck only 15 percent
of the words is about as compelling as claiming the CIA spied on only 15 percent
of senators.

"While Director Clapper may be technically correct that the document has been 85
percent declassified," Sen. Mark Udall (D-Colo.), a member of the intelligence
committee, said in a statement, "it is also true that strategically placed
redactions can make a narrative incomprehensible."

Strategically placed redactions? Well, yes, that could cause [redacted],
particularly if it were done to [redacted]. Imagine Clapper trying to do his job
while operating under the 85 percent rule, in which one in every six or seven
words goes missing:

"Director, the prisoner is not [redacted]. Do we have your permission to
[redacted]?"

Or: "Sir, the Russians say they will [redacted] Snowden if we agree to
[redacted] on [redacted]. What should we do?"

Imagine Clapper's anxiety when he gets a call saying the president wants to see
him in the Oval Office at [redacted] to get his briefing on [redacted], or when
he is asked to authorize a drone strike right in the capital of [redacted].

It would be enough to make Clapper [redacted] himself.

To accept the CIA's claim that the torture report must be censored is to embrace
the notion that the people's representatives - Democrats and Republicans alike -
cannot be trusted to keep truly sensitive information (rather than embarrassing
disclosures) out of the public domain.

"The Senate Intelligence Committee is not the ACLU, and if they're saying more
can and should be released, one suspects that is likely to be true," says Steven
Aftergood, who monitors government secrecy for the Federation of American
Scientists.

Obama's overall failure to deliver on his promise to create a more transparent
government has been one of the greatest disappointments of his leadership.
Aftergood says the administration hasn't improved on the record of the highly
secretive George W. Bush administration. And in some cases, such as leak
investigations, it has been worse: The administration is now deciding whether to
seek to jail a New York Times journalist, James Risen, for protecting his
sources in a national security case.

Last week, the House Intelligence Committee asked the intelligence agencies to
declassify the committee's report on the 2012 Benghazi attacks. The committee's
top Democrat says the report finds "no intelligence failure," so maybe Clapper
and his colleagues will use their redaction pens more lightly. But they have
shown little inclination to relax their reflexive secrecy, even if it's in their
interest.

The intelligence agencies' slow-walking of the torture report and the clashes
with lawmakers have only drawn more attention to the matter and made them look
worse. Why would the intelligence community handle this with so little
intelligence? And why would the president let it get away with this?

There can be only one explanation, and that is [redacted].

Twitter: @Milbank

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


