                             1928 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

U.S. justified killings by citing terror law

BYLINE: Larry Neumeister

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 456 words


NEW YORK The Obama administration justified using drones to kill Americans
suspected of terrorism overseas by citing the war against al Qaeda and by saying
a surprise attack against an American in a foreign land would not violate the
laws of war, according to a previously secret government memo released Monday.

The memo provided legal justification for the September 2011 killing in Yemen of
Anwar Al Awlaki, an al Qaeda leader and one time cleric at a northern Virginia
mosque who had been born in the United States, and another U.S. citizen, Samir
Khan, who edited al Qaeda's Internet magazine. An October 2011 strike also
killed Abdulrahman al Awlaki, al Awlaki's teenage son and also a U.S. citizen.

The memo, written by a Justice Department official, said the killing of al
Awlaki was justified under a law passed by Congress soon after the 9/11 attacks.
The law empowered the president to use force against organizations that planned,
authorized and committed the attacks.

Al Awlaki had been involved in an abortive attack against the United States and
was planning other attacks from his base in Yemen, the memo said. It said the
authority to use lethal force abroad may apply in appropriate circumstances to a
U.S. citizen who is part of the forces of an enemy organization.

The memo stated the Defense Department operation was being carried out against
someone who was within the core of individuals against whom Congress had
authorized the use of "necessary and appropriate" force. It said the killing was
justified as long as it was carried out in accord with applicable laws of war.

The 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan released the memo, portions
of which were blacked out, after the American Civil Liberties Union and The New
York Times filed a lawsuit seeking any documents in which Justice Department
lawyers had discussed the highly classified "targeted killing" program. The
court ordered the memo disclosed after noting President Barack Obama and other
senior officials had commented publicly on the subject.

White House spokesman Josh Earnest, responding to criticism from groups that
complained that it took a court order to get the memo released, said the
administration worked through the legal system "to produce a redacted document
that protected national security interests while at the same time trying to live
up to our commitment to transparency."

"In this case, I think even the groups that sharply criticized us would call
this a win for transparency," Earnest said.

Jameel Jaffer, an ACLU lawyer who argued the case before the 2nd Circuit, said
the memo will shed light on the administration's reasoning, but "the public
still knows scandalously little about who the government is killing and why."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


