                             1906 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           November 28, 2013 Thursday
                              THU REGIONAL Edition

The Open Forum Letters to the Editor

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 31A

LENGTH: 562 words


The Pilgrims weren't Puritans

Re: "A promise unfulfilled on Thanksgiving," Nov. 24 Perspective article.

Chip Colwell Chanthaphonh should know better. The Pilgrims were not Puritans.
They were Separatists who wished to separate themselves from the Church of
England. The Puritans came later to the Boston area. They wished to "purify" the
Church of England. It may not make much difference to us today, but at the time
there was a significant difference.

Charleen Doty Roberts, Highlands Ranch

The extent of government spying

Re: "Slowly, spying picture is coming into focus," Nov. 24 editorial.

The Denver Post's editorial board is rightfully concerned about the extent of
our government spying on Americans in the name of national security.

The public is subject to the interception, collection, sorting, monitoring of or
access to our personal phone calls; e mails; activities on Facebook, Google,
Skype and YouTube; Internet searches; credit card records; GPS locations; health
and prescription records; license plate locations; property records; faxes;
document files; DNA; grocery store purchases and spending habits; library
records; attorney/client communications; audio and video chats; photographs; e
mail contact lists; cellphone locations; insurance information; religious
activities; mail; packages; metadata; workplace interactions; bank accounts;
connection logs; and any walk down a public street.

We also get facial recognition systems; comprehensive surveillance cameras and
videos; wiretaps; black boxes; retina scans; domain awareness systems;
XKeyscore; PRISM; MUSCULAR; drones and satellites.

Need we go on?

Diane and Jim Schrack, Highlands Ranch

Dangers of U.S. nuclear arsenal

Re: "Air Force's nuclear missile force; Misconduct. Angst. Fatigue," Nov. 21
news story.

Thank you for publicizing the problems with keeping so many nuclear missiles on
active alert. While the article focused on staff burnout, the resulting
questions about public safety deserve attention as well. If even one of the 49
missiles scattered across northeastern Colorado were to accidentally detonate,
the 50 mile radioactive "dead zone" could likely include Greeley, Fort Collins
or Fort Morgan and the wind could carry radioactive fallout to Denver or across
our farmlands, threatening our health and food supply.

A recent book by Eric Schlosser, "Command and Control," details the history of
the nuclear industry and the accidents and near misses over the years. It is due
to luck that these fatal accidents have not resulted in more damage to people or
the environment.

Does the possession of and threat to use nuclear missiles make us safer, or do
nuclear weapons endanger our safety and the health of our planet?

Mary Casper, Bailey

Plow bicycle paths, too, Denver

If they don't get plowed, bike paths and bike lanes are worse than useless
they're a dangerous temptation. To get to work last Friday, I gambled and took
the Cherry Creek bike path instead of the road, hoping to find it cleared. Au
contraire: The path was plenty icy, and when I finally, slowly backtracked to
the road, the bike lane was covered as well. I'm just glad I found out in the
morning light instead of while biking home in the dark.

Denver encourages biking in many ways, but should set a better example for other
fitness oriented cities by paying as much mind to its bike paths as its roads.

Margaret McCall, Denver

LOAD-DATE: December 01, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


