                             1968 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 29, 2013 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

China sends warplanes to new air defense zone

BYLINE: Simon Denyer;Chico Harlan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1469 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


China sends warplanes to patrol new air defense zone Beijing responds to
incursions by U.S., Japan and South Korea into disputed area.

BEIJING - China said Thursday that it had sent warplanes to patrol its newly
declared maritime air defense identification zone, as a dispute over an island
chain ratcheted up into a dangerous regional standoff.

The move came after Japan and South Korea said Thursday that they had sent
surveillance aircraft of their own into the area in the East China Sea. The
United States has joined many of China's neighbors in condemning the decision
last   week to establish the zone and defied Beijing by flying two B-52 bombers
through the area Tuesday.

A Chinese air force spokesman, Col. Shen Jinke, said several fighter jets and an
early-warning aircraft had been sent on "defensive" air patrols in the zone to
"strengthen the monitoring of aerial targets," following an earlier patrol
shortly after the zone was announced, the official Xinhua News Agency reported.

Establishing the zone Saturday, China had warned that any noncommercial aircraft
entering it without notice could face "defensive emergency measures." Concern
immediately surfaced because the zone overlapped similar zones operated by Japan
and South Korea, encompassing islands controlled by those countries but claimed
by China.

But in a sign of the mixed signals emanating from Beijing this week, a Defense
Ministry spokesman said in response to a question that it was "incorrect" to say
that countries had the right to shoot down unidentified planes entering air
defense identification zones (ADIZs).

Such zones were neither "no-fly zones" nor territorial airspace, Col. Yang Yujun
told a news conference, but simply meant to give nations time to react to
possible threats. "The country delimiting the zone has the right to identify and
ascertain the intentions and attributes of aircraft from foreign countries and
make the relevant response according to different situations and degree of
threats."

Experts say China's decision to establish the zone, apparently imposed
unilaterally, inflamed an already tense situation and raised the possibility of
military conflict. The latest flights intensify the game of dare being played
above Asia's contested maritime territory.

"Thus far, Beijing has defined its new ADIZ in a categorical manner that ignores
the complexities and risks involved," said Andrew Erickson, an associate
professor at the U.S. Naval War College.

"It is to be hoped that Beijing will choose to exercise restraint and allay
concerns by its neighbors and other users of the international airspace in
question by offering specific clarifications and reassurances," Erickson said.
"Otherwise, suspicions will grow that the 'new type of great power relations'
Beijing promotes is merely intended to signal that others should yield to a
rising China's principled positions."

Analysts said China had established the zone to bolster its claims to a chain of
tiny, rocky islands administered by Japan, to strengthen its hand in any future
negotiations and to match its rival's own air defense identification zone,
established in 1969. In Beijing, it was also seen as a response to Japan's
threat, made in September, to shoot down any Chinese drones that flew above the
disputed islands on mapping missions.

Yang, the Defense Ministry spokesman, criticized Japan for its decision to
purchase several of the disputed islets from a private landowner last year and
complained that its warships had also interrupted Chinese military maneuvers in
international waters in October. "So who is changing the status quo
unilaterally? Who intensified tensions in the region? Who intensified
contradictions unceasingly? And who is undermining regional security?" he asked.

But experts said China's decision to establish the zone could have backfired,
uniting several of its neighbors in condemnation and providing the United States
a perfect opportunity to demonstrate its commitment to ensuring stability in the
Asia-Pacific region with its fly-through.

Chris Johnson of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in
Washington said Beijing's muted reaction to the U.S. flights, and the fact that
there had apparently been no contact with Japanese or South Korean planes this
week, suggested that China might not enforce the zone as aggressively as first
feared, although that might not go down well at home.  "I wonder if they haven't
backed themselves into a little bit of a corner," he said.

Announcing the zone unilaterally - and using relatively threatening language -
had turned out to be something of a public relations disaster for President Xi
Jinping's government, which is usually more sure-footed, he said. "The rollout
was terrible," he added.

On Tuesday, Beijing reacted calmly to the U.S. challenge, simply noting that it
had identified and monitored the American warplanes. That response drew
criticism from citizens on Chinese micro-blogging sites, and even from state
news media.

The nationalist Global Times newspaper said that the United States had engaged
China in a "war of public opinion" and that Beijing had "failed to make a timely
and ideal response."

"Beijing needs to reform its information release mechanism to win the
psychological battles waged by Washington and Tokyo," the paper said in an
editorial.

Spokesman Shen said the Chinese air force would remain on high alert and would
take "relevant measures according to different air threats" to defend the
country's airspace, Xinhua reported.

In another editorial, the Global Times said Japan, not the United States, was
the target of the new zone and suggested that enforcement of the zone would be
selective.

"If the U.S. does not go too far, we will not target it in safeguarding our air
defense zone," the newspaper wrote. "What we should do at present is to firmly
counter provocative actions from Japan."

A spokesman for the Japanese government said Thursday that its Lockheed
Martin-made turboprop patrol planes have been conducting routine flights in
China's air defense identification zone since Beijing's declaration. The
spokesman did not say specifically when the flights have taken place or how many
there have been. Japan has not been notifying China of its activities.

"We have no particular comment beyond saying that the Japanese government will
continue to operate according to the existing policy of protecting its territory
calmly and firmly and it will maintain its surveillance and reconnaissance
activities," said Masaru Sato, a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman.

Japan's Defense Ministry did not confirm the flights, but one official,
requesting anonymity to describe the situation, said that Japan is "conducting
the same monitoring activity as before, and we will not change or restrict such
activities."

China and Japan remain key trade partners and their governments have a strong
incentive to avoid armed conflict, but they also have to cater to powerful
nationalist audiences at home -  making the management of this dispute a
delicate balancing act.

South Korea's flight took place Wednesday near the area of a South Korean
maritime research center, built atop a submerged rock that Seoul and Beijing
contest.

The flight marks a "clear sign that Seoul will not recognize the new airspace
claim," South Korea's Yonhap news agency said in its report. Yonhap also
reported Thursday that China had rejected Seoul's request to redraw its air
defense identification zone and eliminate an overlap with the zone of South
Korea. The South in turn said it may expand its own zone.

In Asia's waters, territorial disputes go back decades or centuries and draw in
nearly every nation in the region. China has clashed in the South China Sea with
Vietnam and the Philippines. In the East China Sea, the nastiest dispute of late
has been between Japan and China over several uninhabited islets and rocks known
as the Senkaku in Japanese and the Diaoyu in Chinese. Since the Japanese
purchase of the islets   last year, China has increased its surveillance - both
with vessels and aircraft - in the area, and Japan has frequently scrambled its
own fighter jets in response.

U.S. officials said China's air defense identification zone needlessly raised
tensions between Asia's two largest economies. In his trip next week through the
region, Vice President Biden plans to convey those concerns to China, a senior
Obama administration official told reporters Wednesday.

"There is an emerging pattern of behavior by China that is unsettling to China's
own neighbors," the official said. Biden will raise questions "about how China
operates in international space and how China deals with areas of disagreement
with its neighbors."

simon.denyer@washpost.com

chico.harlan@washpost.com

Harlan reported from Seoul. Li Qi contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


