                             1940 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                               FRI SCENE Edition

"Homeland" gets a big (needed) reboot

BYLINE: Joanne Ostrow

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6C

LENGTH: 495 words


The "Homeland" casting department got the baby just right: She looks like her
father, blue eyed, red haired Brody (Damian Lewis) whose memory hangs over the
story. And not in a good way. Beyond the baby, the series has some work to do to
extricate its characters from the hole it dug in season 3.

When season 4 of "Homeland" premieres with two episodes Sunday (7 9 p.m.
locally) on Showtime, the task is to restore Carrie Mathison (Claire Danes) to
an active anti terrorism role and to put the Brody storyline behind us.

As this season begins, Carrie will bounce from Kabul to Islamabad shot in Cape
Town South Africa and CIA headquarters, checking in with her daughter, feeling
the tug of her work, and demonstrating again and again just how crazy/brilliant
she is.

The show will delve into PTSD and the spy culture, asking viewers to imagine the
psychological stresses. Specifically, the opener challenges viewers to
experience the guilt when a fly over bombing goes wrong.

In "The Drone Queen," Carrie is a stand in for America at large as she orders a
bomb strike on a farmhouse where a high value target is said to be. The
farmhouse explodes on the giant video screen at the CIA outpost. Horrific death
and destruction rain down as Carrie calmly returns to her room, puts on earplugs
and an eye shade, takes an Ambien and goes to sleep.

"It's a job," she says later.

Are we collectively so numb to the horror? The point could be made more subtly.

A snafu involving CIA Chief of Station in Pakistan Sandy Bachman, played by
Corey Stoll ("House of Cards"), keeps the first hour moving. It's in the second
hour, when Carrie is recalled to Langley, Va., and pauses to confront Frannie,
her infant, that the writing falls flat.

It's painfully bad: She sits in her car with the baby in front of Brody's old
house, explaining that "I loved him so much." Please, let us be done with all
that. (During that drawn out scene, the audience must pray no members of Brody's
family emerge. Imagine if Dana Brody popped out the front door. Thankfully,
executive producer Alex Ganza has said we've probably seen the last of those
characters.)

New faces this season include Raza Jaffrey as Aasar Khan and Suraj Sharma ("Life
of Pi") as Ayaan Ibrahim. Nazanin Boniadi, a recurring character last season as
Fara Sherazi, has become a series regular.

Let's acknowledge the series was much better in seasons 1 and 2 than in the last
round. ("Homeland" won the Emmy in 2012 for outstanding drama series, and earned
Emmy awards for Danes and Damian Lewis as well; in 2013 it scored a nomination;
this year it wasn't even nominated as a series, although Danes was.)

A major reboot in season 4 is necessary. The Brody baby mommy subplot will be
what the counter terrorism folks might call collateral damage.

Here's hoping the drama can avoid the credibility problems of past seasons while
launching a taut and topical new story.

Joanne Ostrow: 303 954 1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp

LOAD-DATE: October 07, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison in "Homeland." Provided by Showtime

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


