                             1998 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                          November 13, 2013 Wednesday

Roundup: Staff Departures, an 'Incorrect Promise' and More

BYLINE: MARGARET SULLIVAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 754 words



HIGHLIGHT: A variety of items from the public editor&#8217;s desk.


Here's a roundup of items from all over that may be interesting to Times readers
and to the readers of this blog:

1. The Great Exodus? | Several news sites, including The Huffington Post and The
Daily Beast, have written in the past couple of days about the loss of some
crucial staff members at The Times.

Among them are: Eric Wilson, the former Styles writer, who has gone to InStyle
magazine; Richard L. Berke, a longtime politics correspondent-editor and lately
director of video content development, who has gone to Politico; and, most
recently, Brian Stelter, the media writer, who will move to CNN. All of this
comes in the wake of Nate Silver's departure to ESPN and the loss of some major
names in newsroom management at the beginning of this year.

One thing to remember is that The Times has a huge newsroom staff - about 1,100
people - and that it continues to hire people and groom new talent. (It's one of
the few newsrooms that hasn't seen major staff cuts over the past few years.)

Dean Baquet, the managing editor, told The Daily Beast, "I really don't think
there's a broader issue at play here," noting that he himself left The Times for
a few years, only to return in 2007. My sense is that these departures are
notable, and certainly qualify as bad news, but they fall short of a disastrous
trend.

Marc Tracy provides a cogent analysis in The New Republic.

2. About That Secret Deal | A number of readers wrote to me about The Times's
recent editorial about the Trans-Pacific Partnership. They were disturbed about
what they saw as the editorial board's approval of a plan that hasn't been made
public. One reader, Jonathan Cohn, put it this way: "I found it strange and
rather disconcerting to read the glowing praise that the Times editorial board
had for the Trans-Pacific Partnership last week. Why is The Times so willing to
praise a deal it has not read?"

I asked the editorial page editor, Andrew Rosenthal, about this. He responded by
drawing a distinction. The editorial, he said, does not praise the specifics of
the deal but the idea of negotiating one. "We never endorsed any text of the
agreement, secret or otherwise," he added. "We said they were negotiating this
deal, which we think is a good idea (to negotiate a deal) and then said what
would constitute a worthwhile agreement."

(WikiLeaks on Wednesday revealed the provisions of the agreement, according to
the journalist Kevin Gosztola.)

3. The President's 'Incorrect Promise' | Last week, I questioned an editorial
that used the words "clearly misspoke" to describe President Obama's statements
about whether Americans could keep their current health care providers under the
new law. On Wednesday, a similar instance arisesin a news article, and some
readers are criticizing the words "incorrect promise" in the following passage:

The split between lawmakers and the White House reflects the dilemma the
president finds himself in as he seeks to follow through on last week's
acknowledgment about his incorrect promise on health care coverage. Hundreds of
thousands of people have received cancellation notices from health insurance
companies because their plans do not conform with minimum standards set by the
new law.

It is an awkward phrase. What, exactly, is an incorrect promise, anyway?
Something more direct like "false promise" would have been both clearer and more
accurate.

4.  A Global Look at Ombudsmen | Finally, and a bit on the "meta" side of
things, a former Wall Street Journal reporter and a former managing editor for
The Nation, Karen Rothmyer, has written a comprehensive report (PDF) on
ombudsmen worldwide. After recently completing a stint as the first public
editor for The Star newspaper in Nairobi, Kenya, she is now a visiting fellow at
Cambridge University. Her report, with the headline, "Giving the Public a Say:
How news ombudsmen ensure accountability, build trust and add value to media
organizations," provides a global perspective, noting a decline in the United
States and greater interest abroad.

Among her case studies is one from The Times - my criticism of editors' decision
to withhold the location of a drone base in Yemen, and I am among the public
editors or ombudsmen interviewed in her report.


     ·    Editorial Is Under Fire for Saying President 'Clearly Misspoke' on
          Health Care
     ·    The Story Behind the Racial Profiling Article in The Times
     ·    Was a Question About Women and the 'Great American Novel' Sexist?
     ·    Behind the Scenes on Changes to a Story on Pope Francis
     ·    An Unacceptable Headline Atop a Questionable Article


LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


