                             1993 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                           November 7, 2013 Thursday

Beijing Seeking a Break in the Impasse over North Korea

BYLINE: JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 808 words



HIGHLIGHT: Recent months have seen a flurry of diplomatic meetings aimed at the
resumption of negotiations over North Korea&#8217;s nuclear weapons program.


For a diplomat who reportedly does not like to fly - no-smoking cabins cut into
his nicotine habit - Wu Dawei, China's special representative for Korean
Peninsula affairs, has been a busy man.

Mr. Wu visited Washington last week, and now he is in the North Korean capital,
Pyongyang, presumably conveying what he learned about the Obama administration's
requirements for a return to negotiations on North Korea's nuclear weapons
program.

Washington has made clear that it wants concrete steps by North Korea on
denuclearization - such things as a freeze in uranium production and inspections
by the International Atomic Energy Agency - before it will consider a new round
of six-party talks. The talks, which involved the United States, North Korea,
South Korea, China, Japan and Russia, fell apart in 2009.

Beijing, however, wants to jump-start talks with North Korea without such
preconditions, and Mr. Wu met with Washington officials to try to persuade the
United States to return to the talks. Washington told Mr. Wu that would not be
possible under the current circumstances.

Can Mr. Wu bridge the difference between Washington and Pyongyang? Will he be
able to find out what the North Koreans might be prepared to do to satisfy
Washington?

In the short term, that seems unlikely, although, since President Obama and the
Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, met in California last summer, Washington appears to
be putting great store in using China as the broker that can best nudge North
Korea forward.

China has gotten tougher with North Korea, but not tough enough to elicit moves
that would meet the Obama administration's demands, said a senior administration
official, who declined to be named in keeping with protocol.

The administration is convinced that North Korea, which conducted a third
nuclear test this year, has no interest in scrapping its nuclear arsenal. North
Korea keeps reminding the world that it considers itself a nuclear state, and
that its "military-first" policy requires that most of its resources go to its
armed forces.

With that in mind, the United States has enhanced its missile defenses in
northeastern Asia, a buildup that brings these weapons closer to China, a
situation distasteful to Beijing. For Washington, the stepped-up missile
defenses can be used as leverage with China to pressure North Korea to give up
its nuclear weapons.

The logjam has not deterred efforts outside official channels to ease a path
back to six-party talks.

Two former American negotiators, Stephen Bosworth and Robert L. Gallucci,
recently attended meetings in Berlin and London where North Korean officials
were present. The pair then wrote an op-ed piece saying that the Obama
administration should abandon its hard-line posture and reopen talks with North
Korea. That argument has gotten little traction inside the White House, the
senior administration official said, where it is seen as having been overtaken
by developments.

Another former American official, Evans J.R. Revere, agreed in a paper for the
Brookings Institution with the pessimistic conclusion of Mr. Bosworth and Mr.
Gallucci that in the absence of dialogue there was little to prevent North
Korea's development of more and better nuclear weapons. But Mr. Revere counseled
a different tack. Now is not the time to join talks with North Korea, he wrote.
Washington should get tougher with North Korea, and stop relying so much on
China, whose interests overlap but are not identical with those of the United
States.

Still, some are encouraged by the recent comings and goings over North Korea,
especially since Mr. Wu is on his second visit to Pyongyang in three months. On
Wednesday, South Korean and Japanese officials also met in Washington with Glyn
T. Davies, the United States special representative for North Korea.

Roger Cavazos, a former United States Army intelligence officer and North Korea
watcher who is now with the Nautilus Institute, a group that studies
international security issues, said, "The point is: Wu Dawei talks with North
Korea in August, North Korea then talks with U.S. interlocutors" - Mr. Bosworth
and Mr. Gallucci - "U.S. interlocutors back-brief the State Department, then
State gives their answers to Wu, and Wu is now in North Korea relaying American
answers/concerns."

All this movement bears resemblance to "a Ferris wheel with lots of up and down
- lots of movement, but not getting anywhere," Mr. Cavazos said. But on a more
positive note, "This particular iteration may be the point at which the
participants get off the Ferris wheel and meet again - or at least that is the
hope."


     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    One Place Where the U.S. Can Rest Easy About China's Influence?
     ·    Strident Video by Chinese Military Casts U.S. as Menace
     ·    Challenging the Chinese Government to Disclose Its Aid to North Korea
     ·    Chinese Leader Gets a Cartoon Makeover


LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


