                             1947 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 1, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 357 words


Gadget-friendly skies The FAA plans to allow gate-to-gate use of personal
electronic devices, expecting to lift its ban by 2014. A3

Verdict tossed Virginia Tech had no legal duty to warn students after the first
killings in 2007, the state Supreme Court ruled. B1

the nation

President Obama's campaign advisers explored the possibility of replacing Vice
President Biden on the ticket with Hillary Rodham Clinton, a book said. A5

Senate Republicansblocked President Obama's nominees to oversee the home
mortgage industry and to serve on a powerful appellate court. A3

A federal appeals courtblocked a ruling that the New York police's
stop-and-frisk policy was discriminatory and took the judge that issued it off
the case. A3

Thousands of federal employeesand contractors approved for security clearances
owed millions in back taxes in 2012, the GAO said. B4

Most of Texas's tough new abortion restrictions can take effect immediately, a
federal appeals court ruled. A2

the world

International inspectorssaid Syria has destroyed its declared chemical-weapons
production facilities. A10

The chief political leaderin a Pakistani province threatened to choke off NATO
supply routes if U.S. drone strikes continue. A8

The starved bodiesof 92 migrants were recovered along a known trafficking route
in Niger's Sahara Desert. A8

A "60 Minutes" broadcasthas helped propel a new round of partisan conflict over
last year's attacks in Benghazi, Libya. A10

the economy

Tension with Germanymounted as a U.S. Treasury report criticized Berlin's
economic policies. A12

The "cash for clunkers" programwas fairly inefficient as economic stimulus, a
new analysis said. A14

the region

The Washington areawill be hit hard when the food-stamp program loses $5 billion
on Friday. B1

Terry McAuliffehas raised double what his opponent has in the Virginia
governor's race after racking up $510,000 in contributions in one day. B1

More than 2,000 peopleattended a memorial service for 10-year-old Gabriella
Miller, who became an advocate for pediatric cancer research. B1

A manfatally shot by Fairfax County police outside a homeless shelter "was
fighting everyone," a witness said. B1

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


