                             1923 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 2, 2014 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

The Open Forum Letters to the Editor

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 606 words


Kerry's jab at Edward Snowden

Re: "Kerry to Snowden: Man up," May 29 news story.

So Secretary of State John Kerry thinks that Edward Snowden should "man up" and
return to the United States. Well, fair enough, but should Kerry and other
senior government officials "man up" and tell the public about the extent of
spying on U.S. citizens as well as on our allies?

Kerry also states that Snowden "should trust the American system of justice."
Tragically, given secret drone strikes on American citizens and the long term
imprisonment of individuals without bringing them to trial, it seems that the
American system of justice has fallen far short of its ideals.

Gene R. Reetz, Denver

The art of the interview died a little with Brian Williams, whose talk with NSA
leaker Edward Snowden felt more like an infomercial than a dialogue. But little
else could be expected in an age of soft lighting and the cotton ball pitch of
the negotiated interview, which journalism has become. Williams wasted an hour
of air time and Snowden remained the same self justifying, naive fool he was
before.

Richard Mattingly, Denver

* * *

I appreciate Edward Snowden for revealing the scope and extent of U.S.
government surveillance of Americans. But Snowden is no heroic civil
disobedience martyr. The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. committed civil
disobedience and accepted the consequences. He went to jail. And I don't buy the
claim that if Snowden had faced the music in the U.S., he would have been
muzzled.

Snowden says he wanted to go to Ecuador. He could easily have flown to six
different countries in South America from Honolulu before the NSA found out he
was gone. Instead, he flew to Hong Kong and Moscow. China and Russia. The United
States' biggest rivals or opponents.

Snowden's no hero. He's a naive, self serving whiner.

Peter Gross, Denver

Not just guns in Calif. slayings

Re: "Father's grief won't change gun laws," May 29 Chris Cillizza column.

It seems that no one wants to address that 50 percent of Elliot Rodger's murders
were committed with a knife. No one is saying we need federal laws on knife
control. Like no knives over a certain length, background checks to buy a knife
or no one can own a super sharp knife, etc.

If a mentally ill person wants to create carnage, then there are knives, bombs
(Boston Marathon), running cars into crowds, and of course the dreaded gun. The
issue is not the weapon, it is the mental instability of the person and their
access to things that do harm.

It's a tough, tough issue. I'm not sure our society (much less our government)
has the ability to solve this complex problem.

Bruce Jameson, Wheat Ridge

In defense of Initiative 75

Re: "Fuel for a petition drive," May 24 business news story.

Comments about the "devastating" effect Initiative 75 would have on economic
growth in Colorado is simply an attempt to spread a perceived fear. Does anyone
really think that a local government would deliberately restrict or prevent the
operation of a business that functions in a responsible manner, generates tax
revenue and offers stable employment to the community? Of course not.

This initiative gives some control back to the communities whose citizens'
safety, health and quality of life are being threatened by the influence and
irresponsible actions of companies in the energy industry. Their disregard of
the impact that energy development, such as fracking, has on the people affected
by this process is truly alarming.

All Initiative 75 will do is help to level the playing field, by allowing those
communities directly impacted by energy development to have voice in how they
choose to live.

Norm Kramer, Monument

LOAD-DATE: June 05, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


