                             1916 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              May 11, 2014 Sunday
                               SUN SCENE Edition

HORRORS!

BYLINE: Joanne Ostrow

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 1083 words


Horrors! And so many of them!

A fresh wave of the old horror genre is coming to TV, inviting us to lose
ourselves in evocations of our deepest fears. This once cultish corner of the
entertainment world is working its way into the mainstream, bringing renewed
scrutiny to classic, terrifying icons.

Monsters, vampires, ghosts, witches, demon babies ... everything old is
possessed again.

The settings are as varied as Victorian London, contemporary Paris and Anytown,
USA. The horrors range from creepy crawlies in the dark to severed body parts,
unearthly creatures to hallucinations and the proverbial bad seed.

Recycled and updated every generation or so, the horror show is deathless.

The digital effects are so advanced, the visuals are primed to scare us out of
our seats.

And that's the point. It's all about the thrill ride: blood pressure and heart
rate go up as eyes open wide to the onscreen horror. A physiological arousal
lingers after the show is over, and we want to go back for more. The catharsis
never gets old.

Newest TV horrors

Premiering this weekend are "Penny Dreadful," a melodramatic mashup of horror
origin stories on Showtime, and a remake of "Rosemary's Baby," based on Ira
Levin's 1967 horror novel, on NBC.

No spoilers here, just the set up: In the opening moments of "Penny Dreadful,"
premiering at 8 p.m. Sunday on Showtime, a woman is awakened by a strange noise.
She tiptoes toward it in the dark, extra vulnerable in a skimpy nightgown, one
sock off. Before we know we've shifted into phantasmagorical territory, she is
the victim of some overwhelming supernatural force. All that's left is the
memory of her scream. The story includes appearances by Frankenstein, Dorian
Gray, allusions to Jack the Ripper, Dracula and more.

(Why are women drawn, alone in the dark, toward the scary noise? Those of us who
dread roller coasters never get this.)

In the beginning of the slow incubating "Rosemary's Baby," May 11 and 15 on NBC
(7 p.m. on Channel 9), we meet the sweet couple who seem to have lucked into the
greatest apartment in Paris. Only later do we learn the horrific history of the
residence and what's up with the pregnancy.

"Rosemary's" is a four hour tease with a certain French je ne sais quoi, more
reminiscent of ABC's recent "666 Park Avenue" than of the original "Rosemary's
Baby." "Penny Dreadful" is a psychosexual thriller with literary pretentions,
but the first couple of hours don't inspire patience.

Both succeed at being creepy.

They join a steady march of horror types into more staid (some say respectable)
drama formats: the White Walkers of "Game of Thrones," and the titular terrors
of "The Walking Dead" are only the most obvious reference points for the bleed
over of horror into drama. The post Rapture horrors of Damon Lindelof's "The
Leftovers" are due on HBO June 29. And the adaptation of Stephen King's "Under
the Dome," returns for season 2 on CBS June 30.

We could blame the latest rise of horror on the ratings success of "American
Horror Story" on FX. The latest installment of that anthology series, "AHS:
Coven," ranked among the top 20 shows on TV in the 18 49 demographic, and among
the top 5 in cable. Beyond the remarkable cast, it touched a nerve.

Why it registers

Theories abound as to horror's claim on us:

"Nothing delights us so much as experiencing danger from a place of safety. We
get a tremendous rush of adrenalin and maybe endorphins without losing life and
limb to do it," said Denver psychoanalyst Roy Lowenstein by e mail. "I think the
key to good horror is the closeness to, not the distance from, normal human
experience. Think of Psycho (AUGGHHHH!) vs. Freddy Kruger (meh)."

"Horror, of all the genres, is the only one that can provoke an involuntary
visceral reaction," said Stephen Graham Jones, author and professor of English
at the University of Colorado Boulder. "Everything else we feel in the arts is
elective. We watch a romantic comedy because we want to cry, say, or an action
movie so we can participate in heroics. Horror's different. It can hit you with
a moment of revulsion so hard you might want to erase the last five minutes of
your life, please. Or, you might leave the theater thinking, that was nothing.
But then it's time to walk through an empty parking garage... The horror, it
comes welling back up, whether you want it to or not... Horror always bleeds
through."

"Horror is a compound of terror and revulsion," CU's Bruce Kawin explained in
his comprehensive 2012 book, "Horror and the Horror Film." He chronicled how
people historically love and may even need horror. "Horror films resonate,
politically and personally, with what we know of some extremes of human
behavior, and in this they are relevant to an understanding of the world. They
grapple with the important mysteries of sex and death, and they may even give us
a feeling of temporary power over death."

If the 1920s '30s Depression was the "big bad wolf" during the classical age of
the horror genre, terrorism is the scary monster today, said CU Boulder Film
Studies director Ernesto R. Acevedo Munoz. Additionally, he cites "a
disproportionate concern with women's sexuality" that society finds frightening
(fear of reproduction being at the core of "Rosemary's Baby"). The social
function of horror is "to assure us everything's going to be OK," he said.

Surely, horror is resonant at the moment. Post 9/11, with robots supplanting
humans, drones spying overhead and pollution/climate change threatening the
planet, audiences may crave the catharsis of terrifying make believe.

In a time of great social/technological change, TV executives see the field as
ripe. And blurring the lines between drama and comedy and horror opens the genre
to a wider audience. Even reality TV is tapping into the horror act: Animal
Planet has found ratings success in its "monster week" franchise of scary living
things. This month they'll feature Shannen Doherty in "Blood Lake: Attack of the
Killer Lampreys," the network's first B movie from the creators of "Sharknado."

TV is mining the field once left to cinema and finding satanists, cannibals,
synthetic humans, vampires, covens and, now, lampreys in the shower all the
better to scare us with.

"Nothing comes without a price," the couple is told in "Rosemary's Baby."

Similarly, you can't have supernaturally heightened sex scenes without cheesy
music.

The more the horrors change, the more the conventions stay the same.

Joanne Ostrow: 303 954 1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Above, Timothy Dalton, Eva Green and Danny Sapani star in Showtime's
new horror series "Penny Dreadful." Provided by Showtime
Eva Green as Vanessa Ives in Penny Dreadful - (keyart) Photo:Courtesy of
SHOWTIME Provided by Showtime, The Denver Post
Danny Sapani as Sembene in Penny Dreadful - (keyart) Photo:Courtesy of SHOWTIME
Provided by Showtime, The Denver Post
Zoe Saldana and Patrick J. Adams star in NBC's "Rosemary's Baby" reboot May 11
and 15. Provided by NBC
Shannen Doherty in "Blood Lake: Attack of the Killer Lampreys," Animal Planet's
first B-movie. Provided by Animal Planet

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


