                             1933 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 17, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN REGIONAL Edition

Sophs' turn to step up game

BYLINE: Brent Briggeman

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 12C

LENGTH: 559 words


AIR FORCE ACADEMY Nate Romine made his debut as Air Force's starting quarterback
against Notre Dame four months after reporting to basic training.

But no decision made that day against the Fighting Irish gave him as much stress
as one he had to make this summer when the night chill set in and he was lying
in a horse stable next to teammates Hayes Linn and Colin Sandor.

"It was freezing cold," Romine said of the experience during survival training.
"You've got a horse looking right down on you, and you're lying there debating
do you cuddle next to these guys to stay warm or not?"

Experiences like that, and those already made on the football field, have helped
this deep sophomore class become a tight knit group that will go a long way
toward determining Air Force's fortunes for the next three years.

"Our class is special," safety Weston Steelhammer said. "It's a bright future.
I'm excited about it."

Last year, during a 2 10 season, plenty of freshmen were thrust into action
either on their own merits or out of necessity. Now, they are dominating the
depth chart.

Air Force's leading returning passer is Romine. Jalen Robinette had the most
yards on the receiving corps last year. Jacobi Owens may start at tailback.
Shayne Davern has the inside track at fullback.

Sandor, at 6 foot 2, 285 pounds, is a backup guard, occupying that second team
line along with tackles Patrick Halloran and Allen Caunitz.

Steelhammer is the starter at safety, while Jacob Onyechi has one of the outside
linebacker spots. Ryan Watson and David Harris will rotate on the defensive
line, where Samuel Byers, Haji Dunn and Jalen Lacy will also likely play. Linn
and Roland Ladipo provide depth at cornerback, while Patrick Healy and Claude
Alexander are backup linebackers.

"It really is exciting," Onyechi said. "I like the way that coach has been
willing to put young players in. It shows that he really will put the best
player in, no matter who it is."

Some in this group including Davern, Onyechi, Romine and Steelhammer entered
directly out of high school. Others have found fall camp to be like a reunion of
their class at the prep school.

"I'm excited about this year," Robinette said. "Guys I played with in the prep
school I'll see on the field all the time."

Plus, they'd had off the field experiences, having gone through a full year that
included recognition training, survival training and three summer periods.

One of Owens' summer classes was Unmanned Aerial Assistance, where he flew
drones. Romine experienced a daily, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. chemistry class, and all
enjoyed their first prolonged trip back home if three weeks is prolonged.

"Life after freshman year, you get a broader scope of everything going on; from
the offense, to your role and where you stand here," Romine said. "You're not in
the dark as much. When you're a freshman, your focus is kind of right in front
of you."

Added Steelhammer: "It was really crucial that we were able to play last year
and feel the speed of the game and see the difference between high school and
college. It will help a lot."

Air Force better hope it helps, because nothing would help this team more than
this deep sophomore class blending into the mix.

"We feel it's a strong class, but it's not just us, it's the whole team," Sandor
said. "If we can play together as a team, it doesn't matter which class you're
in."

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


