                             1919 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              May 27, 2014 Tuesday
                               TUE FINAL Edition

Town fears for three missing in mudslide

BYLINE: Nancy Lofholm

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 874 words


COLLBRAN

Town Marshal Adam Appelhanz normally makes sure his patrol car is clean and
buffed for the annual Memorial Day procession down Main Street of this town of
400.

But this Memorial Day, Appelhanz's vehicle was coated and spattered with mud,
all the way to the windshields, as he followed behind a small cadre of flag
waving, rifle carrying veterans on their slow walk through town from the
Collbran Servicewomen's Memorial.

Appelhanz, like many folks in this ranching community located high on the Grand
Mesa above Grand Junction, had been out on Salt Creek Road helping with a search
for three local men missing in a nearby mudslide. That mudslide isn't spoken of
around here without the adjective "massive" attached.

The slide was more than 3 miles long, a half mile wide and as deep as 250 feet.
It dwarfs the mudslide that buried a subdivision and killed 41 people in Oso,
Wash., in March.

But this mudslide occurred in a remote, rugged area that is partially on U.S.
Forest Service land and partially on private ground. Three gas wells were in the
slide's path, but no structures. No other people were believed to be in an area
that is fenced off to the public.

The three men who are missing and feared caught in the slide went out on West
Salt Creek Road on Sunday afternoon to check on reports the mountainside was
cracking and slipping and that irrigation water to ranches below had been
affected.

The missing men were identified as Wes Hawkins, Danny Nichols and his father,
Clancy Nichols, all well known locals whose families homesteaded in the Plateau
Valley area of the Mesa where Collbran is located. The Hawkins family owns much
of the private land below the slide area on Salt Creek. The Nicholses have
ranches down the road near the even smaller community of Molina.

Their large extended families are related through generations by marriage and
are well known in the valley.

"This is a very tight knit area. Everybody's lives touch everybody else's
lives," said Susie Nichols, a longtime resident who was helping to keep the
Memorial Day observance on track Monday morning.

There was only a scattering of observers this year because so many residents
were involved in the search or are related to the missing men. Tables were
mostly empty at a community pancake breakfast.

Once the bugling and drumming died out and the small procession was over, a new
procession began with friends taking boxes of food from the Twisted Sisters Grub
Box restaurant to the rescuers and to the families of the missing men.

The ceremony had taken place under an unbroken blue sky. But Sunday, the area
had been pounded with 3/4 of an inch of rain that didn't let up all day.

It is believed that so much moisture saturated the mountainside that it let
loose and collapsed into the valley below, snapping off large trees, tumbling
massive boulders and moving with such force that it roared over the top of a
hill and down the other side.

A few people had called the Mesa County Sheriff's Office to report hearing the
slide or seeing its aftermath, but many residents of Collbran didn't know what
had happened until they heard the sirens on search and rescue and law
enforcement vehicles speeding through the town Sunday evening.

Collbran may be tight knit in terms of interpersonal relationships, but
connectivity is so poor in the area that it was not easy to spread the word.

"I didn't know what happened until I got here for the festivities," said Tilda
Evans, a resident of Collbran who worked with Dan Nichols at Olsson Associates
engineering firm in Grand Junction.

After the procession, some residents gathered on a bluff on Colorado 330
overlooking the mudslide area where they could look through binoculars and a
telescope to see the broken trees that looked like matchsticks and a waterfall
formed by runoff rushing from the top of the mountain above the slide area.

That kind of heavy moisture made search efforts very dangerous, said Mesa County
Sheriff Stan Hilkey. Ground searchers were only able to probe along the edges of
the very bottom of the slide. Even there, the mud and debris is 20 to 30 feet
deep.

Hilkey called the slide so large and so deep that "it's an understatement to say
it is massive."

Hilkey had called the ground searchers, along with two drones and a helicopter,
to the area Monday. He said searchers and family members of the missing men
still held out some hope that the men could be trapped out in an area with no
cellphone coverage. But an aerial search Monday turned up no sign of the pickup
truck and all terrain vehicle the men were on at the site of the slide.

Hilkey also contacted the sheriff in Oso, Wash., to ask for advice on how to
search a massive mudslide. The Oso slide was about 1,500 feet wide, 4,400 feet
long and 30 to 70 feet deep.

Hilkey said the U.S. Geological Survey and the National Weather Service are
sending a hydrologist and a geologist to aid in the search Tuesday.

About 40 people were involved in the search Monday, and many of them personally
know the missing men. Clancy Nichols was a volunteer firefighter with the
Plateau Valley Fire Protection District, and teams of his fellow firefighters
were helping in the search.

Nancy Lofholm: 970 256 1957, nlofholm@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nlofholm

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: An aerial view of the Mesa County mudslide. The mudslide occurred
Sunday evening and is estimated at 3 miles long and a half-mile wide. AAron
Ontiveroz, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


