                             1905 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            November 18, 2013 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

Fans will be the winners as technology advances

BYLINE: The Denver Post

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1BB

LENGTH: 734 words


Three dimensional images that spin 360 degrees, talking replays, ultra HDTV and
sports fans selecting their own replays from the comfort of their couch.

It's all coming to a television set near you. In fact, some of it's already
here.

"There is a lot of new technology coming for sports fans, because we think the
market is there. We wanted to be a part of it," said Aviv Shapira, chief of
operations and programs for a 2 year old company called Replay Technologies.
"Fans always want something that brings them closer to the game. We think we
have found a way to do that."

Replay Technologies, a Dallas based company founded by Israeli expatriates who
once helped develop drones for the military, is at the forefront of the emerging
fan experience. Its freeD system (short for free dimension video) was unveiled
at New York's Yankee Stadium in April. The system has since been used during
this NFL season on the giant video boards at the Dallas Cowboys' AT&T Stadium
and also was shown during two NBC "Sunday Night Football" telecasts from the
stadium in Arlington, Texas.

According to Shapira, freeD creates so called "bullet time" footage nicknamed
for Keanu Reeves' bullet dodging scenes in the movie "The Matrix" that not only
provides a 360 degree perspective to entertain fans but potentially could help
referees make calls. The image has a three dimensional effect, but it's shown on
a two dimensional plane that can be viewed on a regular television.

At the Cowboys' AT&T Stadium, Replay Technologies first had to install 24 ultra
high definition (12 megapixel) cameras in a circle around the venue. The cameras
capture three dimensional pixels, which are then sent to a server and pieced
together to create a 360 degree view for broadcast producers.

But there are some drawbacks. The replay takes about 30 seconds to put together,
so it's not quite "instant replay." And this season, the replays were limited to
plays in the red zone. Also, for now, the system is in use only at Yankee
Stadium and AT&T Stadium.

Shapira said Replay Technologies hopes to install the freeD system at more
venues, starting with baseball stadiums in 2014, and is in negotiations to do
so.

At some point, Shapira said, freeD might be used as a tool to help umpires
replay close plays. And further down the road, Replay Technologies envisions
putting replay in the hands of viewers.

"We think this eventually will completely change the way replays are used," he
said.

Shapira said plans are in place to provide Cowboys fans in the high end seats at
AT&T Stadium the opportunity to use the technology as soon as next season.
Bringing the technology into the homes of viewers, he estimates, could happen in
two to three years.

"Currently, we give the broadcasters and producers the freedom to choose their
camera view," Shapira said. "We are working on giving the viewers at home an
interactive tool that enables them to see the game from a different point of
view.

"They could see the play from the pitcher's eyes or from the batter's eyes.
Think of it like holding a joystick during a video game and being able to move
the camera around the field."

But Replay Technologies isn't the only company looking to change how we
experience sports. Here are some other products in the works:

Talking replay. Tony Verna was the director who first brought instant replay to
television during the 1963 Army Navy football game. Now, at age 79, he has
secured a patent for another system he calls "talking replays."

The idea is to allow viewers to hear to what's going on from the athletes.
Before the game, athletes involved in key matchups for example, a cornerback
playing against a star wide receiver would be interviewed about specific game
situations. The audio would be stored so it could be called up to air during
replays.

"The point of it is that you would not only hear from the announcers, you would
get the player's insights," Verna said. "This gives a voice to the players."

Verna has tested the system in some high school games in Southern California.

Ultra HDTV. Less than a year after the debut of ultra high definition TV, the
next generation television format, prices have been dramatically reduced. Now,
instead of paying $7,000 or more for a 65 inch ultra high definition TV,
consumers can get them for about $5,500. That's still a hunk of change, but it's
the wave of the future as the clarity gets better, and the price drops.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Using images from multiple sensors, freeD tech-nology utilizes a unique
way of reorganizing pixels in space, allowing a live representation of reality
for free-dimensional video. Courtesy of freeD

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


