                             1978 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 13, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 334 words


Vigil for gun victims About 800 people gathered at Washington National Cathedral
to remember those killed in massacres. A3

Navy corruption scandal An NCIS agent accused of taking bribes has agreed to
plead guilty and cooperate with investigators. A9

science

The Hubble Space Telescope observed signs of geysers erupting from Jupiter's
moon Europa, representing the best evidence yet that it has a deep subsurface
ocean. A8

Education

Schoolchildren are learning computer coding this week in a nationwide campaign
embraced by President Obama. A2

the nation

The top highway safety officialresigned as the Transportation Department
continued a leadership shake-up. A7

A federal panelrecommended lifting protections for grizzly bears in and around
Yellowstone National Park. A5

The Redskins' nameshould be changed, the top U.S. civil rights coalition said.
A6

Child pornography was found on the computer hard drive of a senator's fired
chief of staff, court documents said. A7

the world

The Obama administrationcracked down on firms accused of violating Iran
sanctions even as it tried to keep lawmakers from imposing new curbs. A15

Yemeni security officials said 13 people were killed when U.S. drone missiles
struck a convoy traveling to a wedding party. A12

Secretary of State John F. Kerrytried to reassure Israelis and Palestinians on a
border security proposal for the Jordan Valley. A12

the economy

November retail sales rose the most in five months, boosted by increasing
consumer confidence. A18

JPMorgan Chase is nearing a settlement with the federal government to pay $2
billion related to the Bernard L. Madoff fraud. A19

Hilton Worldwide's shares rose 7.5 percent in its market debut. A20

Bank of America agreed to pay $131.8 million over mortgage securities before the
financial crisis. A20

the region

Ex-Beauvoir teacher Eric Toth pleaded guilty to producing child pornography of
students and other youngsters. B1

Virginia Gov. Robert F. McDonnell (R) proposed $11 million for a slavery
heritage site in Richmond. B5

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


