                             1957 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 14, 2013 Thursday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 283 words


Security fears Even as relief efforts in the Philippines picked up pace, typhoon
survivors were worried for their lives as the law-and-order situation
deteriorated. A9

the nation

A TSA programto screen air passengers for suspicious behavior hasn't proved
effective, auditors said. A3

Guns made with 3-D printersare an increasing cause of concern among federal law
enforcement officials. A3

the economy

The United Statesproduced more crude oil in October than it imported for the
first time since early 1995, the Energy Information Administration said. A10

Financial incentivesfor doctors may be driving some of the rapid rise in spinal
fusion surgery, a government study showed. A6

Gasoline prices have fallen to their lowest level in 33 months, dropping 55
cents a gallon since February. A11

Apple confirmed that Italy is reviewing the firm's tax returns amid claims it
has not paid everything it owes. A14

the world

Drone combat missionsmay eventually be scaled back by more than 25 percent, the
Air Force's top commander said. A8

The United Statesformally designated the Nigerian Islamist militant
organizations Boko Haram and Ansaru as terrorist groups. A9

the region

An Air Force colonelwho led a sex-assault branch was cleared of accosting a
woman in Arlington. B1

Federal investigatorsare questioning the District's settlement with a
businessman at the center of a probe into Mayor Vincent C. Gray's 2010 campaign.
B1

Prince William policerounded up 31 alleged dealers of prescription pills or
heroin and charged 10 others. B1

With temperaturesfalling, local governments and charities are stepping up
efforts to help the homeless. B1

A dangling cableextended Red Line commutes Wednesday morning, some by hours. B3

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


