                             1935 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           August 20, 2014 Wednesday
                               WED FINAL Edition

Cease-fire talks collapse

BYLINE: Ibrahim Barzak

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 359 words


GAZA CITY, GAZA STRIP Egyptian attempts to broker an end to a month long war
between Israel and Hamas collapsed in heavy fighting Tuesday, with Palestinian
militants firing dozens of rockets and Israel responding with airstrikes across
the Gaza Strip. At least three Palestinians were killed.

The burst of violence, which erupted in the hours before a temporary truce was
set to expire, left the Egyptian mediation efforts in tatters and raised the
likelihood of a new round of fighting in a war that has already claimed more
than 2,000 lives, most of them Palestinians.

The fighting broke out when Gaza militants fired several rockets into Israel
Tuesday afternoon. Israel quickly withdrew its delegation from the Cairo cease
fire talks and resumed its campaign of airstrikes, and fighting continued into
the night.

Three people two women and a 2 year old girl were killed in an airstrike on a
house in Gaza City, Palestinian medical official Ashraf al Kidra said. The
target of the airstrike wasn't immediately known.

However, in Cairo, Moussa Abu Marzouk, a senior Hamas leader, said the dead
included the wife and a child of Mohammed Deif, the Islamic militant group's
elusive military chief, who has escaped numerous Israeli assassination attempts
in the past. There was no immediate confirmation from Hamas leaders in Gaza.

Twenty one people were wounded in a separate airstrike that hit a building that
houses offices of Hamas' Al Aqsa TV station, al Kidra said. The fatalities were
the first since a temporary truce was reached last Wednesday.

Israeli officials reported at least 50 rockets were fired late Tuesday, setting
off air raid sirens throughout southern Israel and as far away as the cities of
Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.

In Cairo, Palestinian negotiators declared the cease fire talks over, and said
they would leave Egypt on Wednesday.

Azzam al Ahmad, leader of the delegation, blamed Israel for the failure, but
held out hope that the talks could be resumed.

Egyptian security officials said Egypt was still pressing the two sides to agree
on a cease fire. They spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not
authorized to speak to the press.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A Palestinian boy points to the sky as he spots two Israeli drones in
the late afternoon Tuesday. Witnesses said Palestinians fled their homes in
eastern Gaza City carrying bags of clothes, pillows and mattresses after renewed
Israeli airstrikes. Roberto Schmidt, Getty Images/AFP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


