                             193 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                           February 13, 2014 Thursday

Too Secret for Congress

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 399 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Obama administration won&#8217;t let most lawmakers learn about
the drone program.


The Los Angeles Times had a great story today that helps explain why few
Americans - including the ones who make the country's laws - know much about the
drone program that is the vanguard of the endless war against terror. The basic
reason, of course, is that the Obama administration wants to keep everyone in
the dark, but the lengths to which officials will go can sometimes be
surprising.

The newspaper reported that Senator Carl Levin, chairman of the Armed Services
Committee, held a closed-door joint hearing last week with the Intelligence
Committee to discuss the drone program, and who should operate it. Mr. Levin's
committee oversees the military, which conducts drone strikes in Afghanistan,
while the Intelligence panel oversees the C.I.A., which runs the secret drone
program in Pakistan.

Mr. Levin and his committee's members would prefer that the Pentagon take over
the drone strikes now conducted by the C.I.A., in part to force greater
accountability, and the White House has suggested it shares that goal. Both
agencies were invited to testify at the classified hearing.

But the White House wouldn't allow the C.I.A. to show up. And it wouldn't give
members of the Armed Services Committee the necessary clearances to hear the
C.I.A.'s secret testimony, even though they often are briefed on classified
military operations. Why? Because then more people would gain detailed knowledge
of the program, officials said. And eventually the committee's counterparts in
the House would demand the same information.

"They didn't want to have to do this in the House," one congressional aide told
the paper. "If you open this thing up to the House Armed Services Committee,
that means a third of Congress will have been read in to the C.I.A. drone
program."

Whatever you might think of the competence of lawmakers, they're the people who
are supposed to exercise oversight of the government's operations. President
Obama has said he wants greater transparency for the nation's secret anti-terror
programs. But if his administration isn't willing to be transparent to Congress
when the doors are closed, how are the rest of us ever supposed to know what's
going on?


     ·    On Drones, Keeping the Public in the Dark
     ·    In the Navy: Rape
     ·    How Many Non-Combatants Are Killed by Drones?
     ·    Why Are the Intelligence Budgets a State Secret?
     ·    Will Congress Do Anything About the Military's Sexual Misconduct
          Crisis?


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


