                             1926 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday
                              THU REGIONAL Edition

Was it for naught?

BYLINE: Lee Keath

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 772 words


CAIRO

It has been a week of stunning advances by Islamic militants across a belt from
Iraq to Pakistan. In Iraq, jihadi fighters rampaged through the country's second
largest city and swept farther south in their drive to establish an extremist
enclave stretching into Syria. Pakistan's largest airport was paralyzed and
rocked by explosions as gunmen stormed it in a dramatic show of strength.

More than a decade after the U.S. launched its "war on terrorism," Islamic
militant groups are bolder than ever, exploiting the erosion or collapse of
central government control in a string of nations Syria, Iraq and Pakistan that
are more strategically vital than the relatively failed states where al Qaeda
set up its bases in the past: Somalia, Yemen and 1990s Afghanistan.

Most galling to Washington, the crumbling state power has come in countries that
the United States has spent billions of dollars trying to strengthen during the
past 13 years.

Policy failings by those governments have contributed to giving militants an
opening.

Iraqi prime minister Nouri al Maliki has alienated the country's Sunni
community, which feels sidelined by his Shiite led government. That has pushed
some Sunnis into supporting the militants and has undermined the military, which
includes many Sunnis.

Pakistan's authority always has been tenuous in its rugged, tribal dominated and
underdeveloped northwest, near the Afghan border and for years that was where
militant groups, from al Qaeda to the Taliban, operated. Now, the Pakistani
Taliban have expanded to develop a strong presence in the country's largest
city, Karachi, where the airport attack took place and where police are gunned
down almost daily.

The Afghan Taliban won a diplomatic victory of its own when the U.S. freed five
Taliban detainees last month in a swap for the release of the only remaining
U.S. prisoner of war in Afghanistan, Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl.

U.S. policies have shrunk its options in all these regions. American forces left
Iraq more than two years ago without winning agreement on a longer presence from
Maliki's government. Combat troops are on their way out of Afghanistan by the
end of the year, which could have a similar effect as the Afghan government
takes the lead in fighting the Taliban insurgency.

In Syria, the Obama administration has resisted calls to more strongly arm and
finance rebels fighting against President Bashar Assad, in part because of fears
of inadvertently aiding Islamic radicals rather than moderate forces. As a
result, better armed and better funded extremists have risen to prominence
anyway.

"A common theme is the inability of the international community ... to help
local actors, local leadership to create more viable institutionally based
societies, especially on the security side," said Salman Shaikh, director of the
Brookings Doha Center in Qatar.

As a result, "weak and fragile states" have been unable to create "viable
political systems of government, a political culture which is able to manage
diversity and pluralism, and a security environment which is there to ...
protect rather than to intimidate and impose order," he said.

Nothing illustrates the potential for Islamic militants to rearrange the
region's map more than the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant,
which this week took over much of Mosul then swept into the Iraqi city of
Tikrit, farther south.

This year, it captured the Syrian provincial capital of Raqqa, where it imposed
strict Shariah rule, carrying out executions in public squares, smashing liquor
stores and extracting "taxes" from local businesses. It captured the Iraqi city
of Fallujah in January and has now seized the bigger prize of Mosul.

Pakistan presents a host of separate, complicated issues for the United States.

A nominal ally against al Qaeda and the Afghan Taliban, its military backed
governments have bristled at U.S. pressure to fight militants in the border
regions and have railed against American drone strikes on insurgent hideouts.

During the weekend, militant gunmen stormed Karachi's airport and while the
fighters ultimately were killed, the attack and another in the city afterward
illustrated the confidence of the Pakistani Taliban, which claimed
responsibility along with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan.

In a country that touts itself as a homeland for Muslims, authorities are
reluctant to denounce an ideology championing Islam.

So militants often are viewed not as enemies but as misguided Muslims, Pakistani
journalist Zahid Hussain said.

"The narrative is basically controlled by the radicals in Pakistan, and that is
their biggest victory," he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Iraqi families fleeing violence in the northern Nineveh province gather
at a Kurdish checkpoint in Aski kalak. Jihadists have seized key cities across
northern Iraq, and authorities appear incapable of stopping the advances. Safin
Hamed, AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


