                             1977 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Dec. 9, 2013

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 657 words

PAKISTAN

Protests jeopardize aid, Hagel says

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel warned Pakistani leaders Monday that if they don't
resolve protests that have stalled some military shipments across the border
with Afghanistan, it could be difficult to maintain political support in
Washington for an aid program under which billions of dollars have been sent to
Islamabad, defense officials said.

In response, the officials said, Hagel received assurances from the Pakistanis
that they would take "immediate action" to resolve the problem. Details on how
that might be done were not provided.

Last week, anti-American protests along a primary border-crossing route in
Pakistan prompted the United States to stop shipments from Torkham Gate through
the port city of Karachi, because of worries about the safety of the truckers.
The protests center on the CIA's drone program, which has targeted and killed
many terrorists but has also caused civilian casualties.

- Associated Press

RUSSIA

Putin increases control over news

President Vladimir Putin tightened his control over Russia's media on Monday by
dissolving the main state news agency and replacing it with an organization
tasked with promoting Moscow's image abroad.

The move to close RIA Novosti and create a news agency to be known as Rossiya
Segodnya (Russia Today) is the second in two weeks strengthening Putin's hold on
the media as he tries to reassert his authority after protests against his rule.

Most Russian media outlets are loyal to Putin, and opponents get little airtime,
but the shake-up underlined their importance to Putin keeping power and the
Kremlin's concern about his ratings and image.

The head of the new agency, to be built from the ashes of RIA Novosti, is Dmitry
Kiselyov, a conservative news anchor who had caused outrage by saying that the
organs of gay people should not be used in transplants.

The main mission of Rossiya Segodnya "is to highlight abroad the state policy
and public life of the Russian Federation," said a decree signed by Putin.

- Reuters

THAILAND

Embattled premier calls early elections

Desperate to defuse Thailand's deepening political crisis, Prime Minister
Yingluck Shinawatra dissolved parliament's lower house on Monday and called
early elections. But protesters seeking to topple her vowed to carry on their
fight, saying they cannot win at the ballot box because of corruption.

A decree from King Bhumibol Adulyadej scheduled the elections for Feb. 2 and
named Yingluck as interim prime minister until then. The protesters demanded her
resignation and rejected the election date, putting the strongly royalist
movement at odds with the king's decree.

Protest leader Suthep Thaugsuban, who faces an arrest warrant on insurrection
charges, spoke to more than 150,000 followers at a stage outside Yingluck's
offices, challenging authorities to "Come get me!"

He said his movement was assuming some functions of government, citing a clause
in the constitution that "the highest power is the sovereign power of the
people."

After Yingluck called the elections, the United States said it supports the
democratic process in Thailand, a longtime ally.

The opposition Democrat Party, allied with the protest movement, has been
defeated by pro-Thaksin parties in every election since 2001 and is unlikely to
win the new elections.

- Associated Press

Students, police clash in Cairo: Students of an Islamic university in Cairo and
supporters of Egypt's ousted Islamist president set security vehicles on fire
Monday, sending police chasing them into their campus with armored vehicles and
tear gas, the Interior Ministry said. Dozens were arrested. It was the second
straight day of protests by Al-Azhar University students, who have been holding
regular demonstrations since the start of the academic year in September against
the military's July ouster of President Mohamed Morsi. The rallies have
frequently deteriorated into clashes with police.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


