                             1931 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            August 12, 2014 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

Space pioneer steps down

BYLINE: The Gazette

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 384 words


COLORADO SPRINGS One of the generals who redesigned the military's approach to
space is stepping down this week in a Peterson Air Force Base ceremony.

Air Force Space Command boss Gen. William Shelton guided Air Force Space Command
through unprecedented budget strife that saw it cut $1 billion in annual
spending, but he is best known for his plan to increase on orbit intelligence
and pursue a future with smaller, cheaper satellites. He's set to give way
Friday to his deputy, Lt. Gen. John Hyten.

The new plan for space is driven by an increase in the number of space faring
nations and the fear that the first shots in the next war could be fired high
above Earth.

"We've seen this coming for a long time in space," Shelton said.

But the fix Shelton sought required asking hard questions about what America was
sending into space and how it was being protected.

"How do we make ourselves survivable in light of what is a very challenging
space domain going forward?" Shelton asked.

Until a few years ago, the United States and Russia had a lock on technology
required to shoot down satellites. But China has a demonstrated anti satellite
missile, and nations including North Korea and Iran are thought to be on the
brink of their counterspace programs.

Losing satellites could be crippling to any American war effort. Troops rely on
satellites for weapons guidance, navigation, communications and intelligence.

Some new weapons systems, including drone aircraft, won't function without
satellites.

"We can no longer believe space is a peaceful sanctuary," Shelton said.

The general sought to change the way the Air Force has been building satellites
as a partial solution. The service has relied on relatively low numbers of
technologically complex satellites to fulfill missions. In that system, if one
satellite gets shot down, there's a dramatic drop in capabilities.

Now, Shelton says, America needs big numbers of smaller, less capable
satellites, which in concert can do the job of their bigger, more complex
cousins.

The second part of Shelton's plan is taking shape, too. In July, Space Command
launched a satellite to spy on other satellites and watch for space attacks. The
recently declassified Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program uses
those satellites to monitor what's going on in orbit.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


