                             1904 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            November 10, 2013 Sunday
                              SUN REGIONAL Edition

Poll: Most in GOP back pathway

BYLINE: Allison Sherry

SECTION: DTW; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 821 words


WASHINGTON More than three quarters of Colorado Republicans back a minimum 13
year path to citizenship for people living in the U.S. without legal permission
if they learn English, pass a criminal background check and pay taxes and fees,
according to a recent poll.

This sentiment diverges from the beliefs of three of the four Colorado
Republicans in the Congressional delegation who remain noncommittal about a path
to citizenship for the roughly 11 to 12 million people currently living in the
U.S. without legal permission.

Presented with the poll's findings Friday, those Republicans Reps. Scott Tipton,
Cory Gardner and Doug Lamborn said they instead want to focus on border security
and a guest worker program before tackling plans for a path to citizenship.

Aurora GOP Rep. Mike Coffman, who admits he has evolved his position on
immigration because of his new district, says he believes in comprehensive
immigration reform. But only after there is an independently verified secure
border would he support allowing 11 million individuals living in the country
without legal permission to apply for permanent legal status from a temporary
status.

Coffman says he believes they should eventually be able to apply for
citizenship.

The poll found 63 percent of Colorado Democrats say they believed in the 13 year
path to citizenship, and among unaffiliated voters the number was 70 percent.

The poll, paid for by three Republican interest groups including Republicans for
Immigration Reform, surveyed voters in 12 battleground states, including
Colorado.

The effort is an attempt to sway Congressional Republicans to take up a
comprehensive immigration reform bill. The same interest groups brought groups
of business leaders to Washington last week to lobby Republicans on Capitol
Hill.

Nationally, 52 percent of those voters polled said they would be more likely to
support an elected official who supports comprehensive immigration reform.

In Colorado, 46 percent of Republicans and 60 percent of Democrats are more
likely to support an elected official who supports comprehensive immigration
reform. Twenty one percent of Republicans said they were "less likely" to vote
for someone who supports immigration reform.

The Colorado survey was an automated telephone survey on Oct. 19 21 among 500
likely voters. The margin of error was plus or minus 4.4 percent.

Tipton, R Cortez, would not say how he felt about a path to citizenship, but he
has said in the past that he "will not support amnesty," but believes in a
"compassionate" approach to DREAMers young people brought to the country
illegally when they were children by their parents.

He declined to clarify what he means by "compassionate."

Tipton says he wants to create a guest worker program for the people living in
the U.S. without legal permission.

Gardner, R Yuma, is also noncommittal about whether he supports a path to
citizenship, saying he favors a rigorous guest worker program and strengthened,
independently verified border security.

Gardner says he wants those two things in place before starting a conversation
about whether there should be a path to citizenship for both DREAMers and adults
living in the U.S. illegally.

"I urged leadership to bring a bill to the floor in July, before Congress went
on its summer work period, to show the American people that we are serious about
getting this done," he said, in a statement.

That didn't happen, however. GOP House leadership has signaled they will not
bring a big plan to the floor for a vote before the end of the year.

Tackling border security first could take years and cost billions of dollars.

The Senate bill, which no Colorado House Republican supports, commits $38
billion on border security 20,000 new agents, 700 miles of new fencing,
expensive technology such as drones and infrared cameras.

Lamborn, a Colorado Springs Republican, favors tackling immigration in a
piecemeal approach. He believes in a strengthened border and an improved
"temporary" guest worker program.

"He does not want to reward those who have broken our laws, by allowing them to
go to the front of the line to gain citizenship ahead of those who are going
through the process legally," Lamborn said through a spokeswoman.

Allison Sherry: 202 662 8907, asherry@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/allisonsherry

Would you say Congress is on the right track or are they headed in the wrong
direction?

Republicans: 10.4 percent say right track

Democrats: 17 percent say right track

Unaffiliated voters: 13.6 percent say right track

Do you believe the US immigration system is broken?

Republicans: 86 percent say yes

Democrats: 71 percent say yes

Unaffiliated: 70 percent say yes

How important do you believe it is that Congress enact immigration reform this
year

Republicans: 70 percent say very important or somewhat important

Democrats: 77 percent say very important or somewhat important

Unaffiliated: 67 percent say very important or somewhat important

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Rep. Mike Coffman wants a secure border before considering other
reforms. Rep. Cory Gardner seeks a guest-worker program along with border
security. Rep. Doug Lamborn favors tackling changes in stages and avoiding
amnesty. Rep. Scott Tipton wants an unspecified "compassionate" approach to
reform.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


