                             1997 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                          November 13, 2013 Wednesday

Teaching About the Typhoon in the Philippines

BYLINE: KATHERINE SCHULTEN, ALISON FROMME and MICHAEL GONCHAR

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 1159 words



HIGHLIGHT: In this lesson, we offer several ideas for talking and teaching about
Typhoon Haiyan in the classroom.


 Please preview this Times video as there are many graphic images.

Typhoon Haiyan, which cut a destructive path across the Philippines on Nov. 8,
is believed by some climatologists to be the strongest storm to ever make
landfall, with winds of at least 140 miles per hour and a storm surge as high as
13 feet. Thousands are feared dead or missing. The storm has upended the lives
of millions.

Below, some ideas for talking and teaching about this disaster.


Understand the Basics: Students can watch the video above and use our 6 Q's
About the News related to this Nov. 10 article to begin to understand the scale
of the devastation.

To go further, students can read about the formerly thriving city of Tacloban,
with a population of 220,000 before the storm, that now faces daunting
challenges, including food shortages, no electricity, looting, relief gridlock
and many unburied dead bodies.

If you are unsure of how to broach the topic of an international disaster with
your students, or you teach students who may have family or friends affected by
the storm, you can read our guest post "10 Ways to Talk to Students About
Sensitive Issues in the News" for some ideas.

Put a Human Face on the Disaster: Students may have heard about the typhoon in
the news, but sometimes it's hard to imagine what it means for real people who
are living through the crisis - especially when the storm is thousands of miles
away from the United States.

Students can view slide shows of the devastation in "Pictures of Typhoon
Haiyan's Wrath" and then journal about the images they see in these photographs
and what they reveal about the effects of Typhoon Haiyan.

Or sometimes it can be more effective to look closely at one image, such as this
one of a solitary woman standing amid the storm's debris, and have students
answer the same questions we use in our weekly "What's Going On in This
Picture?" series:


     ·    What's going on in this picture?
     ·    What do you see that makes you say that?
     ·    What more can you find?


Students can also read "Messages to and From Survivors of Typhoon Haiyan" to
learn more about how survivors are trying to get in touch with relatives and
friends, despite the challenges of downed communication lines. And they can read
about how Filipinos in the United States are struggling to contact their kin
across the Pacific. Then they can write a journal entry responding to one or
more of the personal stories they read about.

Contribute to the Relief Effort

What can we do to help survivors of Typhoon Haiyan? The Lede blog has compiled a
long list of places that need donations. Students might choose one or more as a
class or school and raise funds to send to relief agencies.

As they brainstorm ideas for how to fundraise, students can take inspiration
from past relief projects by Do Something and Students Rebuild, such as the
Paper Cranes initiative following the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan.

Students can read about current attempts to provide international aid, including
a United Nations request for $301 million in emergency assistance, to better
understand how the world is trying to help in the Philippines, and what immense
challenges the relief effort faces.

Looking at another angle, we can ponder the challenges and dangers that
journalists face as they try to report on what is happening in the Philippines.
After perusing the coverage on the Lede blog or reading one or more news
articles, students can discuss how reporters have been shooting the footage,
taking the photographs and reporting the facts.

Investigate Typhoons and Hurricanes

For starters, students can watch this Discovery News video and then chart the
differences between the various storms. Students might set up their charts like
this:

They can also read this article about hurricane formation and decay to learn
more about how hurricanes form.

To go deeper, students can explore how scientists study large storms like
typhoons and hurricanes. They might view the Hurricane Hunter videos, read about
storm field studies, and learn how storm pilots remain safe. Then, students
might create their own research plans. What data would they collect? For
example, air and water temperature? Wind speeds? Barometric pressure? How would
they collect their data - with drones, airplanes or satellites? Finally,
students could create peer review panels to offer suggestions on their plans.

Students can also learn about why storms arise where they do, and why they
follow somewhat predictable paths. This  and NOAA visualization illustrate the
path of Typhoon Haiyan. To put this one storm into perspective, compare those
images with this map that tracks all tropical storms over the past century.

Then students can connect the Coriolis force and ocean currents with storm
formation. Questions they should consider include:


     ·    How do ocean currents influence storm formation?
     ·    Do storms in the Northern Hemisphere spin in the same direction as
          those in the Southern Hemisphere?
     ·    Why don't tropical storms form at the Equator?


Students can even research storm anatomy and create their own labeled 3-D model.

Relate Typhoon Haiyan to Global Climate Change

Have students read "Typhoon in Philippines Casts Long Shadow Over U.N. Talks on
Climate Treaty" and, based on the information in the article, consider whether
or not Typhoon Haiyan was caused by climate change. What do scientists in the
article say about the relationship between climate change and devastating
storms? How does global warming change the earth's energy budget and influence
climate forcings? Why is there a lack of data on Pacific Ocean storms? And who
is  by storms? Students can summarize their findings in a podcast, newspaper
article or digital presentation.

Additional Resources:

Teaching Hurricane Sandy: Ideas and Resources

Teaching and Learning About Hurricanes

20 Ways to Teach About the Disaster in Japan Across the Curriculum

5 Ways to Teach About Haiti Right Now

Standards

This resource may be used to address the academic standards listed below.

Common Core E.L.A. Anchor Standards

Reading


     ·     1 Read closely to determine what the text says explicitly and to make
          logical inferences from it; cite specific textual evidence when
          writing or speaking to support conclusions drawn from the text.
     ·     7 Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and
          formats, including visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.


McREL Standards and Resources

Geography


     ·     1 Understands the characteristics and uses of maps, globes, and other
          geographic tools and technologies.
     ·     2 Knows the location of places, geographic features, and patterns of
          the environment.
     ·     15 Understands how physical systems affect human systems.
     ·     18 Understands global development and environmental issues.



     ·    6 Q's About the News | Typhoon Haiyan Devastates the Central
          Philippines
     ·    Student Crossword | Hurricanes
     ·    Teaching Hurricane Sandy: Ideas and Resources
     ·    What Are Your Experiences With Severe Weather?
     ·    Hurricane Sandy vs. the East Coast


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


