                             1952 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 8, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 353 words


Adding up the impasse The government shutdown cost $2 billion in lost
productivity from furloughed employees, the OMB said. A4

GDP's deceptive bounce Signs of economic weakness lie beneath a new report of
faster-than-expected growth over the summer. A16

the nation

The Senatevoted to establish federal protections for the nation's gay and
lesbian workers. A2

Edward Snowden was said to have conned passwords out of NSA co-workers to access
some of the classified material he leaked. A4

Reports of sexual assaultsin the military increased by 46 percent in the past
fiscal year, the Pentagon said. A3

The FAApresented what it called a "road map" to put drones in U.S. skies after
years of testing at six yet-to-be-chosen sites. A4

the world

The Pakistani Talibanselected as its new leader a hard-line militant who had
ordered the shooting of the teen education advocate Malala Yousafzai. A10

Japan's damaged nuclear plant is set to take a  groundbreaking step in a cleanup
expected to last decades. A14

the economy

J.C. Penneyreported the first annual increase in store sales since 2011 and said
online salesalso rose. A17

Competition is forcing Whole Foods Market to adjust its longtime strategy of not
competing on price. A17

Taxpayers are close to breaking even on the government's bailouts of Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. A17

The Energy Departmentfailed to disclose its concerns about a green-tech company
that won federal funding but later filed for bankruptcy. A20

the region

Work was performed at Virginia Gov. Robert F. McDonnell's home by the brother of
a businessman whose relationship with McDonnell is the subject of a federal
probe. B1

A banon food and beverage containers made of plastic foam is among environmental
initiatives that Mayor Vincent C. Gray submitted to the D.C. Council. B1

Three armed men burst into a Montgomery County home and confronted three
residents, leaving one dead, authorities said. B3

Authorities in Baltimore launched a massive strike against the Black Guerrilla
Family gang, indicting 48 suspects. B4

sports

The Capitals beat the Wild, 3-2, in a shootout, stretching their winning streak
to four. D1

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


