                             1927 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN REGIONAL Edition

Liquid meth finds way across border

BYLINE: Scott Smith

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 652 words


FRESNO, CALIF. In methamphetamine's seedy underworld, traffickers are disguising
the drug as a liquid to smuggle it into the United States from Mexico.

Dissolved in a solution, it's sealed in tequila bottles or plastic detergent
containers to fool border agents and traffic officers. Once deep in California's
Central Valley, a national distribution hub, meth cooks convert it into crystals
the most sought after form on the street.

Tough policing has driven the highly toxic super labs south of the border, where
meth is manufactured outside the sight of U.S. law enforcement, but the smaller
conversion labs are popping up domestically in neighborhoods, such as one in
Fresno where a house exploded two years ago.

People inside the home had sealed it tightly so the telltale fumes didn't give
them away.

"These guys, they don't have Ph.D.s in chemistry," said Sgt. Matt Alexander of
the Fresno County Sheriff's Office. "They're focused on not getting caught."

Investigators say it's impossible to know how much liquid meth crosses the
border, but agents in central California say they have been seeing more of it in
the past few years.

A California Highway Patrol officer in late 2012 pulled over a 20 year old man
on Interstate 5 who said he was headed to Oregon from Southern California and
seemed nervous. The officer found 15 bottles in the trunk full of dissolved meth
but labeled as Mexican tequila.

The man pleaded guilty to drug trafficking and received a federal prison
sentence of 46 months.

Three men were indicted in late 2013 and await trial after a drug task force
found 12 gallons of liquid meth in a Fresno house along with 42 pounds of the
drug ready for sale, four guns and 5,000 rounds of ammunition.

Officers raided a Madera home earlier this year, finding a lab used to convert
liquid meth into 176 pounds of crystals with a street value over $1 million.
Nobody was arrested, but agents said the bust dealt a blow to the organization
behind the lab.

Mike Prado, resident agent in charge of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Investigations' Fresno office, said law enforcement agencies are always on the
lookout for creative ways cartels smuggle meth.

"We've become better at detecting certain things," Prado said. "When they catch
on to that, they modify their methods."

The super labs driven south to Mexico are notoriously toxic to people and the
environment, but Prado said the small conversion labs in the Central Valley are
more dangerous. His agents have found them in densely populated apartment
buildings and foreclosed homes in quiet neighborhoods where children play on the
street.

In the conversion process, cooks evaporate off the liquid and use highly
combustible chemicals such as acetone to make crystals. The fumes are trapped
inside. "A spark can turn this into a fireball," Prado said.

Central California's interstates and proximity to Mexico make it an attractive
distribution hub for cartels, officials say.

John Donnelly, until recently in charge of the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration's Fresno office, said agents all over the country have tracked
meth to California's Central Valley. "We're the source point for Seattle,
Portland, Alaska and as far east as the Carolinas," Donnelly said.

Not all the meth travelling north makes its way to central California. Two men
were arrested last month in San Bernardino when investigators found a conversion
lab, 206 pounds of crystal meth and 250 gallons of the liquid capable of
producing 1,250 pounds of crystals.

The seized drugs, which investigators suspect came from Mexico, were valued at
$7.2 million.

Liquid meth is just the latest innovation for transporting drugs for profit, he
said. Smugglers have used tunnels, submarines and drones, and once, Olson said,
a 90 year old farmer was used as a decoy.

"There's no end to the creativity to getting the drug to market when there's
demand," he said of the turn to liquid meth.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


