                             1917 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              May 16, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

The sound, the fury, the tweet

BYLINE: Charles Krauthammer

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 21A

LENGTH: 428 words


Mass schoolgirl kidnapping in Nigeria to tweet or not to tweet? Is hashtagging
one's indignation about some outrage abroad an exercise in moral narcissism or a
worthy new way of standing up to bad guys?

The answer seems rather simple. It depends on whether you have the power to do
something about the outrage in question. If you do, as in the case of the Obama
administration watching Russia's slow motion dismemberment of Ukraine, it's
simply embarrassing when the State Department spokeswoman tweets the hashtag
#UnitedForUkraine.

That is nothing but preening, a visual recapitulation of her boss's rhetorical
fatuousness when he sternly warns that if the rape of this U.S. friend
continues, we are prepared to consider standing together with the "international
community" to decry such indecorous behavior or some such.

When a superpower, with multiple means at its disposal, reverts to rhetorical
emptiness and hashtag activism, it has betrayed both its impotence and
indifference. But if you're an individual citizen without power, if you lack
access to media, drones or special forces, then hashtagging your solidarity with
the aggrieved is a fine gesture and perhaps even more.

The mass tweet is, after all, just the cyber equivalent of the mass petition.
And people don't sneer at petitions. Historically, they've been a way for
individuals, famous or anonymous, to make their views known and, by weight of
number, influence authorities who, in democratic societies, might respond to
such expressions of popular sentiment.

The hashtag campaign for the Nigerian girls originated in Nigeria by Nigerians
was meant to do exactly that: pressure the Nigerian government to more seriously
respond to the kidnapping. It has already had this effect. And attention from
abroad has helped magnify the pressure.

As always, however, we tend to romanticize the power of the tweet. For a while,
Twitter (and other social media) was seen as a game changer that would empower
the masses and invert the age old relationship between the ruler and ruled.

This is mostly rubbish. Yes, the tweet improves upon the mass petition because
tweets contain an instant return address that allows for mass mobilization.

At which point, alas, the age old dynamics of power take hold. If the tyrant,
brandishing guns and tanks, is cruel and determined enough, your tweets will
mean nothing. Try it at Tahrir or Tiananmen, in Damascus or Tehran. They will
shoot and torture you, then maybe even let you keep your precious smartphone.

For the full version of this commentary, go to denverpost.com/opinion.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


