                             1909 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

Ringing in the new year in Colorado politics

BYLINE: Thomas E. Cronin and Robert D. Loevy

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 812 words


It's a new year as well for Colorado politics and politicians. Colorado has a
new Senate president, Morgan Carroll, and a new Supreme Court chief justice,
Nancy Rice. And likeable, yet beleaguered Gov. John Hickenlooper, and likeable,
yet unusually low profile U.S. Sen. Mark Udall are campaigning hard to win re
election on Nov. 4.

We don't have a crystal ball, but years of following political patterns in
Colorado suggest the following intrepid forecasts:

* 2014 should be a good year for Republicans in Colorado and in the nation. The
political party that is not in the White House nearly always does well in
elections held in the sixth year of an incumbent president. Economic recovery
may help the Democrats right now, but the Obama care soap opera, general party
fatigue and complaints of "overreach" all give the Republicans an advantage.

* Hickenlooper, as he did in 2010, will likely buck any building Republican
national wave. Hickenlooper has assiduously protected his center of the road,
cheerleading, "Chamber of Commerce Independent Democrat" brand despite having
been pushed to the left occasionally by his more progressive colleagues.
Hicklenlooper is a battle weary politician at this point. He has confronted
shooting tragedies, historic wildfires, huge floods, the NRA, state Senate
recalls, frackers vs. anti frackers, secessionists, death penalty pros and cons,
Tea Partyers, marijuana legalizers lefties, righties, all but the locusts!
Running again against the ever resilient Tom Tancredo might, in comparison, be
the easiest of his challenges.

Hickenlooper is also advantaged that more mainstream, respected Republicans,
like Attorney General John Suthers and Congressman Cory Gardner, are not running
for governor.

* Democratic Sen. Mark Udall appears headed for re election in part because of
incumbency and also the lack of a prominent Republican opponent who could appeal
to the crucial suburban and non affiliated voters.

* Should there be a national Republican wave this year, it will definitely help
"down ticket" Republicans running for attorney general and secretary of state,
for example. It might also help veteran Congressman Mike Coffman defeat his able
challenger Andrew Romanoff, the former state House speaker. (If he had run in
2012, Romanoff would probably have won the seat.)

Republicans have a shot at picking up a few legislative seats, in part because
the 2011 State Reapportionment Commission created several more legislative swing
districts. Swing districts are normally affected by national waves.

* Principled Democrat Morgan Carroll has now replaced recalled principled
Democrat John Morse as state Senate president. But everyone expects Carroll to
be decidedly pragmatic, for a variety of reasons, including her desire to have
her party retain control of the Senate and the governorship in November. There
will be the typical calls for altering gun regulations, fracking reform,
education funding improvement, and revenue "enhancements," but there will be
little action on any of this. Expect instead lively marijuana oversight debates,
and a variety of obscure new regulations on issues such as drones.

* There will be plenty of jokes this year about Colorado's Rocky Mountain high,
or "Potorado," and there will doubtless be a number of regulatory and
enforcement hiccups as Colorado serves as the nation's experimental test lab for
legalized marijuana. The state has an uneven record of dealing with medical
marijuana, so there are understandable worries. But prohibition hasn't worked,
and a pervasive drug culture already exists here.

Will it help or hurt Colorado's economy? Will the feds find reason to intervene
when their guidelines are violated? Will it be a quiet seamless transition? And
what does it say about Colorado that we embrace legalized pot, have generally
permissive gun regulations, yet seem reluctant to adequately and fairly invest
in K 12 and public higher education? Stay tuned.

* Colorado Springs' bold City for Champions program to create several new
tourist attractions, including an Olympic Museum and a downtown baseball
stadium, will be built over the next couple of years. The business community and
the stalwart El Pomar Foundation are fast at work ensuring funds will be raised.
Colorado Springs' new strong mayor form of government deserves some of the
credit for this something several other Colorado cities should take note of.

* Finally, Browns Canyon, a bucolic stretch of the Arkansas River near Salida,
will, sooner rather than later, become a 22,000 acre National Monument, with a
designated wilderness area within it. Much of this is already BLM or U.S. Forest
land, but it will wonderfully conserve this land for hiking, fishing, hunting,
rafting and similar recreational activities. Colorado regularly adds some new
pearl to the nation's preservationist tradition. Browns Canyon is next.

LOAD-DATE: January 08, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


