                             1911 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            February 2, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

The future: Stepford Robots

BYLINE: Teresa Keegan

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 603 words


Colorado's business owners "remain cautious on hiring" in 2014, according to
recent news reports. Apparently, last year was much tougher than projected, with
companies suffering from lower than expected revenues, relentless downward
pressure on prices and falling profit margins.

Given those harsh economic realities, prudent executives would of course refrain
from hiring. However, business owners may be unwilling to admit to another
eminently sensible reason for keeping head counts as low as possible: Employees
can be a massive pain in the derriere.

Anecdotal evidence of this assertion abounds. Any supervisor can recite a litany
of complaints about a rogue's gallery of workers. There's the Minimalist,
disengaged and unmotivated, torpid as a lizard on a rock, doing just enough to
get by. There's the Surrealist, who shows up for work in shorts and flip flops,
festooned with facial piercings and head tattoos, demanding a hefty raise after
a week on the job. The Expressionist can be especially hard to handle: dramatic,
emotionally intense and high strung, ready to file a grievance over any
perceived slight.

Moreover, employees routinely are caught red handed cheating their employers in
ways small and large: from stealing office supplies and surfing the Internet on
company time to outright embezzlement. Even if they are honest, their behavior
can be really annoying: making loud personal calls, wearing heavy perfume, and
monopolizing the good copier. And it seems every workplace contains at least one
Casanova or his female counterpart, the Jezebel, whose antics put companies at
risk of sexual harassment lawsuits.

But now, there is a developing industry in our state that may eventually make
human employees as outmoded as IBM Correcting Selectrics. There is talk of an
unofficial but growing "robotics cluster" in Colorado, particularly in the
northern part of the state. Industry insiders believe that the combination of
companies already located here and the state's top notch universities could
attract federal dollars for further research in the field, leading to ever more
innovation and improved products.

From an employee's perspective, this is daunting news. How can any mere mortal
ever hope to compete against tireless machines that continue to get smarter,
faster, and easier to use?

For years, people have been losing jobs to artificial intelligence: meter
readers, phone operators, secretaries, paralegals. But now, even more jobs are
on the line. Robots patrol warehouses and data centers and dispense medications
from pharmacies. Amazon has plans for 30 minute home delivery by drones called
"octocopters." Companies have already rolled out driverless cars and automated
trains. Can pilot less airliners be far behind?

And here's a frightening thought: At this pace of innovation, in addition to
being smarter, faster and far more reliable than people, robots may eventually
be a lot better looking, too. Gorgeous "Stepford Workers" will glide about,
effortlessly completing their tasks.

But wait. Humans design robots, and by their nature always push the envelope. I
can envision "mad scientists" who will be unable to resist making robots as
human like as possible, not only physically but emotionally. These creatures
won't merely mimic or simulate emotions. They'll have real feelings: happiness,
sadness, pride, greed, wrath, sloth, envy, lust, gluttony.

Then, workers who lose jobs to faster, smarter, prettier robots will at least
have the cold comfort of knowing that they're every bit as flawed and annoying
as we are.

Teresa Keegan (tkeegan@ecentral.com) works for the courts in Denver.

LOAD-DATE: February 05, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


