                             1922 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Obama's empty West Point speech

BYLINE: Charles Krauthammer

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 21A

LENGTH: 643 words


It is fitting that the day before President Obama gave his grand West Point
address defending the wisdom and prudence of his foreign policy, his government
was urging Americans to evacuate Libya.

Libya, of course, was once the model Obama intervention the exquisitely
calibrated military engagement wrapped in the rhetorical extravagance of a
nationally televised address proclaiming his newest foreign policy doctrine: the
responsibility to protect.

You don't hear R2P bandied about much anymore. Not with more than 50,000
civilians having been slaughtered in Syria's civil war, unprotected in any way
by the United States. Nor for that matter do you hear much about Libya, now so
dangerously chaotic and jihadi infested that the State Department is telling
Americans to get out.

And you didn't hear much of anything in the West Point speech. It was a somber
parade of straw men, as the president applauded himself for steering the nation
on a nervy middle course between extreme isolationism and madcap
interventionism. It was the rhetorical equivalent of that classic national
security joke in which the presidential aide, devoted to policy option X,
submits the following decision memo:

Option 1. All out nuclear war.

Option 2. Unilateral surrender.

Option 3. Policy X.

The isolationism of Obama's telling is a species not to be found anywhere. Not
even Rand Paul would withdraw from everywhere. And even members of Congress'
dovish left have called for sending drones to Nigeria, for God's sake.

As for Obama's interventionists, they are grotesquely described as people "who
think military intervention is the only way for America to avoid looking weak"
while Obama courageously refuses to believe that "every problem has a military
solution."

Name one person who does.

"Why is it that everybody is so eager to use military force?" Obama recently and
plaintively asked about Ukraine. In reality, nobody is. What actual earthlings
are eager for is sending military assistance to Ukraine's woefully equipped
forces.

That's what the interim prime minister asked for when he visited here in March
and was denied. Two months later, military assistance was the first thing Petro
Poroshenko, Ukraine's newly elected president, said he wanted from the United
States. Note: not boots on the ground.

Amid all this, Obama seems unaware of how far his country has fallen. He
attributes claims of American decline to either misreading history or partisan
politics. Problem is: Most of the complaints are coming from abroad, from U.S.
allies with no stake whatsoever in U.S. partisan politics. Their concern is
their own security as they watch this president undertake multiple abdications
from Warsaw to Kabul.

What is the world to think when Obama makes the case for a residual force in
Afghanistan and then announces a drawdown of American forces to 10,000, followed
by total liquidation within two years on a fixed timetable regardless of
circumstances?

The policy contradicts the premise. If you want not to forfeit our terribly hard
earned gains as we forfeited all our gains in Iraq with the 2011 withdrawal why
not let conditions dictate the post 2014 drawdowns? Why go to zero precisely by
2016?

For the same reason, perhaps, that the Afghan surge was ended precisely in 2012,
in the middle of the fighting season but before the November election. A 2016
Afghan end date might help Democrats electorally and, occurring with Obama still
in office, provide a shiny new line to his r\xE9sum\xE9.

Is this how a great nation decides matters of war and peace to help one party
and polish the reputation of one man? As with the West Point speech itself, as
with the president's entire foreign policy of retreat, one can only marvel at
the smallness of it all.

E mail Charles Krauthammer at letters@charleskrauthammer.com A longer version of
this column appears at denverpost.com/opinion.

LOAD-DATE: June 02, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


