                             1958 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 14, 2013 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

At least he still has both ears . . .

BYLINE: John Kelly

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 805 words


Erik Van Loon loves D.C. But does D.C. love him?

"That's a good question," the 42-year-old Dutchman says. His tone of voice
suggests he needs to think about it for a while.

These past few weeks have not been easy for Erik. He has been stymied at nearly
every turn in his efforts to memorialize - nay, monumentalize - his affection
for Washington. Partly this is his own fault. Erik thinks big, and the bigger
they come, the harder they, you know. . . .

Erik is a former accountant, sometime taxi driver, occasional distance swimmer
and energetic artist from Rotterdam. Since 2005, he has been traveling to New
York City for the marathon, where he unveils each year a massive painting along
the race route. It's a bit of guerrilla art. He hopes his paintings will be
picked up by TV cameras broadcasting the race.

When Hurricane Sandy canceled last year's marathon, Erik brought his painting to
Washington, where he stealthily unfurled it near the White House. He was quite
taken by our city. Washington, he decided, is a lovely place: green, walkable,
friendly. He wanted to give the District a gift, and he knew just where to do
it.

In one of his wanderings, Erik had come across the tall concrete chimney at
Second and H streets NW that vents vehicle exhaust from the Interstate 395
tunnel below. It's already decorated on the west side with Val Lewton's 1988
trompe l'oeil image of the Capitol, but Erik thought the narrower south face
needed embellishment.

His idea: cajole 250 Washingtonians to park their cars - red and black only - in
an arrangement that spells "I [Heart] DC," which he would then photograph from a
helicopter, have printed as large as a billboard and hang on the chimney as if
it were a giant Polaroid.

This might then inspire other artists to add their works. "Just imagine this
ugly chimney in a couple of years," Erik says as we stand staring up at it.
"More works, more paintings. I think it could be a nice totem pole."

The moment Erik arrived at Dulles on Sept. 20 he got to work. He stood at the
end of the jetway handing out "I Love DC" fliers to his fellow KLM passengers.
"Join us," they read. "We need only 175 red and 75 black cars for approximately
3 hours to realize I LOVE DC."

He worked out a deal with the owners of a parking lot at Fourth and K NW to
charge $3 a car on the Sunday he wanted to take a photo. He put fliers on every
red and black car he could find in the city.

"I went to 10 or 12 car dealers," Erik says, "from BMW to Toyota to Chrysler to
Chevrolet, and I ask all those car dealers, 'Do you know people with a red or a
black car who would like to join I Love DC?' " (They didn't.)

He contacted Enterprise Rent-A-Car hoping it would offer a discount on red or
black vehicles on the day in question. (It wouldn't.)

He solicited donations online to cover the costs of the work: He needs $1,200 to
make posters to raise awareness, $700 to rent a helicopter for two hours, $1,000
to make Dutch sandwiches for everyone who signed up, $1,600 to print the
18-by-27-foot photo. . . .

Eventually, about 70 people promised their cars, not nearly enough. Nor was Erik
getting enough donations. "I can't afford to pay the whole 'I Love DC' myself,"
he says. "I'm an artist, not the owner of a development corporation. Also, I'm
not Damien Hirst."

Then there were the logistics themselves. "It's a no-fly zone," he says of where
he planned to take the photo. He looked into ditching the chopper and renting a
crane. He joined a group of local drone enthusiasts, in case it might prove
easier to mount a camera on a tiny remote-controlled copter.

D.C. was proving hard to love in other ways, too. When he first arrived, Erik
rented two rooms in a D.C. house he found on Craigslist. Erik alleges he was
made to sleep in the unheated basement. He moved out, didn't get his security
deposit back and has been staying in the homes of Dutch Americans.

I gently point out that "I [Heart]" is a New York thing and that Washingtonians
have complicated feelings about New York. He thinks this shouldn't be an issue.
" 'DC' is really a brand," he says. "I'm using that to make a simple, effective
work."

Did he ever get permission to hang artwork on the tower? No, he says. "I'm doing
it American style, like Nike: Just do it."

There has been one bright spot on this trip. "This year, it happened, after nine
years," Erik says. In the live television feed of the New York Marathon, he
spotted his painting "I Will Win the War." It appeared - small and blurry - for
seven seconds.

As for D.C., yes, Erik thinks it loves him. It's just taking a while to show it.
He's given up on creating his giant auto-photograph this year and will go back
to Rotterdam in December. He vows to return in April and try again.

john.kelly@washpost.com

Twitter: @johnkelly

For previous columns, visit washingtonpost.com/johnkelly.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


