                             1913 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              March 3, 2014 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

Good snow berms make good neighbors

BYLINE: Steve Lipsher

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 597 words


With apologies to the appropriately named poet Robert Frost, as the flakes
continue to accumulate in the high country during this wonderfully stormy
winter, it is the mountainous walls of shoveled snow between each driveway that
have instilled a greater sense of neighborliness.

As we grow ever more physically isolated, flake by flake, behind the 5 foot high
and growing berms separating our properties, we somehow are drawn closer
together, more sociable in my suburban like street in the mountains.

It's been commonly observed that people living in closest proximity crowded
cities, dense apartment complexes often know the least about their neighbors.
The converse is true, too: Rural farmers and ranchers spread out over vast
expanses of land frequently are close friends, in part because of their
interdependence for certain chores and perhaps simply out of a craving for
society.

For us, when the piles of snow start to isolate us visually, we invariably seek
out each other. In the summers, when everyone is outside already enjoying a bike
ride or an after dinner stroll, interaction is easy.

But the winters shut us inside for the most part, and we're relegated to a brief
wave from behind the frosty windshields as we cross paths to and from work.

In the quiet, calm aftermath of the latest storm, the local residents bundled up
in snowmobile suits and parkas so as hardly to be recognizable pop out of their
domiciles like prairie dogs and fire up snowblowers and pull out shovels for
their snow clearing routines. And, despite the cold, we all share warm
camaraderie with a bit of chat during rest breaks.

For instance, I recently met Rocky, the oversized, arthritic, sweet natured
Doberman Pinscher whose humans I see walking him in all weather.

Neighbor Elizabeth never fails to inquire about my own geriatric, blind Lab mix,
Scout.

Mark, who lives directly across the street and has a north shaded driveway,
always complains about how the winters are getting harder on him, but he good
naturedly soldiers on.

And the ever cheerful Dwight laughs at the deep accumulations before firing up
his four wheeler equipped with a plow blade.

When he is done, he frequently comes over to all of our houses. On more than one
occasion, I've returned home late at night to find my driveway scoured clean by
Dwight's handiwork. He has no idea how much I appreciate that, although he
contends he is just having fun.

Truth is, when it comes to shoveling snow off my driveway, I don't mind the
routine and mindlessness. (Please refrain from comment, those of you who
previously have objected to some of the views expressed in my columns.)

It is satisfying to see, with each pass, the incremental gain in reclaiming the
clear pathway that allows me to make it up the slight incline into the garage on
my bald tires without a running start.

Disdaining the mechanical drone and machine efficiency of a motorized
snowblower, my weapon of choice is a big push scoop shovel, which I use to push
the snow to the foot of the driveway and then to the side via a hard packed ramp
that I construct for dumping.

I once had a girlfriend I know, it's hard to believe, sometimes even for myself
who thought it was better to shovel across the driveway instead of down it. I
pointed out that, with each passing storm, the pavement got a little bit
narrower, as the piles built up on the flanks and encroached on the pavement.

But it's hard to complain effectively or graciously when someone is willing to
shovel your snow.

Steve Lipsher (slipsher@comcast.net) of Silverthorne writes a monthly column for
The Denver Post.

LOAD-DATE: March 06, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


