                             1994 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            November 8, 2013 Friday

Today in Small Business: A $10 Minimum Wage?

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 556 words



HIGHLIGHT: Social media ideas that small businesses can take from big brands.
Why more small businesses are being sold. How small businesses near Yosemite are
coping.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

Management


     ·    The White House is supporting a push for a $10-an-hour minimum wage.
     ·    A Kansas business closes after 92 years and its owner shares the
          secret for how it stayed open so long.
     ·    Small job-shop hiring across the country is being fueled by 3-D
          printing and other technologies. And Joshua Klein thinks 3-D printing
          could be the end of Walmart as we know it.


The Economy


     ·    The first estimate of third-quarter growth in the gross domestic
          product is greater than expected: 2.8 percent.
     ·    Budget talks hit a snag.
     ·    Weekly jobless claims fall.
     ·    Retail sales rose in October.
     ·    Scott Grannis thinks the Federal Reserve's objective is to destroy the
          demand for cash: "If they succeed, and they most likely will, then the
          world will attempt to reduce its holdings of cash and increase its
          holdings of riskier assets."


Social Media


     ·    Twitter goes public and its shares surge.
     ·    These are the top 140 Twitter users in the world, and these are the
          top Twitter markets in the world (Saudi Arabia?).
     ·    Here is how hidden data in tweets help target ads.
     ·    And here are three social media ideas from big brands that small
          businesses can use.
     ·    A bar's Facebook promotion stirs controversy.


Retail


     ·    Amazon.com's huge investments in technology may shape the future for
          retailers everywhere.
     ·    Actually, Blockbuster won't be closing all of its stores. Can you
          guess where the chain is still open?


Opportunities


     ·    Lenders and investors are rushing into restaurants.
     ·    A Canadian start-up has built its first European plant to retrieve
          phosphorous from sewage and waste water and turn it into fertilizer.


Cash Flow


     ·    This common practice could ruin your credit rating.
     ·    Here are four reasons more small businesses are being sold.


Sales


     ·    Jason M. Lemkin believes you will know in the first 30 days if your
          vice president of sales isn't going to work out. One test: did the new

            V.P. get rid of the worst sales representative you have in the first
          30 days?


Taxes


     ·    Twitter employees will owe an average of $420,000 in taxes after the
          company's public offering.
     ·    The Internal Revenue Service says it will be fast-tracking audits of
          small businesses (that's a good thing).


Health Care


     ·    There are now four people signed up through the health insurance
          exchange in Delaware.
     ·    Techies are finding new problems on HealthCare.gov.


Around the Country


     ·    Small businesses in Groveland, Calif., are coping with two big hits.
     ·    A small-business group in New Jersey believes that increasing the
          minimum wage is not a good idea.
     ·    West Virginia entrepreneurs have a new private resource they can tap
          to help finance their start-ups.
     ·    Detroit's bankruptcy crisis isn't bringing down small businesses.


Around the World


     ·    Can a plumber fix Europe's banks?
     ·    Russia cuts its growth forecast.


Technology


     ·    Microsoft attacks Gmail with a blunt comparison and updates Office
          365.
     ·    Here are six picks for small-business collaboration software.
     ·    This app will save energy, one worker at a time.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Amazon's Trojan Rabbit
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Business Lessons of Walter White
     ·    Today in Small Business: The 'Crabfries' Lawsuit
     ·    Today in Small Business: Employee Monitoring


LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


