                             1930 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              July 6, 2014 Sunday
                               SUN SCENE Edition

CIA memoir an exotic peek inside past three decades

BYLINE: Mary Louise Kelly

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 898 words


There is an art to writing a CIA memoir. You must divulge enough insider
tradecraft and gossip that readers feel they're getting a glimpse behind the
curtain but not so much that the censors swoop down. You have to describe covert
operations in colorful detail, without revealing still classified information.
And a challenge inherent to any Washington memoir you want to settle old scores
("setting the record straight" is the preferred term) but not come across as an
embittered has been.

Jack Devine's memoir, "Good Hunting," mostly succeeds at navigating these
treacherous waters. Devine was a CIA spy for 32 years. He was in Chile when
Salvador Allende fell. He later ran CIA stations in Latin America and Rome, and
he eventually rose to become acting chief of the agency's clandestine service.
His book jacket promises a "master class in spycraft." The memoir doesn't quite
live up to that, but Devine does share tales of filing expense reports written
with invisible ink and attempting to recruit a foreign agent in Santiago while
gagging on spoonfuls of raw sea urchins.

There are flashes of the author's keen sense of humor. While serving undercover
in Rome, Devine was invited to Pope John Paul II's private chapel at the
Vatican. After Mass, the pontiff leaned in and inquired, "Where do you work?"
Devine, wary of failing his next polygraph, managed to stammer, "Your Holiness,
I work for the U.S. government." (He titles the chapter "Do I Lie to the Pope,
or Break Cover?")

The book, however, is a mostly serious reflection on a long career at an
institution that Devine clearly still loves. "When an autopsy is done," he says,
"you're going to find that part of my heart contains the CIA's stamp."

Devine provides an accounting of his role in some of the agency's most
controversial entanglements, such as Iran contra and the covert war against the
Soviets in Afghanistan. He ran that war in the late 1980s, as director of the
CIA's Afghan Task Force. To this day, on his office wall in New York hangs a
print of an official agency painting depicting the moment Afghan mujahedeen
fighters shouted "Allahu Akbar!" and fired a Stinger missile for the first time
at a Soviet helicopter gunship.

Devine doesn't deliver Earth shattering revelations. His strength lies instead
in humanizing the many larger than life characters he tangled with over the
years. That list includes the 11 CIA directors he served. There's a great scene
featuring the famously irascible William Casey, President Ronald Reagan's CIA
chief. Devine recalls Casey flying into Panama for meetings and insisting on
donuts for breakfast. "Procuring U.S. style donuts was impossible in Panama in
those days," Devine protests, noting that in his thank you cable to staffers
after the visit, Casey signed off with: "NEXT TIME, YOU WILL GET DONUTS."

One character who haunted Devine throughout his career was Aldrich Ames. The two
men first crossed paths as junior officers, combing through secret cables side
by side in a basement vault at Langley. Years later in Rome, when Devine was
directly supervising the man who would prove to be the greatest traitor in CIA
history, he writes, "I had an eerie sensation that something was wrong, although
I couldn't put my finger on it." Devine recalls having dinner at Ames' home, at
which Devine and his wife enjoyed a "meat and vegetable dish" and a "decent red
wine." By that point, Ames had been selling secrets to the Russians for years.

Elsewhere in the book, Devine writes of the importance of instinct in the
intelligence business. "The most important thing is to let your inner ear speak
to you," he notes. If he feels guilty because his inner ear failed him on Ames,
he doesn't directly say so.

Devine retired from government in 1998, before the two most troubling episodes
in modern CIA history: the failure to prevent the 9/11 attacks and the pre Iraq
war intelligence fiasco. That makes it tempting to engage in finger pointing,
and Devine's comments on Iraq in particular can come across as preachy.

"As it happened, I saw the disastrous Iraq War coming," he remarks, adding that
he could not "have abided the way intelligence on weapons of mass destruction
was handled." In hindsight, of course, no one is happy with the way intelligence
on Iraq was handled. But Devine's tone will probably still strike a sour note
with some former colleagues.

Looking forward, Devine offers a prescription for the CIA. The thrust of his
argument is that the agency must return to what it does best traditional
espionage and covert action while ceding some of its post 9/11 paramilitary role
to the Pentagon.

Today, CIA drones continue to prowl the skies above Pakistan and Yemen an
arrangement Devine welcomes because the spy agency, unlike the Pentagon, has the
ability to operate "below the radar and in ways that preserve some level of
plausible deniability."

That ability remains the CIA's raison d'\xEAtre. Devine has produced an
entertaining chronicle of his decades at the agency and a persuasive case for
its continued relevance. During his years as a spy, he liked to sign off on
classified cables with the phrase "Good Hunting," a reference to the pursuit of
intelligence sources and of America's enemies. A fitting title for the book and
for a life's work.

Mary Louise Kelly, a former NPR intelligence correspondent, is the author of the
espionage novel "Anonymous Sources."

LOAD-DATE: July 09, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jack Devine ran the covert war against the Soviets in Afghanistan in
the late 1980s, as director of the CIA's Afghan Task Force. Above, Afghan
anti-Soviet resistance fighters with their primitive arms in the eastern parts
of the country. Getty Images file
While serving undercover in Rome, Devine, left, was invited to Pope John Paul
II's private chapel at the Vatican. After Mass, the pontiff leaned in and
inquired, "Where do you work?" Devine, wary of failing his next polygraph,
managed to stammer, "Your Holiness, I work for the U.S. government." Getty
Images file, Associated Press file
Pope John Paul II raises his arms as he acknowledges cheers of the crowd at St.
Peter's Square Oct. 16, 1978, shortly after he had been elected as successor to
late Pope John Paul I by the conclavists. The 58-year-old former archbishop of
Krakow, Poland, is the first non-Italian Pope since 450 years. (Ap Photo)
Anonymous, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


