                             1907 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            December 13, 2013 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

The Open Forum Letters to the Editor

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 27A

LENGTH: 518 words


The facts about Plan B

Re: "The facts about contraception," Dec. 9 letter to the editor.

Letter writers Kristina Tocce, M.D., and Christina Gavito, purport to "clarify a
misconception" about contraception. They write: "Hobby Lobby believes that
emergency contraceptives, such as Plan B, are abortifacients. These assertions
are simply not supported by the best available research. ... Plan B does not
prevent implantation of embryos."

Oh? Well, here is what the Plan B website says: "It is possible that Plan B One
Step may also work by ... preventing attachment (implantation) to the uterus
(womb)."

That is, the manufacturers of the pill themselves acknowledge that their drug
may kill living, growing embryos. Moreover, by the time implantation is
complete, an embryo may have undergone as many as eight stages of mitosis, so it
is hundreds of cells, already differentiatiing into bone, skin, organs, etc.

Tom Longua, Westminster

Offended by depiction of Obama

Re: Dec. 10 John Cole editorial cartoon.

Both my wife and I had an instant negative reaction to the cartoon by John Cole.
It was truly offensive to us. Depicting the president with such a foolish
expression "playing" with drones demeans what he accomplished both before and
since receiving the Nobel Peace Prize. It is simply disrespectful and not funny
to those of us who admire him for what he has done to promote peace and avoid
war.

We are avid readers of your editorial page and occasionally disagree with
opinions and cartoons, but this one crossed a line for us.

Bob Morton, Roxborough

Flu shots for all, every year

Re: "Young adult dies of flu, first of season," Dec. 5 news story.

The recent death of a healthy young adult from influenza is an important
reminder of how flu should not be taken lightly. Unlike the common cold, flu can
cause severe symptoms such as high fevers, low oxygen, pneumonia and even death.
According to the Centers for Disease control, 169 children, five here in
Colorado, died of flu last year.

Flu is preventable. As pediatricians who have all been vaccinated, we strongly
recommend flu vaccine every year, not only for very young children and children
with chronic illness, but also for healthy children, their parents, and everyone
else.

It's not too late. Flu season remains in full force but is expected to peak in
January or February. Join in the fight against flu and get you and your loved
ones vaccinated today. Flu vaccines are for everyone, every year.

Stacy Stieren, M.D., Aurora

Elizabeth Coogan, M.D., Denver

Anne Marie Rick, M.D., Denver

A reason to keep death penalty

Re: "A reason to kill death penalty," Dec. 8 guest commentary.

Defense attorney David A. Lane outlines the reasons Colorado should abolish the
death penalty. He leaves out the big reason it should not be abolished. Say a
man commits a murder and is sentenced to life without parole. While in prison,
he kills a fellow inmate, or worse, a prison guard. What to do? Sentence him to
another life sentence? He kills again. Another life sentence?

Without the death penalty, Mr. Lane, you just have given him a "license to
kill."

Earl Becker, Wheat Ridge

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


