                             1936 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 24, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

U.S. leadership is crucial in Iraq

BYLINE: Ved Nanda

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 578 words


When President Obama authorized airstrikes on the extremist jihadi Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), which now calls itself the Islamic State, he had
little choice. ISIS forces had besieged the Yazidi religious minority on the
Sinjan Mountain, pushed back the Kurdish Peshmerga forces, overrun several
cities, and were threatening Erbil, the capital of the semi autonomous
Kurdistan. Obama cautiously described the intervention as humanitarian
assistance in order to protect Americans and to meet the Islamic State's threat.
He assured Americans that the action would be limited, with no boots on the
ground.

ISIS forces retreated, and subsequently the president authorized strikes by
warplanes and drones to help the Peshmarga and Iraqi special forces to retake
the Mosul Dam. The president wrote to Congress: "The failure of the Mosul dam
could threaten the lives of large numbers of civilians, endanger U.S. personnel
and facilities, including the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad."

The limited U.S. intervention includes arming the Peshmarga, which faces the
Sunni militants of the Islamic State who were able to get sophisticated American
weaponry, including armored personnel carriers left behind as Iraqi forces fled
from Mosul and other cities in northern Iraq when the Islamic State forces
rapidly took over parts of Syria and northern Iraq.

Experts agree that the U.S. airstrikes, no matter how effective they were in
dislodging the extremists from the Mosul Dam and the Kurd cities they had
earlier overtaken, even combined with 1,000 American advisers in Iraq, will not
suffice to defeat the Islamic State. Concerted efforts by Iraqi forces and the
Peshmerga will be needed.

The Kurds, who had faced persecution over a long period of time under Saddam
Hussein and have had a difficult relationship with Baghdad under the rule of the
outgoing Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki, are the only stable element in Iraq.
They have long sought an independent state of Kurdistan. As the largest ethnic
group in the world without a representative sovereign state, about 35 million
Kurds are scattered in northern Iraq, western Iran, northeastern Syria, and
southeastern Turkey. This regional splitting can be traced back to the aftermath
of World War I, when the Allies redrew territorial boundaries of the Middle
East. The Kurds suffered severe persecution and human rights violations, and
more than 150,000 of them were killed in the early 1990s in the attempted
genocide by the Hussein administration's use of chemical weapons. In 1992, the
United States led no fly zone provided a safe haven to the Kurds, who took de
facto control over the territory.

There are concerns about the Balkanization of Iraq if the Kurds were to secede.
Under international law, however, they meet the requirements of a sovereign
state. They seem willing to stay as an autonomous region within Iraq, but that
will depend on the policies of Prime Minister Ali al Abadi, who is perceived as
more open and inclusive than al Maliki, whose anti Sunni and anti Kurd policies
had created deep divisions and alienations.

The Islamic State poses a major threat, not simply to the region but the entire
world. Without the U.S. leadership, no effective response is likely.

Ved Nanda (vnanda@law.du.edu) is Thompson G. Marsh Professor of Law and director
of the Nanda Center for International and Comparative Law at the University of
Denver Sturm College of Law. A longer version of this column appears online.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


