                             1979 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 13, 2013 Friday
                                Regional Edition

Kerry pushing Mideast security deal

BYLINE: William Booth;Anne Gearan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


JERUSALEM - The Obama administration is struggling to convince Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to accept a security arrangement that could leave Israeli
troops stationed inside a future Palestinian state, on that state's border with
Jordan.

Neither side is on board with what people familiar with the proposals describe
as a limited Israeli defensive presence along the Jordan River for a period of
five to 15 years.

Secretary of State John F. Kerry returned to the region Thursday night - his
second visit in a week - to try and convince them. Kerry is hoping for some
public sign of progress as his first year as the chief U.S. diplomat draws to a
close, and an unofficial April deadline for a peace agreement looms.

For Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, limiting the number of Israeli
troops in the Jordan Valley, and how long they can be there, would not guarantee
safety.

For Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, who has promised his people
they would not see a single Israeli soldier on Palestinian land in a future
state, any army presence would be too much.

Joint presentations to Netanyahu and Abbas last week by Kerry and retired Marine
Gen. John R. Allen, the Obama administration's special envoy, do not appear to
have been well-received. Neither leader spoke in support of the proposals.
Spokesmen and critics on both sides sharply criticized trashed the ideas in news
media interviews, though they did not reject the proposals outright.

State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki denied that Kerry's speedy return to the
region means that the talks are bogging down.

A generation of Israeli generals has considered the Jordan Valley a crucial
eastern flank against a land invasion of the Jewish state from the east. But
where they once worried about columns of Iraqi tanks, they are now more
concerned about asymmetrical warfare from terrorist groups seeking to infiltrate
the West Bank and use it as a platform to attack.

Since 1967, the valley has been under the control of the Israeli military, which
operates checkpoints and bases. The area bristles with covert listening
stations, radar sweeps and thermal- and night-vision cameras. On the mountains
that rise steeply from the valley floor, Israel maintains a series of
early-warning stations. Troops are on constant patrol along the river and the
passes.

In a meeting last month with members of his Fatah political party, Abbas claimed
that Israel wants to stay in the sparsely populated valley for another 40 years
to maintain its profitable date palm groves, fish ponds and greenhouse farms.

"They say they need the Jordan Valley to protect themselves against the Iranian
threat or whoever comes from the eastern border," Abbas was quoted in local news
reports as saying. "Rather, it is a matter of investment .. . . The claim that
they want to protect their eastern border from Iran and others is all lies."

Israel explains its security concerns by pointing to the Gaza Strip, on its
southern border. Israel withdrew from Gaza in 2005. The militant Islamic
organization Hamas came to power two years later. Now, rockets and
shoulder-fired missiles are routinely smuggled into Gaza from Egypt, Israeli
officials say. They note that no such weapons have been found in the tightly
controlled West Bank.

"The Israeli government is concerned that the Palestinian side will not be
interested or not be able to carry out its part of the deal," said Giora Eiland,
a retired major general in the Israel army and former head of Israel's National
Security Council. "What happens if this deal is signed tomorrow, Israel
withdraws and a day later Hamas takes over the West Bank?

"This is the Israeli concern, and this creates a lot of suspicions and agitation
on the Israeli side," he said.

Kerry and his team have tried to help Israel overcome its fear with offers of
U.S.-provided intelligence and technology - but Israel already has sophisticated
drones, surveillance technology and some of the best "smart fences" in the
world.

At one point, U.S. diplomats discussed placing international troops in the
Jordan Valley. But Israeli hawks pointed to failures by U.N. forces in
demilitarized zones along the borders with Lebanon and Syria.

Another proposal calls for a combination of Palestinian and Israeli security
forces at border crossings and a strip of territory along the Jordan River.

"The question now is, for how long will the Israelis be there?" Eiland said.
"Will it mean a permanent Israeli presence or for a limited period of time? Does
that mean two years, five years, 15 years or 50 years?"

william.booth@washpost.com

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Gearan reported from Washington. Ruth Eglash in Jerusalem contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


