                             1983 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday
                                Regional Edition

Kansas airport worker arrested in bomb plot to aid al-Qaeda

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 408 words

DATELINE: WICHITA


WICHITA - A Kansas man was arrested Friday on charges that he planned to set off
a car bomb at the Wichita airport in an attack intended to support al-Qaeda,
authorities said.

Terry Lee Loewen, a 58-year-old avionics technician who worked at the airport,
was arrested before dawn as he tried to enter the tarmac in a vehicle he
believed was loaded with high explosives.

But the materials in the car were inert, and no one at the airport was in
immediate danger, authorities said.

The Wichita man had been under investigation for about six months after making
online statements to an undercover agent about wanting to commit "violent jihad"
against the United States, U.S. Attorney Barry Grissom said.

Authorities said Loewen spent months studying the layout of the Mid-Continent
Regional Airport, its flight patterns and other details to maximize fatalities
and damage. During that time, he developed a plan with conspirators, who were
undercover FBI agents, to use his employee access card to pull off the attack.

Loewen planned to die in the explosion, a fate that he said was inevitable in
his quest to become a martyr in a jihad against the United States, according to
court documents.

Authorities said they believe Loewen acted alone. No other arrests were
expected.

In his online conversations, Loewen talked about downloading documents about
jihad, martyrdom and an al-Qaeda "manual." He expressed admiration for Anwar
al-Awlaki, the American-born al-Qaeda leader who was killed in a 2011 drone
strike in Yemen, according to the documents.

In August, an undercover agent offered to introduce Loewen to someone who could
help him engage in jihad. A few days later, he mentioned providing a "tour" of
the airport for one of the undercover agents.

In September, the undercover agent told Loewen he had returned from overseas
after meeting with individuals connected with al-Qaeda. The agent told him the
"brothers" were excited to hear about his access to the airport and asked Loewen
if he would be willing to plant some type of device, the documents said.

"Wow! That's some heavy stuff you just laid down. Am I interested? Yes. I still
need time to think about it, but I can't imagine anything short of arrest
stopping me," Loewen told the agent, adding that he needed to let Allah guide
him.

Loewen was charged with attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction,
attempting to damage property and attempting to provide support to terrorist
group al-Qaeda.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


