                             1961 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 22, 2013 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 271 words


A Karzai surprise The Afghan leader voiced support for a post-2014 deal with the
U.S. but said he won't sign it until the spring. A8

the nation

Insurance brokerssaid technological problems with HealthCare.gov prevent them
from helping consumers sign up for plans. A3

The annual one-night head countof homeless people found a 4 percent decline,
with big drops among families and veterans. A2

Americans lag behind the international average in life expectancy, a report
found. A18

the economy

The Dow Jones industrial averageclosed above 16,000 for the first time on
encouraging jobs news. A17

Classic toystop wish lists this season as analysts wonder how the lack of a
must-have gift will affect shopping. A17

A Thanksgiving dinner'saverage cost has dropped a bit for the first time in
three years, a survey by a trade group said. A19

the world

A State Department advisoryagainst travel to North Korea came after a visiting
U.S. veteran of the Korean War was jailed there. A10

U.S. officialsstrongly denied Pakistani allegations that an Islamic school was
hit in a U.S. drone strike. A10

the region

The corruption probeat two Maryland detention facilities led to 14 more arrests
of current or former corrections officers. B1

D.C. policesaid two recent attacks in Columbia Heights may be part of a
disturbing trend called the "knockout game." B1

What a 5-year-old girltold a neighbor led to the discovery of her parents and
baby brother dead of apparent gunshot wounds, in Frederick County.
Murder-suicide is suspected. B1

The teen driverinvolved in a skateboarding stunt in Arlington that killed his
friend apologized before he was sentenced. B3

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


