                             1954 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 11, 2013 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

Private Pakistani schools ban book by teen education activist

BYLINE: Zarar Khan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Private schools in Pakistan said Sunday that they have
banned teenage activist Malala Yousafzai's book, saying it doesn't show enough
respect for Islam and calling her a tool of the West.

Yousafzai attracted global attention last year when the Taliban shot her in the
head in northwest Pakistan for criticizing the group's interpretation of Islam,
which limits girls' access to education. Her profile has risen steadily since
then, and she released a memoir in October, "I Am Yousafzai," co-written with
British journalist Christina Lamb.

Although Yousafzai has become a hero to many across the world for opposing the
Taliban and standing up for girls' education, conspiracy theorists in Pakistan
say her shooting was staged to create a champion for the West to embrace.

Adeeb Javedani, president of the All Pakistan Private Schools Management
Association, said his group has banned Yousafzai's book from the libraries of
its 40,000 affiliated schools and has called on the government to bar it from
school curriculums.

"Everything about Yousafzai is now becoming clear," Javedani said. "To me, she
is representing the West, not us."

Kashif Mirza, chairman of the All Pakistan Private Schools Federation, said his
group also has banned Yousafzai's book in its affiliated schools. Yousafzai "was
a role model for children, but this book has made her controversial," Mirza
said. "Through this book, she became a tool in the hands of the Western powers."

He said the book did not show enough respect for Islam because it referred to
the prophet Muhammad without using the abbreviation PBUH - "peace be upon him" -
as is customary in many parts of the Muslim world. He also said that the book
spoke favorably of author Salman Rushdie - who angered many Muslims with his
book "The Satanic Verses" - and Ahmadis, members of a minority sect who have
been declared non-Muslims under Pakistani law.

In her reference to Rushdie, Yousafzai said in the book that her father viewed
"The Satanic Verses" as "offensive to Islam but believes strongly in the freedom
of speech."

"First, let's read the book and then why not respond with our own book," the
book quoted her father as saying.

Yousafzai mentioned in her book that Pakistan's population of 180 million
includes more than 2 million Ahmadis, "who say they are Muslim though our
government says they are not."

"Sadly those minority communities are often attacked," the book said, referring
also to Pakistan's 2 million Christians.

The conspiracy theories about Yousafzai reflect the level of influence wielded
by right-wing Islamists sympathetic to the Taliban in Pakistan. They also
reflect the poor state of education in Pakistan, where fewer than half the
country's children complete a basic, primary education.

Millions of children attend private school because of the poor state of the
public education system.

The Taliban blew up scores of schools and discouraged girls from getting an
education when they took over the Swat Valley, where Yousafzai lived, several
years ago. The army staged a large ground offensive in Swat in 2009 that pushed
many militants out of the valley, but periodic attacks continue to occur. The
mastermind of the assault on Yousafzai, Mullah Fazlullah, recently was appointed
the new head of the Pakistani Taliban after his predecessor was killed in a U.S.
drone strike.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


