                             1985 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          December 18, 2013 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Dec. 17, 2013

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 774 words

SYRIA

British: Doctor was 'in effect murdered'

A minister in Britain's Foreign Office accused the government of Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad on Tuesday of effectively murdering a British doctor
held in Syrian custody, saying there is no excuse for the treatment of Abbas
Khan.

Khan, 32, an orthopedic surgeon from London, was seized by government troops in
Aleppo in November 2012 after he entered Syria on a humanitarian mission. He
appeared to be on the verge of being released when news of his death was
announced.

Hugh Robertson, head of the Foreign Office's Middle East division, said in a
televised statement that "there is no excuse whatsoever for the treatment that
he has suffered by the Syrian authorities." In an unusually direct attack,
Robertson accused Syrian officials of having "in effect murdered a British
national who was in their country to help people."

Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad told the BBC that Khan took his own
life. That claim was dismissed as "utter nonsense" by Khan's brother, Shah
Nawaz.

The Foreign Office said Syrian authorities consistently ignored requests for
access to Khan and information about his detention.

- Associated Press

Assault on Aleppo extends to third day

Syrian warplanes stepped up airstrikes on rebel-held districts in Aleppo on
Tuesday, the third day of an assault that has killed more than 100 people in the
northern city, activists said.

The strikes came hours after U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon demanded a
cease-fire in the nearly three-year-old conflict, in which more than 120,000
people have been killed.

The escalation suggested that the Assad government was redoubling efforts to
drive the opposition out of Aleppo, Syria's largest city and once the country's
commercial hub, before a peace conference expected to take place in Switzerland
in five weeks.

- Associated Press

JAPAN

New security plan focuses on China

Japan on Tuesday approved a plan to increase defense spending by 5 percent over
the next five years to purchase its first surveillance drones, more jet fighters
and naval destroyers in the face of China's military expansion.

The revised five-year defense plan was adopted by the cabinet along with a new
national security strategy that reflects Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's drive to
raise the profile of Japan's military and have the country participate more in
international diplomacy and security.

Experts say the plan is in line with ongoing global power shifts, but Japan's
neighbors - and some Japanese citizens - worry that the new strategies push the
country away from its pacifist constitution adopted after World War II.

- Associated Press

Tunisians mark 3rd anniversary of start of Arab Spring: Relatively small,
subdued crowds of Tunisians rallied to observe the third anniversary of the
self-immolation of vegetable seller Mohammed Bouazizi, which set in motion the
uprisings across North Africa and the Middle East that came to be known as the
Arab Spring. Despite hardships, the art of patient political negotiation has
been on display in recent days in Tunisia. The ruling Islamist-led Ennahda
party, for months the target of popular protests, agreed over the weekend to the
appointment of a caretaker prime minister to lead an interim government until
elections are held next year.

Actor says detained U.S. businessman has left Bolivia: Actor Sean Penn said
Tuesday that he is with Jacob Ostreicher after the New York businessman was
secretly spirited out of Bolivia, where he's been fighting for more than two
years to clear his name in a money-laundering investigation. Penn said in an
e-mail to the Associated Press that Ostreicher is safe and receiving medical
attention at an undisclosed location. Ostreicher was released a year ago and put
under house arrest after Penn appealed to President Evo Morales to free him.

Italy denounced for hosing down migrants in cold: Italy's government has
promised an investigation into the treatment of migrants after a video was taken
of naked refugees being hosed down in cold weather at a center on the southern
Italian island of Lampedusa. The video, aired on state-run television, showed a
dozen migrants who lined up in a warehouse and then stripped to be hosed down
with a solution to treat scabies.

Date set for Serbian E.U. accession talks: The European Union set a date of Jan.
21 for the start of accession talks with Serbia, rewarding Belgrade for
democratic reforms and its efforts to normalize relations with its former
province, Kosovo. Although Serbia has moved from pariah status among ex-Yugoslav
states,  it will still take years before it is ready to join the bloc.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


