                             191 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                            November 22, 2013 Friday

Chinese Stealth Drone Makes First Flight

BYLINE: GERRY DOYLE

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 316 words



HIGHLIGHT: According to state-run media, the Lijian, or &#8220;Sharp
Sword,&#8221; combat drone made its first flight of about 20 minutes on
Thursday.


Yet another Chinese drone variant has taken wing - and this one might be
stealthy.

According to the state-run Global Times newspaper, the Lijian, or "Sharp Sword,"
combat drone made its first flight on Thursday. The report said the flight
lasted about 20 minutes and went without incident.

The English-language China Daily also carried a report on the Lijian.

The Lijian is different from other Chinese drones, such as the joined-wing
design spotted a few weeks ago, in that it appears to be designed with stealth
characteristics in mind. The contours are similar to those of the Lockheed
Martin RQ-170 Sentinel and even the Northrop Grumman X-47B, which is in the
midst of aircraft carrier landing trials. Dassault's nEURon and BAE's Taranis
programs are also superficially similar.

Although the article specifically calls it an "unmanned ground attack aircraft,"
no weapon bays were visible in any of the photos, which appeared to have been
taken from outside an airfield in southwestern China. The drone, reportedly
designed by the Shenyang Aircraft Design Institute and manufactured by Hongdu
Aviation Industry Group, was first spotted in May, but this is the first time it
has been viewed in flight.

The China Daily report said the flight shows that China has "again narrowed the
air-power disparity between itself and Western nations." And indeed, a first
flight is a big step, but the stealth features that would make a drone like this
a potential balance-shifter remain unproven in this design. Much like China's
J-20 and J-31, the drone certainly appears stealthy, but without any details on
the materials used, for instance, it is impossible to tell whether the reality
matches the deadly looks.


     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    Running Away From Japanese Cars in Chongqing
     ·    Taking on the Task of 5: A Party Veteran on Xi Jinping
     ·    An Island Outpost for China's Maritime Claims
     ·    On the Roach to Riches


LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


