                             1988 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                            November 4, 2013 Monday

Editorial Is Under Fire for Saying President 'Clearly Misspoke' on Health Care

BYLINE: MARGARET SULLIVAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 502 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Times&#8217;s editorial page editor addresses reader complaints
about a phrase.


A Times editorial on Sunday on the new health care law let President Obama off
the hook with its too-soft choice of words, according to some readers who
complained to me on Monday.

The editorial began this way:

Congressional Republicans have stoked consumer fears and confusion with charges
that the health care reform law is causing insurers to cancel existing policies
and will force many people to pay substantially higher premiums next year for
coverage they don't want. That, they say, violates President Obama's pledge that
if you like the insurance you have, you can keep it.

The next sentence - "Mr. Obama clearly misspoke when he said that." - clearly
has many people fired up:

A reader, Richard Limmer, was one of many who wrote to me about it. In an email
he asked: "Don't you think a reasonable person would call that lying? Even the
word 'misspoke' is Orwellian 'doublespeak' and part of the 'newspeak' your
editors resort to when trying to rationalize Obama's blatant lies."

Another reader, Dean Landsman, saw this as a syntax problem: "There's a word
flow and syntax problem here, or so it seems to me. How can one 'clearly
misspeak?' Perhaps it would better flow, or would have been better stated, as,
'Clearly Mr. Obama misspoke when he said that.'"

And a number of media outlets took the opportunity to bash The Times. The Fox
News host Greta Van Susteren swung away on her blog: "The President said this
not once, not twice, but multiple times and it was part of the Obamacare
supporter talking points. You say it one time and it could be misspeaking - but
when it is part of your mantra, and your talking points ... repeated over and
over and over again ... well, the rest of us just are not that stupid."

On Monday, I asked the editorial page editor, Andrew Rosenthal, about the
wording.

"We have a high threshold for whether someone lied," he told me. The phrase that
The Times used "means that he said something that wasn't true." Saying the
president lied would have meant something different, Mr. Rosenthal said - that
he knew it was false and intended to express the falsehood. "We don't know
that," he said.

Contrary to what many readers and commenters are saying, The Times has
frequently been tough on the president and his administration in recent months
on subjects from press rights to surveillance to drones.

But "misspoke" does suggest a one-time slip of the tongue.

Wouldn't it have been better, I asked Mr. Rosenthal, if the editorial had said
that Mr. Obama's statements "clearly weren't true," or that the president "was
clearly wrong" when he repeatedly made those statements?

He responded that the editorial's language was fine, but he also allowed, "We
could have done that."


     ·    The Story Behind the Racial Profiling Article in The Times
     ·    Was a Question About Women and the 'Great American Novel' Sexist?
     ·    Behind the Scenes on Changes to a Story on Pope Francis
     ·    An Unacceptable Headline Atop a Questionable Article
     ·    Vows Column Angers Readers With Mention of Child's Death as a
          Spiritual Milestone


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


