                             1908 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            December 23, 2013 Monday
                               MON SCENE Edition

Convenience

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 451 words


The skinny:

It may be a while before we can outsource our driving and walking, but there's a
market for it, judging by the buzz over Amazon teasing that it's testing using
drones for delivery somewhere down the line and Google's bewildering self
driving cars and sudden purchase of robotics companies.

Both companies are among the drivers of a serious push to automate and
streamline everything we do while making cash hand over fist, of course by being
omnipresent and very nearly omniscient. Amazon, for example, will allow you to
"subscribe" to household items like toilet paper, so it arrives at your doorstep
monthly.

You can also find, to the dismay of environmentalists, single use products for
nearly every need these days. The only one that seems to have gone out of style
is the formerly ubiquitous disposable camera.

We hardly think about it now, but single serve yogurt cups are a great example.
It doesn't take long at the grocery store to see that a larger tub would save
you money, but you've made the calculation in your head that you want the
convenience of yogurt being ready to go, don't mind throwing away a cup each
day, and don't want to spend a minute in the morning scooping yogurt into a
container you carry with you.

Time is money, as they say, and you've chosen to outsource mundane tasks because
convenience is your priority.

The tools:

The aforementioned Amazon Subscribe and Save is designed for people who don't
want to spend time and energy going to the store. You can't "subscribe" to just
anything on Amazon, but the selection of household products, groceries and
toiletries is pretty broad.

If you want a product you can't subscribe to or just want to outsource all of
your shopping you might be able to hire someone to do it for you on a site like
TaskRabbit.

Want higher end convenience? How about having personal care items or clothes
chosen by stylists delivered right to your door? The Internet's got you covered.
Birchbox for the former, Trunk Club for the latter (for men). Oh, and there's
also BarkBox for dogs, naturally.

The coffee example:

"We offer a coffee subscription," Boxcar Coffee Roaster's Katie Parks says. And
it's not just Boxcar doing it.

"A lot of small roasteries are doing it," she says. "It's getting more popular
as people are realizing that it's something that exists, especially around the
holidays."

Increasingly, you also see those single cup coffeemakers made famous by Keurig.
They take all of the thinking out of making coffee for one, although you end up
with more stuff to throw away. A middle ground might be to use a reusable "K
Cup."

You've still outsourced most of the work and thinking, but haven't externalized
it all to some landfill somewhere.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


