                             1970 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Obama to set new national security goals

BYLINE: Scott Wilson

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 546 words


President Obama will formally present a new national security strategy early
next year, identifying his foreign-policy priorities for the remainder of his
time in office, the White House said Friday.

The new policy document will be the second of Obama's administration and will
likely update the previous one, released in May 2010, in several important
areas. Those include policies for fighting the next phase of the war against
al-Qaeda, the shift of national security resources to Asia and a plan to manage
declining defense budgets amid fiscal strain.

The administration will present another strategy paper on how it intends to
achieve the policy ambitions to be outlined in the new national security
doctrine sometime in the spring, Obama told Congress in a letter made public
Friday.

The new strategy is being drafted at a time when Obama continues to face
questions over his counterterrorism policy, particularly the use of drones in
Afghanistan and Pakistan as the U.S. military withdraws from that region.

Disclosures over the scope of the National Security Agency's eavesdropping
practices have also placed Obama at odds with some foreign leaders, including
U.S. allies, and prompted him to pledge reforms in the way intelligence
gathering is conducted.

The new security strategy will likely reflect some of those proposals and expand
on administration plans in the Asia-Pacific region as the country shifts from a
war footing in the decade since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks to new
diplomatic and economic initiatives.

The National Security Strategy document falls under a 1986 law requiring the
president to present Congress with an annual strategic statement. Most
administrations have been inconsistent in meeting that obligation. George W.
Bush, for example, issued only two during his eight years in office.

The policy statement sets administration priorities inside the government and
communicates them to Congress, the American public and the world. It also is
intended as a framework for strategy documents produced by other parts of the
government, including the Pentagon's national defense planners.

Obama's first National Security Strategy ran 52 pages and set out a course for
ending the U.S. military involvement in Iraq.

Although the strategy asserted America's central role in the world, it also
warned that "when we overuse our military might, or fail to invest in or deploy
complementary tools, or act without partners, then our military is
overstretched."

"Americans bear a greater burden, and our leadership around the world is too
narrowly identified with military forces," the document reads. It lists as the
country's "enduring national interests" security, prosperity, values and
international order.

In recent months, Obama has outlined some of his foreign-policy priorities for
the rest of his second term,  telling the U.N. General Assembly in September
that in the Middle East, he would focus on securing a nuclear agreement with
Iran and peace between the Israelis and Palestinians.

That emphasis will likely be reflected in the updated strategy document, which
will also likely look beyond the official conclusion of U.S. combat operations
in Afghanistan at the end of 2014.

scott.wilson@washpost.com

Karen DeYoung contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


