                             1992 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                           November 6, 2013 Wednesday

New York Today: Meet Your Mayor

BYLINE: ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 728 words



HIGHLIGHT: What you need to know for Wednesday: Up close and personal with Bill
de Blasio, slightly warmer weather and a play about Anthony Weiner&#8217;s fall.



Updated, 12:20 p.m. | The city woke today to a new mayor, Bill de Blasio, who
won in a landslide.

To mark this occasion, we have gathered some facts about Mr. de Blasio that you
might not know.

At 6 feet 5 inches, he is even taller than John Lindsay, who was 6 feet 3 inches
and was elected mayor in 1965.

In his 20s, colleagues referred to him as "Big Bird with a beard."

He speaks Italian (well) and Spanish (decently).

In the early '90s, he lived in a basement bachelor pad in Astoria, Queens. His
answering machine greeting often quoted lyrics or poetry.

He then courted a lesbian writer, now his wife, Chirlane McCray, and moved to
Park Slope.

He is 52; she, 58. They are the city's first interracial mayor and first lady.

He is the first mayor to live in Brooklyn since Abraham D. Beame, who was
elected in 1973.

He does impersonations, including Charles Rangel, Bill Clinton and a goose.

He is a Red Sox fan.

Traveling in Spain, he and a fellow N.Y.U. undergrad, Barry Yeoman, wrote these
words to the tune of "I Wanna Be Sedated," by the Ramones:

Put me on a postage stamp,
Take me to a show,
Put me on some currency so everyone will know
Never once confuse me with Francisco Franco
I know, I know, I know!
I-wan-wan-wan-wan-wan-wan-wan-wan-
I wanna be Juan Carlos!

Here's what else you need to know for Wednesday.

WEATHER

Strong sun, wimpy clouds, at least for now. A little more humid, too, with a
high of 62. This may portend rain on Thursday.

COMMUTE

Subways:  Click for latest status.

Rails: Click for L.I.R.R., Metro-North or New Jersey Transit status.

Roads:  Click for traffic map or radio report on the 1s.

Alternate-side parking is  in effect  the rest of the week.

COMING UP TODAY

Mr. de Blasio meets with Mayor Bloomberg at City Hall at 9:45 a.m., then holds a
press conference at 11:15 a.m. to discuss his transition.

Officials celebrate a new line of holiday stamps by unveiling a giant
gingerbread house at the main post office on Eighth Avenue at 10 a.m. [Here's a
sneak peek of the stamps.]

The last brushstrokes are applied to a restored 200-foot mural on the Lower East
Side that celebrates heroes after Sept. 11. 4 p.m. [Free]

Actors read from a play about an unlikely friendship that emerges from the
demolition of the old Penn Station. Center for Architecture in the West Village.
6 p.m. (not 7 p.m. as we misreported earlier).  [Free]

Try to break a world record today - say, for completing the fastest 20-meter
"butt scoot" - in Times Square. From 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. [Free]

Off they go: Watch as three astronauts in Kazakhstan take off for the
International Space Station, on a giant screen, also in Times Square. 11:14 p.m.
[Free]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

IN THE NEWS

Voters approved an amendment to authorize up to seven casinos upstate. [New York
Times]

Brooklyn has a new district attorney. [New York Times]

One of the oldest runners died after completing her 25th New York City marathon.
[Wall Street Journal]

Former Secretary of State Colin Powell donated $5 million to his alma mater,
City College. [NY1]

Mission Chinese, a Lower East Side restaurant that has charmed critics, has
closed, apparently because of health inspection issues. [Bowery Boogie]

A man who says he was forced to rap in order to be released from police custody
has sued the city. [New York Post]

The New York Public Library Labs flew a drone around the main branch to create
this video. [Atlantic Cities]

Scoreboard: Bobcats maul Knicks, 102 - 97.  Nets mute Jazz, 104 - 88.

AND FINALLY...

"This seems like it was a prank to make fun of my name, the name Weiner."

That was how Anthony D. Weiner explained a lewd photo that appeared on his
Twitter account in 2011.

And so began the scandals that made a congressman with a promising future - and
even would-be mayor - the roast of the town.

In "The Weiner Monologues," which opens tonight at Access Theater, a group of
recent Hunter College grads draw on texts, images and interviews to chart his
rise and fall.

Complete with a Greek chorus.

Javier C. Hernandez, Sam Roberts and  Joseph Burgess contributed reporting.

New York Today is a morning roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till about noon.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Find us on weekdays at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


