                             1918 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              May 25, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

When is it OK for U.S. to take a citizen's life?

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 359 words


With the rise of terrorism, war isn't what it used to be.

The threats are diffuse. The enemy has no single flag. The battlefields are
scattered.

It is in this context that President Obama claims war making authority to use
unmanned drones to find and kill enemies abroad even American citizens.

We're glad to see the administration has signaled it is finally abandoning
efforts to keep secret its legal rationale for having taken the lives of U.S.
citizens overseas who were deemed threats to this nation. It's unfortunate this
debate had to drag on for several years before the administration was
sufficiently pressured to take this step.

The coercion came in the form of a federal appeals court ruling in April saying
the government must release its legal reasoning. Administration officials last
week finally said they will not appeal.

The administration also got heat from a group of U.S. senators, including Mark
Udall, D Colo., who had pledged to block an appeals court nominee unless the
administration made the memo public.

"This is a welcome development for government transparency and affirms that
although the government does have the right to keep national security secrets,
it does not get to have secret laws," Udall said.

Udall said with the promise of disclosure, he was ready to support the judicial
nomination of David Barron, a Harvard law professor and former Justice
Department official who wrote the memo at issue.

On Thursday, the Senate confirmed Barron's nomination for a seat on the 1st U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals, based in Boston.

What remains is for the release of the memo and without so much redaction that
it's impossible to make sense of it.

Given the Bill of Rights and federal law, it is difficult to see how the
government could justify the killing of a citizen without judicial due process.
But let us at least see the full reasoning.

Thus far, U.S. officials have acknowledged killing four U.S. citizens overseas,
but contend that only one was explicitly targeted. Americans deserve to know
when their government believes it can take citizens' lives, and they have the
right to challenge such a breathtaking assertion of power.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


