                             1912 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            February 23, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN BUSINESS Edition

Humanize your r\xE9sum\xE9

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2K

LENGTH: 627 words


There is a sea change going on in the arena that recruiters and human resources
pros call the Talent Market. Corporate and institutional America are realizing
that technology doesn't help them recruit better people into their organization.
On the contrary, cumbersome and tedious applicant screening systems (that also
tend to be full of bugs) drive the best candidates away. They won't submit to
that broken recruiting process, so they opt out and either consult on their own
or get jobs through headhunters and friends.

Organizations are waking up to the talent crisis. There are plenty of job
seekers on the market, but not all of them have the strategic altitude, skills
and pluck that employers need. If you have a track record, and I have no doubt
you do, the last way you'd want to describe that history is to say, "I have a
proven track record of success." What does that tell us? Nothing at all it's
pure corporatespeak boilerplate.

I don't blame job seekers for writing their r\xE9sum\xE9s and LinkedIn profiles
to sound like "Star Wars" battle drones, because that is the way they've learned
to write a r\xE9sum\xE9 in countless seminars and outplacement meetings. But a
zombietastic r\xE9sum\xE9 won't help you in 2014. You need a human voice in your
r\xE9sum\xE9 now, to sound like yourself and to bring your power across to the
hiring manager who's scanning your documents.

You can use a human voice in your r\xE9sum\xE9, like this:

I majored in Mechanical Engineering and spent four years developing tools for
industrial manufacturers before getting hooked on Sales. Now I help product
manufacturers run their businesses more simply and safely by integrating my
company's Safety tools into their daily workflow.

We don't need to know about your assessment of yourself \xE0 la "I'm smart, I'm
savvy, I'm seasoned."

We have to decide for ourselves, through your r\xE9sum\xE9 or your LinkedIn
profile, whether we believe you are any of those things. When you simply tell
your story like the former mechanical engineer in our example, then the reader
can make his or her own assessment. Plus, when you use a human voice in your
r\xE9sum\xE9, you allow the reader to get a feel for you as a person, rather
than a faceless bundle of skills and certifications.

Here are the steps to take if you'd like to humanize your r\xE9sum\xE9:

* Think about what you want in your next job, not just what you feel "qualified"
to do. Once you've been in the working world for 10 years, you can do a
tremendous number of things, and even younger folks can apply their talents in
many ways. Don't box yourself in.

* Once you know your target role, brand yourself for that. Don't say "I'm a
results oriented professional." That falls completely flat for the reader. We've
seen it a million times. Tell us who you are, distinct from every other human on
the planet!

* Look for the worst examples of corporatespeak in your r\xE9sum\xE9, and get
rid of them: results oriented professional; motivated self starter; cross
functional teams; superior communication skills; team player.

Replace these tired phrases with words that describe you, not half the people in
Colorado.

You can tell your story in a r\xE9sum\xE9. If you're planning to pitch your
r\xE9sum\xE9 into a corporate Black Hole recruiting portal (and I sincerely hope
you are not), make sure to keep a section of your r\xE9sum\xE9 available for
keywords that the Darth Vader mechanism may be looking for. Otherwise, use a
human voice throughout, and see if your new r\xE9sum\xE9 doesn't sound and feel
a lot more like the you behind the suit!

Liz Ryan is a former Fortune 500 human resources vice president and the CEO of
Human Workplace, an online community and consulting firm focused on reinventing
work and career education.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: To stand out in the job-seeking crowd, r\xE9sum\xE9s should describe
skills. Don't use catch-all jargon. LM Otero, The Associated Press

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


