                             1937 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN REGIONAL Edition

Related

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 284 words


King Abdullah warns Europe, U.S. * RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA The king of Saudi Arabia
has warned that extremists could attack Europe and the U.S. if there is not a
strong international response to terrorism after the Islamic State group seized
a wide territory across Iraq and Syria.

King Abdullah's statement appeared aimed at drawing Washington and NATO forces
into a wider fight against the Islamic State group. Saudi Arabia openly backs
rebels fighting Syrian President Bashar Assad, but is concerned that the al
Qaeda group could also turn those very same weapons on the kingdom.

"If neglected, I am certain that after a month they will reach Europe and, after
another month, America," he said Friday.

U.S. launches airstrikes against Islamic State * WASHINGTON The U.S. military
says fighter aircraft and unmanned drones have struck Islamic State militants
near Iraq's Mosul Dam.

In a statement issued Saturday, U.S. Central Command says the five latest U.S.
airstrikes were in support of operations conducted by Iraqi security forces.

Aussies delivering weaponry CANBERRA, Australia Australian military aircraft
will fly guns and ammunition into Iraq to help fight Islamic State militants,
Australia's prime minister said Sunday.

Militants ousted from Somali town MOGADISHU, Somalia Somali government troops
fighting alongside African Union troops ousted Islamic militants from a southern
town they have been controlling, an official said Saturday.

Abdiqadir Mohamed Nor, governor of Somalia's Lower Shabelle region, said the al
Shabab stronghold of Bulomarer was seized from militants.

"The residents have welcomed our troops because we freed them after years of
oppression by the terrorists." The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 03, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


