                             1990 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            November 4, 2013 Monday

New Options for Small Businesses Looking to Go Paperless

BYLINE: EILENE ZIMMERMAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 847 words



HIGHLIGHT: Three new tools designed to make it easier to manage a small
business.


Academics predicted the rise of a paperless society decades ago. We're not there
yet, but at least on the small-business front, we're getting closer. In fact, a
host of new tools have arrived recently, including Shake, an app platform that
allows users to create, sign and send legally binding agreements from their
smartphones; Zipmark, a digital checkbook; and SimpleScan, a mobile scanner and
document management system that integrates with cloud apps used by small
businesses.

Shake was started in 2012 by Jared Grusd, Jon Steinberg, Abe Geiger and Stuart
Ellman, a venture capitalist with RRE Ventures, which has invested $1 million.
It takes long, complex legal documents and shortens them, putting them into
plain English and allowing them to be dispatched and signed digitally. "People
sign things all the time they don't understand," Mr. Geiger said. "We think the
most important thing is to sign something you understand and that will hold up
in court."

The app is geared toward freelancers and small businesses that need to get deals
done quickly with documentation but don't have the time or money to go to a
lawyer. It offers six templates: a freelance contract, a hiring contract, a
standard nondisclosure agreement, a buy/sell agreement, a rent/lend agreement
and an agreement for loaning money. There's also a create-your-own agreement,
which is referred to in-house as "the napkin agreement."

So far, the app works only with an iPhone or an iPad, although the company
expects to introduce an Android version.  And for now, Shake is free; the
company plans to roll out premium options that will range in price from $10 to
$50 a month.

Zipmark's software lets a small business with recurring invoices - like
subscription-based services, businesses with monthly membership fees or rent -
accept online payments that clear within 24 hours. Zipmark's application is
embedded in a host of invoicing platforms small businesses use, said Jay
Bhattacharya, Zipmark's chief executive.

"Businesses can send an email invoice - my children's piano teacher now does
this - and at the bottom of the email is a place to click that says, 'Pay with
your checking account. Powered by Zipmark.' The customer registers and is
automatically taken through the process of paying," said Mr. Bhattacharya, who
added that it works much the way PayPal or a credit card does, but the fees are
lower and the payments clear faster. Zipmark also allows business owners to
create their own payment website, where customers can find and pay their bills.

The company started in 2010 and has raised almost $4 million in venture capital.
Its digital check tool works with many of the accounting systems that small
businesses use, including FreshBooks, WorkingPoint, Apptivo and Toast Invoice.

"We do real-time risk management in such a way that we can economically provide
a risk-free digital check," said Mr. Bhattacharya. "We created our own algorithm
that pulls in a variety of data and determines the likelihood the check is going
to clear." Another key segment for the company is B2B payments, where the risk
of insufficient funds is also very low. Zipmark charges businesses 1 percent of
the transaction with a cap of $5.

Mr. Bhattacharya, who opened Zipmark with Jake Howerton, is a veteran of
Citigroup, and helped start Citi Ventures. He worked in the credit card
division, where charges can be as high as 3 percent of a transaction. "I saw
this as a pain point in the small-business community," he said. "These
businesses that do recurring billing have relationships with their clients so
the risk is very low that the transaction won't clear. Yet they are forced into
a payment system where they are charged the same amount as a business that
doesn't know their customers."

Finally, SimpleScan is a mobile scanner from Document Capture Technologies,
which has designed and built mobile scanners sold under other brand names, like
Xerox and Brother. Introduced in July, SimpleScan signals a shift from hardware
to software, said Karl Etzel, who is chief operating officer of DCT. It works on
a cloud-based document-management platform that integrates with many
small-business applications.

Users get a free account and through SimpleScan's Web interface, they can direct
scanned documents to cloud-based apps like Evernote and Dropbox. "SimpleScan
will just send a scanned document to the cloud app you want to send it to," said
Mr. Etzel. And if you forget where you put it? "We have a feature that keeps
track of that for you," he said

The scanner also offers users the ability to snap photos of receipts with a
smartphone and send them to the cloud. It ranges in price from $159 to $199. For
small businesses that want additional document management functions, a premium
service will be available for $5 a month later this year.

You can follow Eilene Zimmerman on Twitter.


     ·    Debating How to Market an iPhone App
     ·    A Start-Up Struggles to Market Its iPhone App
     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    Today in Small Business: Thank You for Sharing
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


