                             1943 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            October 17, 2014 Friday
                               FRI SCENE Edition

Like moths to a flame: People flock to hear personal sagas

BYLINE: John Wenzel

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 946 words


People from all over the world call the "pitch hotline" for The Moth, a live
storytelling series that has birthed a popular podcast and radio show of the
same name.

But Cynthia Riggs' story immediately stood out.

"She had recently received a package with only a latitude and a longitude as the
return address," said Sarah Austin Jenness, producing director for the New York
based nonprofit series. "Inside were cryptograms written on paper towels, and
she came to realize she had created these cryptograms 60 years ago. A gentleman
she used to work with at a marine biology lab had kept them and sent them back
to her with a new one enclosed."

The message? "I've never stopped loving you." It compelled Riggs to seek out her
former colleague whom, at the age of 86, she married last year.

Jenness was so excited by Riggs' story (which did not originally include the
happy ending) that she called her back and helped her develop it for a Moth live
show at Union Chapel on Martha's Vineyard. It was also recorded for The Moth
Radio Hour, which airs on 340 stations nationwide, including Northern Colorado's
KUNC 91.5 FM.

"There's this honest emotion that comes with being excited but also terrified by
the prospect of love," Jenness said. "People really respond to that."

The Moth, which will debut its monthly, Denver based "StorySlam" at Swallow
Hill's Daniels Hall on Oct. 17, has presented 3,000 stories since it was founded
in 1997. Its new Denver series joins at least a half dozen Front Range
storytelling shows that have sprung up in recent years to meet the demand for a
direct, unvarnished stage experience.

As the basis of most performance art, storytelling offers a back to basics,
often participatory alternative to not just other forms of entertainment, but a
daily existence filtered through the impersonal drone of social media.

"When someone shares a story, you're getting a more pure version of what
happened," said Andrew Orvedahl, a Denver comic who founded The Narrators
storytelling show and podcast in 2009. "I don't know if 'true' is the right
word, but it's often the most accurate way to see a slice of someone's life."

The free Narrators show, which takes place the third Wednesday of each month at
the Buntport Theater, draws a frequently young, hip crowd that digs into
subjects ranging from the awkwardly hilarious to the heartbreaking. In an
average show, audience members might hear anything from a harrowing tale of
sexual assault or political strife to a botched first date or career triumph.

Like many storytelling shows, The Narrators' lineup is a mix of comedians
(Orvedahl is a member of Denver's Grawlix troupe who this week debuted his
comedy on "The Tonight Show") writers, actors, musicians and, yes, regular
folks.

"Live storytelling feels different because it's the ancestral form, the campfire
version, (a) cross cultural tradition that has existed since language first
emerged," said Narrators co host Ron Doyle. "There's something ancient and
intimate and intrinsically natural about it."

Indeed, shows like Boulder's bi monthly Truth Be Told (Oct. 19 at Shine
Restaurant), Longmont's Stories with Spirit (Oct. 30 at Still Cellars) and
Denver's My Teenage Angst (Oct. 23 at the Deer Pile) emphasize a confessional,
vulnerable tone that creates a genuine feeling of connection with the audience.

It's comforting on multiple levels, said Anthony Powell, artistic director of
Denver's 14 year old Stories on Stage company.

"I don't think we ever really lose the feeling of pleasure we had from being
read to as kids," he said.

Stories on Stage, which will present its "Brush Up Your Shakespeare" show on
Oct. 17 at Chautauqua Community House in Boulder and on Oct. 19 at Su Teatro in
Denver, employs professional actors to tell its stories, which are often adapted
from literature and drama.

Nonetheless, Powell likens each show to "being fired out of a cannon," since the
mood in the room can change at a moment's notice, given the spontaneous nature
of the readings.

"Any actor who's into Shakespeare has done monologues," he said. "But this is
even more one on one. If it' s a scene and it basically is the audience is the
other actor. And with so many of these stories we have only the barest idea of
what's going to happen until we get in front of an crowd."

The formats of these shows determine the experience. Stories on Stage is more
structured and theatrical than, say, The Narrators. The Moth's "Story Slam" is a
competitive format in which stage hopefuls (who can be pretty much anyone in
attendance) submit their ideas a half hour before the show, which are then
whittled down to 10 storytellers for that night. Winners compete for a spot in
the Moth's GrandSlam event.

"With The Moth coming to town, that's a major jump for the scene," said
Orvedahl, who founded The Narrators as a comedy storytelling show while living
in Los Angeles. (His former Narrators co host, Robert Rutherford, will soon open
a Narrators chapter in Rutherford's new home of San Diego).

But with the recent proliferation of shows, is Denver approaching storytelling
overload?

"(The other shows) don't feel like competition unless they're on the same
night," Orvedahl said. "All the different shows make for a richer scene in
general."

the denver moth story slam. Competitive storytelling stage show. 7:30 p.m. Oct.
17 at Swallow Hill's Daniels Hall, 71 E. Yale Ave. $10. 303 777 1003 or
swallowhillmusic.org.

stories on stage: "brush up your shakespeare." Theatrical storytelling show.
7:30 p.m. Oct. 17 at Chautauqua Community House, 900 Baseline Rd. in Boulder.
$28. Also at 1:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. at Su Teatro, 721 Santa Fe Drive. $17 $20.
303 440 7666 or chautauqua.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: George Dawes Greene, founder of The Moth storytelling series, spins a
tale in New York City. The Moth StorySlam series comes to Denver starting Oct.
17. Provided by The Moth
Alfonso Lacayo competes in the Moth High School GrandSlam in New York. Provided
by The Moth
Rachel Fowler performs "Eccentrics Unlimited" as part of Stories on Stage. Its
latest show, "Brush Up Your Shakespeare," runs Oct. 17 and 19. Provided by
Stories on Stage

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


