                             194 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                              July 11, 2014 Friday

Amazon Seeks Permission to Test a Drone Delivery System

BYLINE: DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 281 words



HIGHLIGHT: Amazon is getting serious about delivery by drones, and asked the
F.A.A. for special permission to test them outdoors.


In some ways, this was not the best week for Amazon. The Federal Trade
Commission sued itfor improperly billing customers for games used by their
children. And it continues to be enmeshed in a nasty public relations battle
with the publisher Hachette.

But Amazon still has the drones. In a filing with the Federal Aviation
Administrationthat got widespread attention Friday, Amazon asked for permission
to test its drone delivery system outdoors, a practice that is banned for safety
reasons.

Never mind for the moment the fact that the F.A.A. said a few weeks agothat
there will be no commercial uses of drones in a memo that did not mention Amazon
but pointedly excluded even the free shipping of items by drone. That's a
lobbying battle for another day.

Delivery by drone was first mentioned by Amazon last year on "60 Minutes," and
quickly became a viral sensation despite, or because of, the fact that it was
unlikely to happen anytime soon. If nothing else, it was a vivid demonstration
of Amazon's gift for showmanship.

In the filing to Michael P. Huerta, the F.A.A. administrator, Amazon said it
should get an exemption from the rules because of the "enormous consumer
benefits" of Prime Air: getting stuff to people quickly.

Amazon said if it did not get what it wanted, it would have to move the drone
team to another country.

"Of course, Amazon would prefer to keep the focus, jobs, and investment of this
important research and development initiative in the United States," the letter
said.

Amazon stock shot up Friday faster than a rocket, jumping more than 5 percent.
It was either the power of the drone or analysts' reports predicting a good
second quarter.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


