                             1921 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                              THU REGIONAL Edition

Stay or flee? Mudslide presents unique danger

BYLINE: Nancy Lofholm

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 857 words


COLLBRAN Residents along Salt Creek Road were loading up horses Wednesday,
lining up a moving truck for a 127 year old grand piano, boxing up baby pictures
and reassuring anxious relatives by phone that they were keeping a close eye on
the huge landslide on the mountain above them.

About 35 of them were warned by the Mesa County Sheriff's Office on Tuesday
night that they should be prepared to leave at any time. A lake of trapped water
is building up behind a huge earthen slab at the top of the slide and could send
another torrent of mud down Salt Creek and into this neighborhood of ranches.

The unusually massive slide, which is three miles long and half mile wide, first
let go Sunday afternoon. It roared down a north face of Grand Mesa at an
estimated 170 miles per hour, moving like cement down a concrete truck chute,
burying three local men and now threatening to inflict more damage.

The county has declared a state of emergency for the area, and Gov. John
Hickenlooper's office has promised help. Federal and state government slide
experts are on the ground and in the air studying and monitoring the unstable
mass in hopes they can issue a timely warning if it begins to move again.

Some who live along Salt Creek Road and have Salt Creek running at capacity in
their backyards aren't waiting any longer for that warning. They are getting out
now.

"We rode up to the slide area on horseback, and I seen what I need to see," said
Shelby Ehart, who was packing up his wife, Jennifer, and their four children and
the Salt Creek Ranch livestock and heading for a friend's house in nearby
Molina.

Ehart said he grew up hunting in the area of the slide and was shocked when he
found ravines he knows were 800 to 900 feet deep now brim full of mud and
debris.

"We don't want to overreact," said Jennifer Ehart as her husband loaded horses,
"but we also don't want to take chances."

Across Salt Creek Road, Shannon Murphy cradled her 10 day old baby and said she
has put together a plan to get out if need be. But she is waiting for word from
experts before she gets out.

"We're just paying attention to the people who know the land, know the water and
know the topography," she said.

One of those is her father, Tom "Pudge" Cox, who was a state water commissioner
for 27 years. If he decides it's time to get out, Murphy said she will.

Her next door neighbor Celia Eklund also has been consulting with her son,
James. He is director of the Colorado Water Conservation Board. She and her
husband have plans to go to Arvada and stay with a daughter if the experts say
go.

Authorities have handed out fliers advising residents to have evacuation plans
while the experts puzzle over a slide that is unusual in its size and in its
formation of what is essentially a poorly dammed lake at the top.

The search for the three local men presumed buried Wes Hawkins, 46, Danny
Nichols, 24, and his father, Clancy Nichols, 51 remains suspended because of the
unstable area.

Geologists, hydrologists and engineers have been working with local experts such
as Pudge Cox to try to get a better handle on how the slide might behave from
here on out. A big unknown affecting that is how deep the lake is at the top.

They are using sheriff's office drones that have the capability to survey the
slide to see if it is moving and the lake to see how deep it is.

The team of experts was joined Wednesday by U.S. Geological Survey geologists
who had worked on the slide that killed 41 people in an Oso, Wash., subdivision
in March.

Collbran interim manager Davis Farrar said town officials are meeting with the
experts and the sheriff's office nightly to assess the dangers and to plan for
worst case scenarios. The experts have said that it is possible another slide
could bring mud and debris all the way into Collbran if it hits Plateau Creek
where it intersects with Salt Creek and builds up debris at a bridge in the
middle of this town of less than 400.

Farrar plans to call a community meeting Thursday night so that residents can
get the latest information and know, as close as anyone can tell, what the true
threat is.

Kaden Ehart, the 14 year old son of Shelby and Jennifer Ehart, said he doesn't
need experts to tell him.

"It has to come down here," he said of the lake filling above their home. "There
ain't no other place for it to go."

Rodney Hewitt's home is the closest to the slide. It stopped about 300 yards
from his house as he watched television inside and thought he was just hearing
thunder. The slide also registered as a magnitude 2.8 earthquake, according to
the USGS.

But Hewitt isn't leaving yet. He said he will know it is time to go "when I look
up and see trees falling. Then I'll fire up the pickup and get the hell out of
Dodge."

Those who stay for now won't be resting easy. Celia Eklund said she no longer
feels safe in the home she grew up in and that has always been her "place of
comfort and safety throughout my life."

"Come on mountain," she said as she stood in her front yard shaking a fist
toward the slide area and fighting back tears. "Stay where you're at."

Nancy Lofholm: 970 256 1957, nlofholm@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nlofholm

LOAD-DATE: June 01, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Ty Wallace, 20, leads a colt into a trailer as Shelby Ehart looks on as
they plan to move animals and possessions away from Salt Creek Ranch. AAron
Ontiveroz, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


