                             1915 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             March 16, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

Colorado partners globally for health

BYLINE: Gary Hart

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 668 words


The three great revolutions of our time globalization, information, and the end
of the Cold War happened more or less simultaneously, and it is still taking us
some time to absorb the historic ripples they are causing. This is true in
Colorado and the mountain West even though some of our most important companies
are involved in all three. Several weeks ago, Sen. Hank Brown and I hosted a
lunch in recognition of the U.S. Global Partnership Coalition and the hundreds
of regional companies, large and small, investing in markets around the world.

The profound implications of all this became evident on Feb. 16 when one of our
region's leading companies, DaVita, formalized a long range partnership with the
Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to provide health care clinics
for thousands of Saudi citizens. It is a ground breaking partnership in the
Middle East and particularly in a nation not known for outsourcing its human
health needs.

As a participant in the negotiations of this agreement, it was impossible not to
reflect on how dramatically the world has changed and continues to change.
During the years I had the honor to represent Colorado in the U.S. Senate, we
were at the chilliest depths of the Cold War, and our relationship with Saudi
Arabia was based on two things: oil and weapons. We relied heavily on Persian
Gulf oil and provided a great deal of security to the Saudi government, which in
turn purchased our advanced, and expensive, weapons systems for its own defense.

Now, just over two decades after the end of the Cold War, instead of oil and
weapons we are helping the Saudis provide state of the art health care for their
citizens. Nothing more dramatically illustrates the stark contrast between the
second half of the 20th century dominated by the Cold War and the early 21st
century, a period of global trade, the explosion of information, and America
marketing health care rather than fighter aircraft.

It is too soon to determine whether this transformation in international
business and foreign relations represents a growing trend. But it is certainly a
healthy trend as long as it lasts, and it is gratifying that Colorado companies,
great and small, are participating in it. The long term generation of goodwill
among citizens in Saudi Arabia and countries around the world from advanced
American health care systems will prove much greater than their appreciation for
us consuming their oil.

And because clinics are not as dramatic as fighter aircraft and goodwill is
difficult to measure, it is unfortunate that the national media will miss this
story. Historically, it is an important one. Every Saudi citizen whose life is
improved and lengthened due to a DaVita clinic will remember and repeat to
others that his or her treatment came from America. The value of that impression
is incalculable, and will add immeasurably to our peaceful efforts to promote
democratic values and principles. Whether we can draw lessons from the contrast
between health clinics in Saudi Arabia and drones in Afghanistan is for each of
us to contemplate.

The DaVita clinic operators, the MWH Global water engineers, the Liberty Media
information providers, the CH2MHill engineers, and the hundreds of Colorado
agriculture, technology, and training exporters are all making a huge impact on
the global economy and the impression of America across the globe. Raising
barriers to trade, as some suggest, would substantially undercut both the
enormous economic benefits we receive from foreign trade in goods and services
and the favorable impression that America's genius creates in the world.

To fully appreciate the epic shift from Cold War oil and weapons to human health
care will require much greater public understanding of the importance of this
shift aided by a media as concerned with good news of a Colorado company's
success in a major Middle East nation as with the murder and mayhem of the day.
But this revolution is happening, it is historic, and it must continue.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Left to right: Dr. Mansour Naser Al-Howasi, the Saudi vice minister of
Health and Health Affairs; Tim Lenderking, deputy chief of mission, U.S. Embassy
in Riyadh; Dr. Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz Al Rabeeah, Saudi minister of Health; and
Dennis Kogod, CEO of DaVita HealthCare Partners. David Tauchen, DaVita

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


