                             1925 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             June 10, 2014 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

Pakistani Taliban promises additional violence

BYLINE: Adil Jawad

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 296 words


KARACHI, PAKISTAN The Pakistani Taliban threatened more violence Monday after a
five hour assault on the nation's busiest airport killed 29 people including all
10 attackers raising a new challenge for a U.S. ally trying to end years of
fighting that has claimed thousands of lives.

With recently started peace efforts stalled, the cautious government of Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif may be dragged closer to a decision on whether to take on
the militants in earnest across a country with a long history of ambiguity when
it comes to dealing with militancy.

A further weakening of stability in the nuclear power whose tribal regions are
already a hotbed of foment could ripple to neighboring Afghanistan as
international combat forces prepare to withdraw from that country. "Everywhere
is a threat," warned Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan. "Every area is a
target, every building is a potential target."

Such an attack in Karachi, Pakistan's business center, likely will discourage
foreign investment at a time when its economy is struggling.

The Taliban said the assault on the Jinnah International Airport in Karachi,
Pakistan's largest city, was in revenge for the November killing of the militant
group's leader in a U.S. drone strike. Spokesman Shahidullah Shahid warned that
"such attacks will continue until there is a permanent cease fire."

The attack began late Sunday when 10 gunmen, some disguised as policemen,
stormed into a section of the sprawling airport where a terminal for VIP flights
and cargo is. They opened fire with machine guns and rocket launchers, sparking
a battle with security forces that lasted until around dawn. Heavy gunfire and
multiple explosions were heard coming from the terminal amid the fighting. A
major fire rose from the airport.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


