                             1999 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Latitude)

                            November 15, 2013 Friday

What Makes a Martyr?

BYLINE: HUMA YUSUF

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 419 words



HIGHLIGHT: A debate in Pakistan highlights the pitfalls of mixing politics and
religion.


LONDON - Because they die fighting in defense of Islam, they are guaranteed a
place in heaven. Most major roads, hospitals and bridges in Pakistan are named
after them. They are the martyrs, or shaheed.

For decades, only Pakistani soldiers killed while in service even qualified for
the honor. In recent years, as more public figures have fallen victim to
terrorist attacks, civilians seemed to become eligible. When Prime Minister
Benazir Bhutto died in a suicide attack in 2007, she was given the honorific,
despite being a woman. Many liberals also sought the title for Shahbaz Bhatti,
the first federal minister for minority affairs, after his assassination by the
Pakistani Taliban in 2011. But his Catholicism got in the way, and only a few
supporters refer to him as shaheed.

Earlier this month the debate took a turn for the absurd. Following the killing
of the Pakistani Taliban's chief, Hakimullah Mehsud, in a C.I.A. drone strike,
Munawar Hassan, the leader of the religious party Jamaat-e-Islami, called Mehsud
a martyr because he had been killed by the Americans. Fazlur Rehman, the leader
of another major religious political party,  Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, one-upped
Hassan, adding that any creature killed by the Americans should be considered a
martyr, even dogs.

Anti-American sentiment can really warp logic and rhetoric in Pakistan. Hassan
also argued that the army troops killed while fighting with the United States
against the Taliban should not be considered martyrs because their contributions
were anti-Islam.

The public relations wing of the Pakistani Army demanded an apology. But Hassan
refused to back down, and has instead accused the army of meddling in politics.

The Pakistani Taliban commended Hassan for honoring their former leader. The
provincial assembly in Sindh Province, which is dominated by secular liberal
parties, passed a resolution condemning Hassan's statement. The interior
minister then said such controversial comments about the armed forces were
"worse than poison" for the country.

The debate highlights the pitfalls of mixing politics and religion. The army,
which has long used Islamic sloganeering to boost troop morale, is now under
attack by parties on the far right for not being Islamic enough. And rather than
sticking to security issues, the politicians who oppose extremist parties are
debating theological issues - like what makes a martyr.


     ·    The Taliban Attacks: Pakistan
     ·    Intimidating Pakistan's Press
     ·    Dangerous Donations
     ·    More Malala Malaise
     ·    Why We Fight Terrorism


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


