                             1914 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

Briefs

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 482 words


ECUADOREAN BID TO COLLECT $9B FROM CHEVRON BLOCKED

NEW YORK A federal judge on Tuesday blocked U.S. courts from being used to
collect a $9 billion Ecuadorean judgment against Chevron for rain forest damage,
saying lawyers poisoned an honorable quest with their illegal and wrongful
conduct.

"Justice is not served by inflicting injustice. The ends do not justify the
means," U.S. District Judge Lewis A. Kaplan wrote. The judge said it was a sad
outcome to have to rule that the Ecuadorean court judgment "was obtained by
corrupt means," because it will likely never be known whether there was a case
to be made against the oil company.

Top exec for AT&T in Colorado named. AT&T announced Tuesday that it has named
Pueblo native Roberta Robinette as the company's state president in Colorado, a
key lobbying role for the nation's second largest wireless carrier.

In addition to legislative work, Robinette will handle the company's community
affairs activities and help with technology deployment and infrastructure
investment in Colorado. A key issue Robinette will likely deal with early on is
the ongoing work to update Colorado's telecom laws, including the revamping of
the $50 million high cost fund.

LightSquared seeks to restrict Ergen's vote. LightSquared Inc. said it will ask
a judge not to count a "no" vote on its bankruptcy reorganization plan cast by a
fund controlled by Dish Network Corp. Chairman Charles Ergen, saying the fund
acted in bad faith.

The fund, SP Special Opportunities LLP, owns $1 billion of debt in LightSquared,
the wireless broadband company controlled by Philip Falcone's Harbinger Capital
Partners LLC. LightSquared has accused Ergen of secretly accumulating the debt
so he can buy the company's airwaves for a below market price through
bankruptcy.

Facebook may buy dronemaker new york Facebook is in talks to buy Titan
Aerospace, a maker of solar powered drones, to step up its efforts to provide
Internet access to remote parts of the world, according to reports from
technology blog Techcrunch and financial news outlet CNBC. Both websites cited
anonymous sources who are familiar with the deal and put a purchase price at $60
million.

Japan to regulate bitcoin trading. The Japanese government will set rules for
trading bitcoins, defining the virtual tender not as a currency but as a
commodity akin to gold, The Nikkei reported in its Wednesday morning edition.
Gains from trading bitcoins on online exchanges, and purchases made with them
will be subject to Japanese tax.

Banks will be prohibited from handling them, and securities will be barred from
brokering bitcoin trades.

Halliburton donates to energy lab laramie Halliburton Co. will donate $3 million
to support construction of an energy research laboratory at the University of
Wyoming in response to the state's push to improve energy and engineering
programs there. Denver Post staff, wire reports

LOAD-DATE: March 08, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


