                             1972 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 2, 2013 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

Afghans say U.S. is using fuel as leverage

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: KABUL


Afghan forces say U.S. is withholding fuel, supplies Coalition officials deny
the accusation as tension rises between Karzai and the Obama administration.

KABUL - Afghan military and police commanders are accusing the U.S.-led
coalition of withholding fuel and other support in an attempt to pressure
President Hamid Karzai into signing a security agreement with the United States.

Coalition officials strongly deny the allegation, the latest disagreement
between the Karzai government and U.S. military leaders.

According to a statement from Karzai, the issue arose during a meeting of his
national security council Sunday. Military and police commanders complained that
their forces are struggling with a fuel shortage and said they suspect that the
United States is using the resource as leverage over Karzai.

"This deed is contrary to the prior commitment of America," Karzai's statement
said. "Afghan forces are facing interruption in conducting of their activities
as a result of the cessation of fuel and supportive services."

But coalition officials say they are baffled by the claim.

"There has been no stoppage in the delivery of requested fuel," the coalition
said in a statement. "We remain committed to supporting our ANSF partners and
will continue to do so."

From 2007 through 2012, the U.S. government spent about $500 million on fuel for
the Afghan military, with an additional $135 million budgeted for this year,
according to an October report by the Special Inspector General for Afghan
Reconstruction.

The conflicting statements are another sign of the rising tension between
Karzai's government and the Obama administration over plans to keep up to 15,000
foreign troops in Afghanistan after 2014.

Though a tentative agreement to allow for an extended U.S. presence was reached
10 days ago, Karzai has refused to sign it. He is insisting on additional
concessions from the United States, including an end to military raids on Afghan
homes, a reduction in drone strikes and help in launching peace talks between
the Afghan government and Taliban insurgents.

U.S. officials have urged Karzai to sign the agreement by the end of the year,
warning that President Obama could decide to withdraw all U.S. troops from
Afghanistan if the uncertainty drags into next year. If such a withdrawal
occurs, the Afghan military could lose $4.1 billion in annual funding from the
United States and its coalition partners.

According to Karzai's administration, the United States is already taking steps
to show the Afghan government how such a loss would affect its military.

"In some parts of the country, [the Afghan army] needed to send helicopters to
bring their dead bodies back to Kabul, but because of the fuel shortage, they
were not able to," said a senior Afghan official, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity because the person was not authorized to discuss the matter. "This is
a way to put pressure on us."

The concerns come as relations between Karzai's government and the NATO
coalition have appeared to deteriorate over the past two weeks.

Ten days ago, Karzai accused U.S. Special Operations forces of killing two
Afghan civilians during a raid on a house in eastern Afghanistan. His assertion
angered coalition commanders, who insisted that the men who were killed were
"armed insurgents."

On Thursday, Karzai lashed out after a coalition airstrike killed a 2-year-old
boy and wounded two women. Marine Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., commander of
coalition forces, called Karzai and apologized for the child's death.

Coalition officials said the airstrike had targeted an "insurgent riding a
motorbike," who was also killed.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Sayed Salahuddin contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


