                             1932 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 15, 2014 Friday
                               FRI SCENE Edition

"The Giver" a gentle, chilling dystopian primer

BYLINE: Lisa Kennedy

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 550 words


In the annals of young adult lit of the dystopian variety, Lois Lowry's "The
Giver" was published 18 years before "Divergent" and 15 years before "The Hunger
Games."

And though the movie adaptations of Veronica Roth's and Suzanne Collins' ultra
popular novels beat the Newbery award winning novel to the multiplex, each seems
to taketh from "The Giver."

Had actor Jeff Bridges had his way, "The Giver" would have become a movie years
ago. He started trying to develop it as a project for father, Lloyd, in the
title role he now plays with a warm weariness.

'The Giver" unfolds in the time after "The Ruin." Sameness rules the Community,
a berg of two story, big windowed, sleek box homes. The citizens appear happy in
their appointed labors. The usual "isms" have been eradicated with a hushed but
steady adherence to order and, oh yes, morning injections.

The black white gray palette director Phillip Noyce and cinematographer Ross
Emery utilize at the start of the film evokes '50s sci fi thrillers, although
the film's mood is decidedly muted compared with those Cold War anxious films.
Lowry's book was carefully adapted by Robert Weide and playwright Michael
Mitnick.

Jonas (Brenton Thwaites) and best friends Fiona (Israeli actress Odeya Rush) and
Asher (Cameron Monaghan of "Shameless" ) are set to undergo a ceremony during
which they will be assigned their lifelong jobs. Kind hearted Fiona will head to
the nurturing center. Jonas' own father (Alexander Skarsg\xE5rd) is a Nurturer.

Asher is selected to become a drone pilot. He'll fly toward the boundary that
hems in this utopia that is free of human history, liberated from memory. Except
in one case.

Singled out to become "Receiver of Memories," Jonas begins training with
Bridges' character The Giver a worn, tormented mentor who lives alone in a house
full of books.

He'll transmit human history with his touch. Jonas receives the miracles but
also the miseries of that rush of images, sounds, feelings.

The boldly color saturated montages that flow into Jonas tend toward the
ecstatic more than the horrific, though there are some sure to upset younger
audience members. And pop star Taylor Swift makes an appearance as a prior
Receiver in training.

As Jonas, Brenton Thwaites brings thoughtful wonder to the role of a young man
who is thrilled and frightened by what he learns. He is also curious and
ultimately courageous. When a baby his father brought home is scheduled for what
the Community calls "a release to Elsewhere," Jonas acts.

Katie Holmes plays Jonas' mother, a higher up in the Department of Justice.
"Precision of language," she tells her questioning son. The most imprecise word
of all? "Love."

Meryl Streep looks aptly haggard as the Community's Chief Elder. It's tiring
work keeping a utopia running like a well surveilled machine.

To fans of the juggernauts "The Hunger Games" and the "Divergent" series, "The
Giver" will likely seem tame. Its darkness skews younger. There's a gentleness
that comes with its underlying chill.

It's a class act, the kind of respectful rendering of a literary source we've
come to expect from Philip Anschutz's Walden Media, the indie force behind "The
Chronicles of Narnia," "Holes." and other engaging family fare.

Lisa Kennedy: 303 954 1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Brenton Thwaites and Odeya Rush star in "The Giver." Provided by The
Weinstein Company
Foreground, Meryl Streep and Jeff Bridges star in "The Giver." Provided by The
Weinstein Company

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


