                             1982 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           December 14, 2013 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Dec. 13, 2013

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 687 words

SYRIA

Islamists accusedin deaths of civilians

Syrian soldiers surrounded an industrial area near Damascus on Friday after an
al-Qaeda-linked rebel faction infiltrated the area this week, reportedly killing
dozens of civilians, the government and activists said.

Jabhat al-Nusra, also known as the al-Nusra Front, entered buildings housing
workers and their families, shooting men, women and children in Adra, northeast
of the capital, according to the reports. Most residents of the area are from
the minority Alawite and Druze sects, which largely support President Bashar
al-Assad in his fight against mainly Sunni rebels.

The exact death toll could not be determined. State-run Syrian TV reported that
scores of civilians have been killed since Wednesday, prompting the army to
surround the town.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that it has
documented the names of 19 civilians killed - mostly Alawites and Druze - and
that many more were feared dead after the rampage by the Islamist militants.

- Associated Press

PAKISTAN

2 police officers, polio worker slain

Two police officers and a polio worker were killed by gunmen in separate
incidents in northwestern Pakistan on Friday, officials said.

In the first case, suspected militants fired at two police officers reportedly
on their way to guard polio vaccination workers in the Swabi district of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa province, police said. One officer was killed immediately, and the
second died later at a hospital. Both were shot in the head, an officer said.

In the second case, unidentified gunmen on a motorcycle killed a member of a
polio vaccination team near his house outside Peshawar as he was returning from
giving oral polio drops to children, a local official said.

- Los Angeles Times

S. Africans storm barriers to view Mandela's body: Several hundred mourners
eager to pay their last respects to Nelson Mandela broke through police barriers
and stormed toward the Union Buildings in Pretoria shortly before the former
South African president's body was moved to a hospital. The government said
about 100,000 mourners turned out Friday, but half had to be turned away.

Greenpeace says Russia will not let activists go home: Russian investigators
have indicated that foreign activists free on bail pending trial for a protest
against Arctic oil drilling cannot leave the country, meaning they won't be home
for Christmas despite an international court ruling, Greenpeace said Friday. In
a letter to one of the activists, Denmark's Anne Mie Jensen, the federal
Investigative Committee rejected a request for it to seek exit visas for the
activists, Greenpeace said.

Violence follows execution of Bangladeshi: At least four people were killed in
Bangladesh when supporters of Islamist leader Abdul Quader Mollah vented fury at
his execution for war crimes in the 1971 war of independence from Pakistan. The
decision to hang Mollah, a senior figure in the opposition Jamaat-e-Islami
party, was condemned by his political allies and international rights groups.

Yemen says airstrike targeted al-Qaeda militants: Yemen's Supreme Security
Committee said that people targeted in an airstrike were al-Qaeda militants and
included those who had masterminded attacks on the police and army. The
statement by the committee, headed by Yemen's president, was referring to
Thursday's drone strike on a convoy heading to a wedding party in the central
city of Radda that killed 13 people.

Fugitive mobster's relatives arrested in Sicily: Police searching for Italy's
No. 1 Cosa Nostra fugitive arrested 30 people, including three of the man's
close relatives, accused of helping to run the crime clan's rackets while the
powerful Mafia boss is on the run. Investigators called the pre-dawn sweep in
Sicily a major step in their quest to capture Matteo Messina Denaro, who has
been at large since 1993.

Islamist protests broken up in Egypt: Security forces fired tear gas Friday to
disperse hundreds of Islamist demonstrators marching across Egypt to demand the
release of student protesters. One demonstrator was killed in the canal city of
Suez.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


