                             2058 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday

New York Today: Weathering It

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 829 words



HIGHLIGHT: What you need to know for Wednesday: High winds whip the city, the
mayor supports a taxi surcharge, and a shoe store robber returns to the scene of
the crime.


 Good Wednesday morning to you.

It's very windy.

We used to write about other things.

Then winter came along.

Since Thanksgiving, we have been compelled to lead with the weather here on
roughly 40 mornings.

You might remember "'Life Threatening Windchill,'""Snowstorm,""Big Snowstorm"
and "Snowstorm No. 14."

Then there was "Deep Freeze,""Frozen Commute" and "It's Freezing (Déjà Vu)."

It has a biblical ring to it, 40 days, and that's where we hope to stop.

It's spring, after all.

But alas, once more, we must warn you:

We were expecting to wake to snow today, but only a trace fell overnight.

Instead, we got a wind advisory.

Winds will blow till late today, with gusts up to 50 miles an hour.

The mercury may creep up to 35 degrees, but don't be fooled. It will feel much,
much colder because of the wind.

"Like it's in the teens all day," said David Stark, a meteorologist at the
National Weather Service.

And Thursday looks passive aggressive: sunny but actually pretty brutal, in the
20s.

You know the type.

Here's what else you need to know.

COMMUTE

Subways: Check latest status.

Rails: Check L.I.R.R., Metro-North or N.J. Transit status.

Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking is  in effect  all week.

COMING UP TODAY

City Council members and environmental advocates rally behind a proposed bill to
reduce plastic bag use. City Hall steps. 11 a.m.

Latino groups announce a nationwide campaign to "hold Obama accountable for
record high deportations" outside the Department of Homeland Security offices in
Lower Manhattan. 11 a.m.

Raymond W. Kelly, the former city police commissioner, receives the
Anti-Defamation League's "Americanism Award" at the League's headquarters in
Murray Hill. 11:30 a.m.

Learn about two new laws, Paid Sick Days and the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act,
from experts at the Community Service Society near Union Square. 10 a.m. [Free,
R.S.V.P.]

McKenzie Funk talks about his book (not "her book," as we previously reported),
"Windfall: The Booming Business of Global Warming," at the Institute for Public
Knowledge in Cooper Square. 6 p.m. [Free]

Academics discuss "Drones and the Obama Administration," at Columbia. 6:15 p.m.
[Free]

Phew. Now for some fun: a lecture on the few surviving wooden houses of
Greenwich Village. 6:30 p.m. [Free, R.S.V.P.] ...

... A burlesque tribute to "Star Trek" at the Slipper Room on the Lower East
Side. 7 p.m. [$10] ...

... And "Running Late with Scott Rogowsky: Brooklyn's Live Late Night Comedy
Talk Show," featuring the hip-hop artist Pharoah Monch and Jessica Williams from
"The Daily Show," at Littlefield in Brooklyn. 7:30 p.m. [$8 and up]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

IN THE NEWS

Mayor de Blasio proposed a 30-cent taxi surcharge to finance accessible cabs.
[New York Times]

Two CNN producers were arrested on trespassing charges at One World Trade
Center. Unlike a group of parachutists and a teenager, they didn't actually get
in. [New York Times]

A New Jersey man got out of prison only to go back and rob the shoe store he
held up in 1999.  [Daily News]

A trove of maritime memorabilia, including items from the Titanic, was
purportedly stolen from the aging founder of the Seaport Museum. [New York Post]

A man saw the underside of an L train after jumping onto the tracks to retrieve
his iPhone. He was not injured. [CBS]

A ferry will provide weekend service between Jersey City and Lower Manhattan,
while PATH train stations are repaired. [WNYC]

The owner of the Brooklyn Nets plans to move the team's offices to Russia.
[Brooklyn Paper]

The World's Fair Pavilion will be open to the public one day next month, but
only for three hours. [Gothamist]

Mario Batali will close the wine store at Eataly for six months, following a
liquor license dispute. [Crain's]

Scoreboard: Lakers drown Knicks, 127-96. Islanders escape Hurricanes, 5-4.

AND FINALLY ...

On this day in 1967, some 10,000 people gathered on Central Park's Sheep Meadow.

The occasion, The Times reported, was "a noisy, swarming, chaotic and utterly
surrealistic, 'Be-In.'"

The aim was to express love to mankind on Easter Sunday.

Those gathered also plied police officers with jelly beans and smoked banana
peels.

"Everyone's turning on to banana skins now," one reveler said.

Another observed the crowd - "poets from the Bronx, dropouts from the East
Village, interior decorators from the East Side" - and marveled.

"Look at those hats, look at those helmets, look at those bananas that people
are wearing."

Sandra E. Garcia contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning. You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


