                             2043 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                           February 25, 2014 Tuesday

Today in Small Business: The Best Apps for Start-Ups

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 465 words



HIGHLIGHT: Advertising on a small budget. Arizona&#8217;s bill allowing
businesses not to serve certain people. And the sudden popularity of jersey No.
98.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today?

Today's Best Read

John Harvey says you should consider thinking differently about Washington's
deficits: "This is about as close as you get to fact: when the public sector
spends in deficit, it is by definition a surplus for the private sector."

Washington

President Obama told governors that he expects to make his decision on whether
to approve the Keystone XL pipeline in the coming months.

The Pentagon plans to shrink the army to pre-World War II levels.

Technology

Samsung releases its S5 smartphone, and here's a comparison with the S4.

These are the best apps for start-ups.

The next generation of drones awaits Federal Aviation Authority go-ahead.

Ideas

Barry Ritholtz reviews a book that advocates profiting from global warming. "The
short version: change and confusion equals opportunity."

Employees

A fertility app's crowdfunding campaign asks companies to pay for their
employees' fertility treatments if those employees fail to conceive within 10
months. So far, Eventbrite, Evernote and Domo have signed on and are footing the
bill.

Management

A study says people think more objectively in the dark.

Entrepreneurship

Here are 25 tips to help you become a better entrepreneur.

And here's how to make your business profitable.

Cash Flow

Don't let yourself be ruined by these money mistakes.

Start-Up

Sixty-five percent of high-potential start-ups fail because of conflict among
co-founders, according to a professor at Harvard Business School

Online

The United States freezes the assets of work-at-home Web firms that promise too
much.

GoDaddy plans to introduce a simpler e-commerce storefront this spring.

Social Media

Facebook finally puts its beleaguered mail platform to rest.

Marketing

Here are five ways to advertise on a small budget.

Around the Country

Apparently, Colorado Girl Scouts are not allowed to sell cookies outside pot
shops.

The governor of Arizona has to decide whether to veto a bill that would allow
businesses to refuse service to gay people.

The NBA's retail store reports an "unprecedented" demand for No. 98 jerseys.

Two entrepreneurs give their take on the Google buses.

Around the World

Here is why Target is stumbling in Canada.

A majority of the small Canadian-listed mining companies that help drive global
mineral exploration expect to drill this year after a grim period for many
cash-strapped explorers.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Spying on Employees
     ·    Today in Small Business: the Most Promising Companies
     ·    Today in Small Business: 51 Start-Up Failures
     ·    The Start-Up Vortex of Doom
     ·    Today in Small Business: Learning From the Big Sites


LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


