                             2050 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             March 6, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Cheese Fight

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 636 words



HIGHLIGHT: Which social media platform is best for your business?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today?

The Economy

Growth in the service sector slowed in February.

The Fed's so-called beige book reported a "modest to moderate" increase in
economic activity in most districts.

Construction spending is at an eight-year high.

Private employers added 139,000 jobs in February.

Opportunities

Solar was the second-biggest source of new electricity generation capacity in
2013.

An artist seeks crowd-funded financing for a new line of "Average Barbie" dolls.

This start-up wants high schoolers to create 3-D prosthetic hands.

Comcast Business plans to award more than $600,000 in cash and services to
tech-savvy entrepreneurs through a new program.

Online

If you ignore Google Plus, will Google search ignore you?

Yahoo says it will block Facebook and Google sign-ins for its services.

West Virginia's attorney general warns of scammers trying to trick business
owners into paying for website domain names.

A new report find that more than 80 percent of online shoppers have used an
online alternative payment service in the past 12 months.

Around the Country

Los Angeles is the worst city in the United States for gridlock.

The New York metro economy is almost as large as Australia's.

Some local Shreveport, La., business owners and Mardi Gras "krewes" say they saw
an increase in revelers and profits during the 2014 season.

Charlotte, N.C., businesses are starting to worry about losing Hollywood
productions.

A bill to relax a fireworks law could bring opportunities for some Iowa business
owners.

Kansas City's police don't respond to a break-in at a car dealership because of
an unpaid $45 permit fee.

Washington, the state with the highest minimum wage, beats the national growth
rate.

Around the World

American cheese-makers are fighting back against the European Union's campaign
to restrict the use of designations such as parmesan, gorgonzola, feta and
munster.

Marketing

Eventbrite now offers reserved seating.

Five legacy software companies are in a battle to win the hearts and minds of
chief marketing officers.

Luke Chitwood reviews the major social media platforms to help determine which
one is best for your business.

A pizza chain gets $10 million in free publicity and has a huge sales surge
after Ellen's bit at the Oscars.

  This infographic compares email marketing and social media marketing.

Cash Flow

After two frigid months for auto sales, dealerships are desperate for buyers.

This is why your small business shouldn't be your only retirement funding
option.

Jay Goltz admits he's still learning about managing cash flow: "One seemingly
small decision, made nine years ago, has limited the amount of money that I can
borrow to use in the business."

Retail

Chipotle says guacamole is at risk because of climate change.

A co-owner of a family run jewelry business has some tough words for
small-business owners hoping to get their products or designs on the shelves of
big retailers: "Pack your samples up, swallow your pride and show up."

Technology

Linksys targets small businesses with its new range of security cameras.

The North American robotics market recorded its best year in 2013.

Target's chief information officer resigns in the wake of the company's data
breach.

Facebook is looking into buying a drone maker.

A new survey finds that the majority of financial software projects are still
over time and budget.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: From Minimum Wage to Owning the Franchise
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Minimum Wage Debate Continues
     ·    Today in Small Business: A Social Media Lesson
     ·    Today in Small Business: Tax Uncertainty
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Harlem Renaissance


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


