                             2025 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (At War)

                            December 23, 2013 Monday

Experiencing War Through a Twin

BYLINE: KYLE WESTON

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 1420 words



HIGHLIGHT: A man confronts what it means that while his brother dodged
rocket-propelled grenades, he was enjoying himself skiing.


Like many Americans, I spent much of the past decade feeling disconnected from
our wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, distant places conveniently nudged out of mind
when unsettling images flickered across the television screen. But I had one
very good reason not to feel this way: my identical twin brother, Kael, had
spent seven years over there, serving in the State Department as a political
adviser attached to Marine infantry units.

Forty-one years ago, we entered the world by near simultaneous birth, Kyle and
Kael, 11 pounds, 11 ounces, delivered by steady hands a few minutes apart via
C-section. Not quite a blessed event, Mom would say: "Double the pain.
Absolutely no fun."

Growing up in Orem, Utah, Kael and I once were inseparable. Towheaded toddlers,
we conversed in a fluent twin talk - gibberish to others, but a language all our
own. Our parents referred to us as Pete and Repeat. Everywhere he went, I went;
and everywhere I went, he went. Neighborhood excursions were aided by a trusty
tricycle as troop transport, The Hot Seat, but with room for one. The odd twin
out more often than not, I became the grunt, pushing us along. Kael assumed the
role of fearless leader, surveying the terrain ahead from the comfort of his
seated vantage point, albeit only a couple feet off the ground.

Though we might have shared this bond of twins, the same material makeup -
duplicate genes, carbon-copy DNA - Kael and I had hardly talked about his time
in Falluja or Khost. Like Dad, whose stories of fighting in the jungles of
Vietnam were infrequent, he chose to say little. I grasped only faint outlines
of what he had witnessed, decisions with consequences, friends lost-American,
Iraqi and Afghan.

Now he had asked me, Dad and Mom to join him for a Labor Day weekend gathering
of Marines whom he had served with in Iraq and Afghanistan - an event, organized
by him, to be held in the rugged, two-mile-high landscape of Leadville in
central Colorado. It was to be the inaugural reunion of veterans of the two
wars. I was hesitant. I would be meeting members of Kael's band of brothers, his
other family, the Marines, perhaps the family he felt closest to. Even with his
brotherly invitation, I couldn't help but think I'd be an outsider.

The weekend began on a light note. At the kick-off event at the historic Tabor
Opera House in Leadville, the mayor and a local judge provided an overview of
the town's Wild West past - its reputation well-earned as a onetime home to
gamblers, prostitutes, outlaws, silver barons and bar brawlers. In 1882, Oscar
Wilde partook of the town's spirited generosity: "I had supper, the first course
being whiskey, the second whiskey and the third whiskey." Maj. Gen. Larry
Nicholson, commanding general of the First Marine Division, one of the officers
Kael had advised, received a key to the city and gave a short talk. Much beer
drinking followed late into the night at the nearby Silver Dollar Saloon, a
Wilde-worthy place.

On Saturday afternoon, after a hike around stunning Turquoise Lake, the event
took a somber turn. Our group of 40 veterans from across the country set out for
the Lake County Veterans Memorial, the reason we had come to Leadville: to honor
a native son, Lance Cpl. Nicklas Palmer, 19, killed in Falluja by a sniper's
bullet (in his father's words) on Dec. 16, 2006.

Standing there, I couldn't help but think about war's insanity, death made
personal. Not only was I confronted by Nick's death, but also by Kael's multiple
close calls, including a suicide car bomb attack in Khost. Guilt stirred within.
What sacrifice had I made during these wars? What had been asked of me by my
country? None and nothing. A bumper sticker-deep level of support.

While Kael dodged rocket-propelled grenades alongside Marines, I looked out for
moose during summer and fall trail runs in the Wasatch Range east of Salt Lake
City. He met with family members of civilians killed in United States military
operations, including pro-American Pashtuns critical of drones. He shook the
extended hands of several Afghans who had been detained at Guantánamo Bay for
years without clear proof of wrongdoing.

And me? I moved around stacks of HR paperwork. Come winter, I'd wait for the
next big snowstorm, monitoring the webcams at Alta and Snowbird religiously. I
measured my quality of life by the inches of powder piling up, snowflake-driven
visions of tomorrow's soft turns. Anything less than 70 days on the hill meant a
bad year.

Yes, while Kael was at war, serving his country, wrong or right, I played in
Utah's great outdoors, a carefree embodiment of civilian-military gap"living the
dream"  - the equivalent of my fellow Americans' having gone shopping. I hit the
slopes, while kids like Nick Palmer died. We cut taxes and spent money, while
roadside bombs shattered limbs and melted faces.

More than 6,770 Americans have been killed as of this writing, and tens of
thousands more wounded, with war's hidden mental pain as devastating as the
abrupt savagery of its pink mists. PTSD and Traumatic Brain Injury. Suicide. The
suffering inflicted on Iraqi and Afghan populations has been greater still -
hundreds of thousands dead and maimed, and millions more dislocated.

Kael says, "There's a difference when a country, but not a nation, goes to war."
Now I understand.

In life, sometimes we get second chances. My opportunity is to put words onto
the page like I've done here, describing the inaugural Leadville Reunion (which
Kael, General Nicholson and the town expect will only grow year after year; all
are welcome), and help Kael write a book, provisionally titled, "The Mirror
Test." He is composing a nonfiction work of conscience about our most recent and
longest wars, a book that prompts the kind of hard questions I've been asking
myself - my own look into the reflective glass.

Stories from our recent conflicts, as many as possible, should be retold so as
to be remembered, testament to what happened - whether here on this blog, in
published works, through writing workshops and literary readings, or like those
given voice late one August night at Leadville's Silver Dollar Saloon. The
stories of "them" require retelling too, for these wars were never just about
us. Our war fronts were their home fronts after all, a point Kael emphasizes. He
introduces some of the Iraqis and Afghans - and not only the Americans - who
suffered and sacrificed, and still do.

"The Mirror Test" will profile, among others, charismatic but doomed Iraqi imams
and mayors, an opinionated highway patrolman, a Tony Soprano-like teamster and
an English teacher. The book will take readers to Afghanistan, where Madrassa
and Khost University students debate the country's future and ex-Taliban
fighters try to reintegrate into society. It will explore the resilience amid
the pain of double and triple amputees, both in Helmand Province field clinics
and at Bethesda Naval Hospital.

"The Mirror Test" will be about, Kael says, "the lives of the little people and
their experiences in our wars," that happen "far from Washington, D.C."

Kael's been typing away on his book. And we're finding there's no better
first-look editor than one's twin, red ink spilled toward getting it right, or
as close to right as is possible. It's also proving to be good practice for that
"twinmoir" we plan to write someday. We may no longer be together in Utah
scooting about city streets on a tricycle. But I'm still there supporting Kael,
in force multiplier fashion, to use military jargon, while he sits deployed
behind the keyboard, a different kind of hot seat.

I'm already looking forward to next year's reunion in Leadville. More drinks
will be on me, stories told and friendships made - not to mention that wordy
bond between identical twin brothers having only gotten wordier.

Kyle Weston graduated from Princeton University in 1994 with a degree in
anthropology. He has worked in health care consulting in Washington, and
currently is a director of human resources for a Utah-based outsourcing company.
He can be reached at westonkdc@gmail.com From 2003 to 2010, his twin brother,
(John) Kael Weston, served in Iraq and Afghanistan as the State Department
representative in Anbar Province, Iraq, and Helmand and Khost Provinces in
Afghanistan. His book on both wars is forthcoming from Knopf (2015).


     ·    The Man Behind the MRAP Moves On
     ·    Guide to a Few Nonprofit Groups Providing Care to Veterans
     ·    Women in Combat? Some Marines React
     ·    A Veteran's Plea to President Obama
     ·    My Suicide Attempt and My Struggles to Get Help


LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


