                             2053 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            March 13, 2014 Thursday

Dan Harris, Co-Anchor of 'Nightline,' Discusses Multitasking and Meditation

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 883 words



HIGHLIGHT: Dan Harris, a co-anchor of Nightline, has just published a new book
that says meditation can make us 10 percent happier and that multitasking in a
technology-obsessed world is detrimental to our brains.


Dan Harris, a co-anchor of ABC's "Nightline" and the weekend edition of "Good
Morning America," is the author of a new book, "10% Happier: How I Tamed the
Voice in My Head, Reduced Stress Without Losing My Edge, and Found Self-Help
That Actually Works - A True Story."

In the book, Mr. Harris went on a "deeply skeptical odyssey" into self-help and
meditation to try and navigate through our always-on, multitasking world.

The following is an edited interview:

Q.

What led you to write a book about this topic?

A.

The preamble is I had a panic attack on national television in front of five
million people. I learned that the reason for the panic attack was because I was
self-medicating due to so much stress, which was raising the level of adrenaline
in my brain. At around the same time, I was assigned to do a series on religion
for ABC that sent me into a journey of self-help. This eventually led to
Buddhism and meditation and a series of brain exercises that changed my life,
and, as the title of the book says, made me 10 percent happier.

Q.

Can meditation help even the most hyper-connected geek?

A.

If you live constantly with your attention so fractured and splintered between
Twitter, Facebook, your cellphone, your email and maybe a little bit of your
actual work, your mind is constantly flitting between these things. Our brains
are not designed to do that. Meditation can help offset that.

Q.

You mean we're not supposed to be using all of this social media and gadgets at
once?

A.

No. The term "multitasking" is a computer term. Unlike computers, we humans only
have one processor. I'm not trying to sound all New Agey, but these bad habits
can be unlearned. It literally takes a couple of minutes a day and you can be
working out the same muscle that is atrophying when you're engaged in this
flight of fancy called multitasking.

Q.

But if I'm good at juggling a dozen things at once, should I stop?

A.

There are scientific studies that show that when your mind is wandering, you're
less happy. Focusing on one thing at a time has been found to make us happier
and more productive. We are not supposed to be doing 17 things at once. We're
not built for it.

Q.

Does this philosophy serve any benefit to a chief executive or a tech
entrepreneur?

A.

Meditation is actually huge in Silicon Valley right now. It's not a coincidence
that you're seeing really successful people embrace this practice because not
only does it make you happier, but it makes you more effective. It's a great
superpower to not be yanked around by your emotions. What meditation allows you
to do is to recognize, "Oh, I'm starting to get angry." In a business situation,
avoiding that is greatly beneficial.

Q.

How do you go from being on TV in front of millions of people to sitting and
doing nothing?

A.

Meditation is not sitting in a room and thinking of nothing. Meditation is hard,
especially when you're doing it right. It's like holding a live fish in your
hand. As you sit there and try to watch your breath, it's going to wiggle away
from you millions of times. The trick is catching yourself and coming back.

Q.

Do I have to pick a schedule and time to do this?

A.

No. You don't have to be overly militant about it. You do it when you can fit it
in. But it only takes five minutes of your time, and everyone has five minutes.

Q.

Do you recommend any apps that will help people meditate?

A.

I personally don't use an app. But the one I would recommend is Headspace,
because the creators really know what they are doing. The guy who started it was
a monk.

Q.

Has meditating changed the way you use technology?

A.

Yes. I have changed my habits because I now know what works. I am now of the
mind-set that I can only do one thing at a time. So when you called me, I turned
off my computer monitor. And when someone walks into my office, I turn off my
computer and give them the attention they deserve. Though, I'm far from perfect:
I just caught myself walking down the hallway with a cup of water in my mouth,
while typing on my BlackBerry.

Q.

Wait, you have a BlackBerry?

A.

Ha. Yes, I'm still in the "belt and suspenders school." I have a BlackBerry and
iPhone.

Q.

BlackBerries and iPhones aside, we do live on our devices, and now use multiple
screens at the same time. This seems very difficult to change.

A.

Sure it does, but we're categorically not built for it. It's not even a debate.
We can't multitask. So we do it to our own detriment. If you're really paying
attention to how happy you are in a two-screen experience, to be honest you're
not happy. The science suggests that we're happier when we're really focused on
one thing. The fracturing of the attention of the modern man is deleterious to
our happiness levels. I can tell you how to meditate on the back of a napkin and
it will change your life.

Q.

I don't have any napkins with me. How about you tell us how to meditate in less
than 140 characters?

A.

Sit with your spine straight. Feel your breath coming in and out. When your mind
wanders, return to your breath.


     ·    As the Web Turns 25, Its Creator Talks About Its Future
     ·    Comcast Indefinitely Extends Low-Cost Broadband for Poor Families
     ·    Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan
     ·    Physician, Review Thyself
     ·    Daily Report: Mixed Responses at Microsoft to Rise of New Strategy
          Chief


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


