                             2056 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                             March 25, 2014 Tuesday

Where's That Aid Package for Ukraine?

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 323 words



HIGHLIGHT: Never underestimate the ability of Democrats and Republicans to muddy
the waters, and imperil priorities, including national security priorities, with
ancillary domestic political squabbles.


Since Russia invaded and annexed Crimea, a recurring theme in Washington has
been that the United States needs to lead the international response and stand
up for Ukraine.

One might think that would propel Congress to move quickly on an aid package for
Ukraine, which is in desperate financial straits and facing economic punishment
from Russia. One might think that - but one would be wrong.

The Senate on Monday did indeed agree to formally take up legislation to aid
Ukraine and sanction Russia, and the 78-17 vote suggested remarkable bipartisan
support. The legislation would guarantee $1 billion in loans to the shaky
government in Kiev, offer an additional $100 million in direct aid, and provide
$50 million to strengthen democratic institutions. It would also codify
sanctions against Russian and Ukrainian individuals already ordered by President
Obama.

But never underestimate the ability of Democrats and Republicans to muddy the
waters, and imperil priorities, including national security priorities, with
ancillary domestic political squabbles.

The Obama administration and Senate Democrats have been insisting on including
changes to the International Monetary Fund governance structure. Republicans
have said they oppose that and have been demanding a delay in the Internal
Revenue Service's regulations of political groups operating as tax-exempt
"social welfare" organizations. The House has already passed a Ukraine aid
package but if the Senate adds on those other issues, it could slow down final
adoption of aid for Ukraine.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid let it be known on Tuesday that he is
considering dropping the controversial IMF provisions in the Ukraine package.
One can only hope that he will follow through.


     ·    Press Wars in Ukraine
     ·    Harry Reid 'Hopes' It's Not Racism
     ·    'Undisguised Blackmail'
     ·    What's a Logical Drone Strikes Policy? Hint: Not the Current One.
     ·    There's a Big Difference Between Union Money and Koch Money


LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


