                             2016 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                           December 12, 2013 Thursday

Reports on Central African Republic's Humanitarian Needs

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 995 words



HIGHLIGHT: The fighting in the Central African Republic has left many civilians
in need of aid.


[Video: Alex Thomson, a Channel 4 News correspondent, reported on the aid needs
and efforts to take weapons from suspected fighters.  Watch on YouTube.]

Journalists and international humanitarian workers who have been extensively
covering the conflict in Central African Republic have highlighted the desperate
need for aid for the more than half a million people who have been displaced by
the fighting.

Alex Thomson, a correspondent for Britain's Channel 4 news, and Stuart Webb, the
cameraman who works with him, this week broadcast a report on the lack of
sufficient aid as well as efforts to disarm militias.

Mr. Webb highlighted on his Twitter account the paucity of shelter and medical
care.

#CARcrisis at a refugee camp for 20,000 people one room serves as a
'hospital'-there's no beds so tables make do... http://t.co/rSQdWmU1fm

- Stuart Webb (@Worldwidewebb1)11 Dec 13

#CARcrisis but many thousands are still living in squalor to frightened to
return home... http://t.co/1UCtbLNSDq

- Stuart Webb (@Worldwidewebb1)9 Dec 13

On Thursday, the European Union said it was sending "urgently needed" medical
assistance to the Central African Republic, where the situation was "rapidly
deteriorating" with more than 530,000 people internally displaced. More than 2
million people need immediate assistance, it said.

"A humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding before our eyes in the Central African
Republic. The entire population is affected - and the number of people displaced
in Bangui alone has increased by 130,000 in the space of only a few days. We
must get assistance to them now," Kristalina Georgieva, the E.U. commissioner
for international cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response, said in the
statement.

The United Nations shared a message online about the aid needs in the country.

Aid scaled up as number of displaced in Central African Republic tops half a
million http://t.co/iOfdYbJd8E #CAR

- United Nations (@UN)11 Dec 13

But on Thursday the humanitarian international aid group, Médecins Sans
Frontières (Doctors without Borders),  criticizing the "unacceptable
performance" of the United Nations humanitarian system over the past year in the
Central African Republic, saying in part:

During the growing emergency of the last three months, and most recently in
Bangui just a few days ago, there has been no evidence of an adequate
humanitarian reaction to the needs generated by repeated outbreaks of violence.
The only actions undertaken by UN aid officials have been the collection of data
related to the fighting and a few assessments confirming the need for an
immediate response. Repeated evaluations in the face of glaring needs, and
numerous coordination meetings, have not led to any concrete action around the
main hotspots.

Two recent examples best illustrate the situation: MSF has repeatedly asked UN
agencies to deliver food, tents and soap to the more than 15,000 people
displaced in the vicinity of Bangui's airport, without any reaction; in
Bossangoa, UN aid officials on security lock-down inside the FOMAC compound did
not even provide assistance to the displaced sheltering inside the same
compound, forcing MSF to intervene once more. Following the fighting in
Bossangoa, the UN remained on security lock-down for days, abandoning the more
than 30,000 displaced persons in the main Bossangoa camps, while MSF and ACF
teams move through the city to provide emergency assistance.

Peter Bouckaert, the emergency director for Human Rights Watch, corroborated the
account provided in the MSF letter.

#MSF is right on target with this critique of #UN performance in #CARcrisis.
http://t.co/LcNcNWiamt I witnessed this myself. @msf

- Peter Bouckaert (@bouckap)12 Dec 13

Mr. Bouckaert recently left the country, where he has extensively been
witnessing the conflict unfold firsthand.

In an Op-Ed article in The New York Times this week, he described details of a
meeting there that he had with a rebel colonel, Col. Saleh Zabadi, when he
presented him with witnesses' accounts of killings and with satellite imagery of
burned villages.

"I told him that this was direct evidence that could be used against him at the
International Criminal Court, which prosecutes war crimes and crimes against
humanity," Mr. Bouckaert wrote.

A photographer, Marcus Bleasdale, who has been working with Mr. Bouckaert,
posted on his Twitter account @marcusbleasdale a photograph of Mr. Bouckart
during the meeting.

#CARcrisis @bouckap of @hrw @marcusbleasdale confronted #seleka with evidence of
their crimes http://t.co/GhwH9hkThB http://t.co/2p7YeodleA

- Marcus Bleasdale (@marcusbleasdale)11 Dec 13

As my colleague Alissa J. Rubin reported, French paratroopers arrived over the
weekend to help stem the increasing violence in the country, where the
president, Michel Djotodia, took power in a coup last spring backed by the
Seleka rebels, who are now among one of the largest militias destabilizing the
country.

The Reuters news agency reported on Thursday that the United States has started
to airlift Burundian troops there.

Laura Jepson of the International Medical Corps and Tristan Redman of Al Jazeera
English described the situation in the capital and at the sites for people who
have been internally displaced.

Signs of normalcy in #Bangui as gas stations re-open and Air France flight to
arrive in #CAR.

- Laura Jepson IMC (@LauraJepson)12 Dec 13

Today @IMC_Worldwide & @UNFPA visited IDP sites in #Bangui. The living
conditions were shocking. I've never seen anything like it #CARcrisis

- Laura Jepson IMC (@LauraJepson)11 Dec 13

French soldier searching pedestrians for weapons in #Bangui #CAR
http://t.co/eLRZIgT9iL

- Tristan Redman (@TristanAJE)12 Dec 13


     ·    Reports From the Central African Republic's 'Darkest Days'
     ·    Video of Samantha Power's 2002 Remarks on Imposing Peace on Israel
          Could Haunt Her, Israeli Paper Says
     ·    Congolese Warlord Wanted for War Crimes Surrenders to U.S. Diplomats
          in Rwanda
     ·    Let Slip the Drones of Peace
     ·    Surveillance Video of Suspected Paris Gunman


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


