                             2014 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                          December 11, 2013 Wednesday

Struggle for Kiev Square Unfolds Live Online

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 837 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Ukrainian security forces&#8217;s new tolerance of journalism
means that interested observers who are not in Kiev&#8217;s main square, or even
in the country, are able to follow events as they unfold, in granular detail.


As my colleagues David Herszenhorn and Andrew Kramer report from Kiev, the
security forces failed to clear protesters from the city's main square
overnight, despite dismantling barricades and shoving against lines of
demonstrators for hours in the freezing cold.

The relative restraint shown by the riot police, known as the Berkut, was in
marked contrast to the brutal beating of protesters and journalists during the
government's last attempt to clear the protest camp, just over a week ago. The
security forces's new tolerance of journalism meant that interested observers
who were not in the square, or even in the country, were able to follow events
as they unfolded in granular detail, watching live video of the tense standoff
in the square streamed from multiple camera angles, reading text updates from
reporters and activists as the hours passed and viewing photographs of
protesters fortifying their defenses at the nearby city hall they continue to
occupy.

Thousands of protesters coming to Maidan, now there are more activists in square
than riot police officers

- Myroslava Petsa (@myroslavapetsa)11 Dec 13

city hall. Lights just went out. #euromaid[#x430]n

- Anna Petukhova (@apetukhova)11 Dec 13

lights on. Someone playing the piano. Nothing's really happening in city hall.
Berkut at the doors. #euromaidan

- Anna Petukhova (@apetukhova)11 Dec 13

The police have swept through and cleared numerous barricades and several tents
in Independence Square, main protest site in #Kiev

- David M. Herszenhorn (@herszenhorn)11 Dec 13

http://t.co/GVVRnVon5i

- Feldman (@EvgenyFeldman)11 Dec 13

Men dressed as municipal workers carrying elec saws cutting down barricades.
Berkut seen pulling rowdy protester from crowd, taking him away

- Christopher Miller (@ChristopherJM)11 Dec 13

Ouside the city hall protesters are creating an ice-rink so the riot police,
well, slips away http://t.co/3yhWLybcUv

- Olaf Koens (@obk)11 Dec 13

They are dismantling the barricades now with little resistance. Except this
priest standing in front of bulldozer! http://t.co/NTmHyVrc9p

- Shaun Walker (@shaunwalker7)11 Dec 13

Rather quiet now, police facing protesters, one barricade dismantled, quite
peaceful so far #Kiev #euromaidan http://t.co/AJY3QNfSDh

- Paul Gypteau (@paulgypteau)11 Dec 13

This used to be the exit at kyiv city hall http://t.co/BCv17ESacv

- Dan Peleschuk (@dpeleschuk)11 Dec 13

One of those streaming video throughout the night, from both sides of the front
lines, was Mustafa Nayyem, an independent Ukrainian journalist. At one stage,
Mr. Nayyem recorded the dismantling of barricades by officers and men in orange
vests who appeared to be municipal workers.

As night gave way to morning, video posted on Instagram by Max Seddon, a
Buzzfeed correspondent in the square, and Sergey Ponomarev, a New York Times
photographer, showed that the protest camp's sound system continued to blast out
a driving hard-rock soundtrack to the action, punctuated by repeated renditions
of the national anthem from the Ukrainian pop star Ruslana.

Although the lack of violence made for less obviously dramatic images, there was
one extraordinary scene captured on video at about 2 a.m. local time. As both
the Guardian reporter Shaun Walker and the Dutch correspondent Olaf Koens
reported on Twitter, hours into the shoving match, a phalanx of riot police
officers suddenly found themselves forced through the lines and then trapped
inside the square. The protesters, however, treated them with mercy, and formed
a cordon through their lines to allow them to retreat.

The protesters leaving a cordon, police walking out in defeat. Utterly
extraordinary. Even given their shields back. They're running away

- Shaun Walker (@shaunwalker7)11 Dec 13

Clearly an order to take square with no violence. But they can't. rank and file
are extremely lucky that protesters not minded to violence.

- Shaun Walker (@shaunwalker7)11 Dec 13

Demonstrators give the police their shields back and form a corridor to let them
walk out

- Olaf Koens (@obk)11 Dec 13

Not only the police isn't hitting the demonstrators, the demonstrators don't hit
the police either. A remarkable truce.

- Olaf Koens (@obk)11 Dec 13

Clear images of that scene were recorded by a young Ukrainian filmmaker, Vasia
Nikolayenko. Just over four minutes into his footage of the night's action, Mr.
Nikolayenko showed the orange-helmeted protesters clearing a path through their
ranks and the police officers filing out.

Mr. Nikolayenko, who was 11 years old during the last round of mass protests
against the current president, Viktor Yanukovich, also had some fun with video
of a statue of Lenin that was toppled by protesters in Kiev last week, producing
a remix set to the soundtrack from the Super Mario Brothers video game.


     ·    Ukraine on Edge as Protesters and the Authorities Face Off
     ·    Video of Police Brutality in Kiev Fuels Rage
     ·    A Lot of Music, and a Little Protest, as Hasidic Jews Come to
          Ukrainian Town
     ·    In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests
     ·    Body of Nazi War Criminal Moved to Airport in Rome After Clashes


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


