                             2021 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                          December 18, 2013 Wednesday

Chinese Defense Ministry Issues Statement Playing Down Near Collision at Sea

BYLINE: BREE FENG

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 320 words



HIGHLIGHT: In its first official statement on the near collision of Chinese and
American warships, the ministry refrained from alleging any improper conduct by
the American side.


The Chinese Ministry of National Defense on Wednesday issued its first official
statement about what has been described as a near collision between Chinese and
American warships in the South China Sea. The incident took place on Dec. 5 in
waters off China's southern Hainan Province during a training exercise of the
Liaoning aircraft carrier group.

A Pentagon spokesman said Monday that a Chinese landing vessel and an American
guided missile cruiser, the Cowpens, came within 500 yards of each other during
the encounter. A state newspaper in China confirmed part of the American
account, reporting that the Chinese ship had warned the Cowpens to move away.

In a statement posted on its website, the Chinese Defense Ministry appeared to
be trying to play down the incident. It refrained from alleging any improper
conduct by the American warship and said that military relations between China
and the United States "face a good opportunity for development."

A translation of the statement follows:

Recently, a Chinese naval ship conducting normal patrols encountered a U.S.
military vessel in the South China Sea. Throughout the encounter, the Chinese
naval ship handled the situation properly in strict accordance with operating
regulations. The defense departments of the two countries have also reported the
relevant circumstances through normal operational channels and carried out
effective communication. Some relevant media reports have not been in line with
the facts. Sino-U.S. military relations face a good opportunity for development.
Both sides are willing to strengthen communications, coordinate closely and make
efforts toward safeguarding regional peace and stability.


     ·    U.S. B-52 Flight Prompts Indignant Reaction in China
     ·    Chinese Account Says U.S. Ship Was Warned Away From Aircraft Carrier
     ·    Stumbling Block for Turkey's Missile Deal With China
     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    Hugh White on 'The China Choice'


LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


