                             2085 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                             May 7, 2014 Wednesday

Can Hashtag Activism Save Kidnapped Nigerian Girls?

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 1403 words



HIGHLIGHT: A campaign to draw attention to a terrifying crime in Nigeria prompts
reflections on the limits of hashtag activism.


As my colleague Adam Nossiter reports from Nigeria, President Goodluck
Jonathan's government is under intense pressure to respond to the mass
kidnappings of hundreds of schoolgirls by Islamist militants over the past
month. Public outrage over the abductions, and the apparent inaction of the
authorities, first expressed in small street protests, has been greatly
amplified on social networks, where more than a million messages have been
tagged with the simple demand: #BringBackOurGirls.

The social media campaign, apparently inspired by impassioned remarks from
Nigeria's former education minister, Oby Ezekwesili, has gathered so much
momentum that, according to the BBC Trending blog, about 44 percent of the
tweets posted this week have come from the United States, twice the number
coming from Nigeria.

Post by Port Harcourt World Book Capital 2014.

Yes #BringBackOurDaughters
#BringBackOurGirls declared by @obyezeks and all people at Port Harcourt World
Book Capital 2014.

- Ibrahim M. Abdullahi (@Abu_Aaid)23 Apr 14

If you read one thing today, let it be this @NickKristof piece. There are things
we can do to 'Bring Back Our Girls' http://t.co/FI8vSXwGiR

- mia farrow (@MiaFarrow)4 May 14

Boko Haram says it'll sell girls into slavery; is Nigeria under seige? I ask
Nobel-winning writer Wole Soyinka. 7p Abuja. #BringBackOurGirls

- Christiane Amanpour (@camanpour)6 May 14

#Malala Yousafzai tells me: "Girls in Nigeria are my sisters."
http://t.co/84YToo1Tdl #BringBackOurGirls @MalalaFund http://t.co/Uk8Idx6N9O

- Christiane Amanpour (@camanpour)7 May 14

Some activists celebrated the campaign's success in making the abductions a
central focus for the international news media - and prompting the first public
comments on the case from President Jonathan, as well as offers of assistance
from the United States and Britain.

But close observers of social media trends, like the Turkish sociologist Zeynep
Tufekci and the Sudanese writer Nesrine Malik, pointed out that there were
limits to what hashtag activism, like bumper stickers and T-shirts, can achieve.

One thing is clear: sustained citizen action halted original intention of the
Nigerian government to gloss over #BringBackOurGirls as usual.

- #BringBackOurGirls (@gbengasesan)5 May 14

Nigerians are witnessing, in a rather usual but heightened form, the draconian
crackdown of THE PRESIDENCY  #BringBackOurGirls

- 'Seun Fakuade (@seunfakze)5 May 14

On #bringbackourgirls. Another example that hashtag activism can generate
attention. Everything else after that gets complex, very quickly.

- Zeynep Tufekci (@zeynep)6 May 14

Arguing whether "hashtag activism" works misses the point. Yes it works to
generate attention. Question is: how, and what does attention do?

- Zeynep Tufekci (@zeynep)6 May 14

Nigerian girls' tragedy now in 'WHAT DOES OUR REACTION TO THIS IN THE WEST SAY
ABOUT US' stage.

- Nesrine Malik (@NesrineMalik)6 May 14

The 5 stages of Western Reaction to Foreign Events
1 Ignorance
2 Wikipedia wisdom
3 Outrage
4 #SolidarityHashtag
5 Tedious self-obsession

- Nesrine Malik (@NesrineMalik)6 May 14

Another observer, the Nigerian-American novelist Teju Cole, warned on his
Twitter feed against the temptation to lose, in "the fervor of our hashtags," an
awareness of the complexity of the issues involved.

(Protesting Boko Haram is like lighting candles to cure cancer.)

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

Because everybody must be seen to "care." No context, only sentiment. RT
@chrisbrown: #BringBackOurGirls http://t.co/ec0n8kwZeH

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

I understand the impulse to "do something." But Boko Haram is irreducibly
complex. Makes Kony look like child's play. http://t.co/Vv3pYiycqK

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

The "something" eventually done will likely-as in the past-get many other boys
and girls killed, and no one will be accountable for it.

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

These are difficult conversations to have because we're good and we care. We
don't want to be interrupted during the fervor of our hashtags.

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

To my #Nigerian friends and #BringBackOurGirls - Know @CNN is going to be ALL
OVER this story, all the time from now on...somebody has to!

- Jim Clancy (@clancycnn)3 May 14

Part of the horror was that the girls were ignored. An opposite problem now is
CNN's heavy sensationalist interest. https://t.co/7kfLoZ8toQ

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)3 May 14

Nigeria's First Lady, who vowed to join the protests ("I don't mind being
shot"), has now had protesters arrested: http://t.co/Rk2Tm7taQ3

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)5 May 14

"What can I do to help?" Unless you're a Nigerian with constitutional rights to
participate in Nigeria's democratic process: almost nothing.

- Teju Cole (@tejucole)5 May 14

Mr. Cole also pointed out that Secretary of State John Kerry, who said that the
United States was "working to strengthen Nigeria's institutions and its military
to combat Boko Haram," was, just last year, expressing his deep concern at
"credible allegations that Nigerian security forces are committing gross human
rights violations" as they combated the Islamist militants.

Kidnapping of kids by #BokoHaram an unconscionable crime. US will support
#Nigeria to #BringBackOurGirls & hold perpetrators accountable.

- John Kerry (@JohnKerry)5 May 14

In a post for The New Yorker's literature blog, Mr. Cole filled readers in on
some of the recent history of the conflict between the state and the Islamists
as he tried to imagine what the abducted girls might be going through.

In the town of Chibok, the girls, mostly sixteen or seventeen, had been
cautious. They knew, as everyone did, that schools were being targeted. About
forty boys had been killed at a school in Yobe last July. They'd been lined up
in their dorms and shot. In the same state, twenty-nine others had died in
February, their bodies burned, the culprits never found. And so the girls had
come back to Chibok only for their exams - a quick, calculated risk before they
returned home.

Where are they now? The shock of a sudden captivity will have given way to other
fears. There are more than two hundred of them, Muslim and Christian. Nigeria's
northeastern border is massive, porous. They don't know when they crossed the
border, or if they crossed the border. They could be in Niger, or Chad, or
Cameroon (these three neighboring countries are impoverished states with weak
security). The girls know only what their captors say. They have lost track of
time. But they feel, in their bodies, the distances covered by the rumbling
trucks. They cannot imagine what the world is thinking about them, or if it is.

And what are they themselves thinking of, huddled in their dozens, warned to
stay quiet? Not of the murders of Boko Haram's founder and some of his followers
by Nigeria police five years ago, which sparked the violent phase of the group's
campaign of terror. Not of the thousands killed during that campaign, in suicide
bombs, attacks on churches, and shootings at restaurants, a frightening catalog
of atrocities. Not of the global war on terrorism, nor of America's strategic
goals in that war. (Already, in Niger, a drone base is assembled; already
American specialists are on their way to help the Nigerian government.) Not of
Baga, some two hundred miles from Chibok, where last year government forces
massacred two hundred civilians, nor of Maiduguri, where, in mid-March this
year, more than five hundred men were executed on suspicion of being terrorists.
Not of Abuja, where bombs now explode with unnerving frequency. Not of next
year's elections, which the President wants to win at all costs, nor of the
corruption fueling his reëlection bid.

They are not thinking of Twitter, where the captivity is the cause of the day,
nor of the campaigns on the streets of Lagos for a more competent and less
callous government, nor of the rallies in front of Nigeria's embassies
worldwide, nor of the suddenly ramped-up coverage by international media, nor of
how this war will engulf even those who are only just beginning to hear about
it, nor of those who, free for now, will someday become captives.


     ·    Dozens Reportedly Arrested in Nigeria Amid Antigay Crackdown
     ·    Saudi Men Sing 'No Woman, No Drive' in Mock Homage to Ban on Female
          Drivers
     ·    Tributes and Mourning on Social Media as an Egyptian Voice Goes Silent
     ·    N.B.A. Players, Coaches and Executives React on Social Media to
          Sterling's Ban
     ·    Iraq's Ailing President Talabani Is Shown Casting a Vote


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


