                             2075 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            April 17, 2014 Thursday

Google Uses Algorithms to Create SLR-Like Photos

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 437 words



HIGHLIGHT: Google is lifting up the hood of its new Lens Blur feature for its
camera app, showing how the company can make a photo taken on a smartphone look
like it was shot with an SLR camera.


One of the hardest concepts to grasp as a photographer is depth of field.

It's that quirky mix of settings on a traditional Single Lense Reflex (SLR)
camera that allow you to make your subject look crisp in the foreground, while
everything in the background is as blurry as frosted glass.

What makes this depth of field so difficult to understand is that it's all
dependent on the amount of light a lens can let in, coupled with a number of
confusing camera settings. There are depth of field calculators online to help
people do the math. But really, who wants to do math to take a picture of a
cappuccino?

Most people who snap photos and selfies today don't have to worry about this.
They pull out their phone, press a single button, and voila, the photo is ready
to share online. But that picture doesn't have that crisp edge and blurry
background of an SLR.

Google, being Google, seems to have come up with a solution to this problem.

The company has developed an algorithm it is calling "Lens Blur," which is a new
mode in the Android-based Google Camera app.

The company said that its Lens Blur app simulates a larger camera lens and
aperture by capturing a series of frames when snapping a picture, then using
some fancy Google algorithms, creates a 3D model of the objects in the photo,
which can then be used to create depth within the image.

Other companies and apps have tried to create similar effects in the past, but
most tend to look too blurry and very digital.

In a blog post on the company's site, Carlos Hernández, a software engineer at
Google, explained how the Google software is much more than just blurring a few
areas of a photo. He said there are several different algorithm at play when
shooting with this app, including calculating the position of the camera, the
objects in the photo and then triangulating a number of other factors.

The end result, as the company shows, is a picture that looks just like it was
captured with a big and bulky SLR.

If this sounds familiar, Google seems to be borrowing some techniques used by
the Lytro camera, which was released in 2012 and allowed people to focus on
their pictures after the image is taken.

While the camera app will likely enable people to take better photos, it still
doesn't offer the same quality of higher-end manual cameras, which rely on the
high-quality glass in the lens to create incredible depth of field.


     ·    Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land
     ·    Picking a Bag for a Camera
     ·    Google Plus Aims to Become a Photo Storage and Editing Hub
     ·    A Lesson Learned About the Intensity of Camera Enthusiasts
     ·    Wirelessly Expand Your Smartphone or Tablet Memory


LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


