                             207 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Party Votes to Block NATO Supply Lines if Drones Persist

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH and ISMAIL KHAN; Declan Walsh reported from London, and
Ismail Khan from Peshawar, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 589 words


LONDON -- The ruling party in a northwestern province of Pakistan voted Monday
to block NATO supply lines by Nov. 20 unless the United States stops its drone
strikes in the nearby tribal belt.

The party, Tehreek-e-Insaf, which governs Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, passed a
resolution that threatened to block the supply lines through the region in
response to a C.I.A. missile strike that killed Hakimullah Mehsud, the leader of
the Pakistani Taliban, on Friday.

The death of Mr. Mehsud has set off a furious reaction from Pakistani
politicians, particularly Imran Khan, the leader of Tehreek-e-Insaf, who with
others said that the targeted killing had derailed incipient peace talks with
the Taliban.

But Mr. Khan's resolution stopped short of imposing an immediate blockade on
NATO supplies. Setting the Nov. 20 deadline was a means of building pressure on
the Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, to end American drone strikes, while
buying time to avoid a tricky confrontation with Mr. Sharif's administration,
which does not favor blocking NATO lines.

In his first public remarks since Friday's lethal drone strike, Mr. Sharif said
Monday that peace could not be achieved in Pakistan ''by unleashing senseless
force.'' He later told the cabinet that he would press ahead with efforts to
strike a peace deal with the Taliban.

Unusually, President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan backed Pakistan's protests,
saying that the American strike ''took place at an unsuitable time.'' He told an
American congressional delegation in Kabul on Sunday that he hoped the peace
process would not suffer as a result.

Mr. Khan has led the tide of outrage in Pakistan since Friday, making heated
accusations of American sabotage of the peace process, and threatening to cut
the NATO lines unless the drone campaign ends.

The United States, having weathered years of Pakistani criticism over the drone
campaign, is unlikely to accede to his demand, although the pace of drone
strikes has already dropped sharply this year.

Mr. Khan's threat contains one paradox: Peshawar residents say that much of the
NATO traffic through the northwest is now headed out of Afghanistan, not into
the country, in preparation for the withdrawal of Western combat troops by the
end of 2014. If Mr. Khan cut those routes, he would be slowing the withdrawal of
American troops -- a withdrawal that he has demanded for years, citing the
American presence in the region as a cardinal factor in fueling Islamist
militancy inside Pakistan.

Critics point out that Mr. Khan has financial levers, too, at his disposal to
punish the United States. Foreign donors, including the United States, will
provide development assistance of about $325 million this year, or about 30
percent of the province's budget.

But the provincial finance minister, Sirajul Haq, ruled out sending that money
back. ''We don't want to fight war with them,'' Mr. Haq said in an interview.
''The government will continue to honor its commitments with international
donors.''

The drones issue also contains potential financial stakes for Mr. Sharif's
federal government. During his trip to Washington last month, when Mr. Sharif
met President Obama, the State Department said it was releasing $1.6 billion in
aid that had been frozen during a previous confrontation, and would provide an
additional $1 billion this coming year.

The Taliban leadership, meanwhile, is meeting in North Waziristan to choose a
successor to Mr. Mehsud. A rival commander named Khan Said was the favorite, but
no final decision had been made.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/05/world/asia/pakistani-party-votes-to-block-nato
-supply-lines-if-drone-strikes-persist.html

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


