                             2083 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (At War)

                             April 25, 2014 Friday

Pakistani Censorship, by Other Means

BYLINE: KIRAN NAZISH

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 1083 words



HIGHLIGHT: Almost every journalist reporting on conflict within Pakistan,
addressing government corruption, or investigating the actions of the military
intelligence service, the ISI, has faced repeated threats.


The prominent Pakistani journalist Raza Rumi narrowly escaped death on March 28
when his car was riddled with bullets in Lahore. His driver, Mumtaz, a
25-year-old newlywed, was killed in the ambush, sprung as they were driving away
from the set of Raza's weekly television show on Express News. The topic that
day had been how the country's blasphemy laws are misused to persecute religious
minorities in Pakistan, a regular subject for Raza.

He had been receiving threats for a while. Just two weeks before, while I was in
Washington, D.C., he sent me an email in which he said he was looking to leave
the country. "I want to move out - too many threats here. At least for a year or
two," he wrote.

At the time, it shocked me - he'd been threatened for years without being
deterred. He has been called a traitor, a C.I.A. agent and an enemy of the
state. There have been nationalistic blogs campaigning against him and others
like him, branding them as "fascist liberals."

Nine days after his note, his fears were realized. And he is only one of many to
be attacked recently.

In Peshawar, a senior editor heading the city desk for The Express Tribune was
attacked twice within seven days this month. Jamshed Baghwan's home was attacked
with a grenade first on April 1 and then on April 7. On the April 19, one of
Pakistan's most famous TV journalists, Hamid Mir, was shot and wounded by
unknown men in Karachi.

Almost every journalist reporting on conflict within Pakistan, addressing
government corruption, or investigating the actions of the military intelligence
service, the ISI, has faced repeated threats. And journalists are being hurt or
killed in increasing numbers, their attackers seemingly immune to prosecution.
Still, most journalists do not talk about the threats they are receiving, so
they seldom go on record before the attacks happen.

The usual suspect in these attacks is the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, also known
as the Pakistani Taliban, who openly announced their war against the media in
Pakistan for their lack of "impartial" reporting.

"The job of a journalist is to be fair and tell all sides of a story," the
Pakistani Taliban's former spokesman, identified as Ehsanullah Ehsan, told the
newspaper Dawn in January. He warned that the media should "mend their ways and
become a neutral entity. Otherwise, the media should not feel secure. A few
barriers and security escorts will not help. If we can get inside military
installations, media offices should not be too much of a challenge."

The Pakistani Taliban have a hit list of journalists they are targeting. The
list was revealed for the first time in January 2012, after the Pakistani
Taliban killed a veteran journalist, and a good friend, Mukkarram Khan Atif.
They said he had portrayed them "wickedly," and he had been telling me for
months before his murder about the threats he was receiving from the Taliban and
an allied group, the Haqqani network.

But the Taliban are hardly the only group attacking Pakistani journalists, and
much of the violence comes without  warning.

Other militant groups are involved, too, including Lashkar-e-Jhangvi. That group
is focused on attacking Shia Muslims and other minority groups, and a senior
police official in Punjab Province believes it was also behind the attack on
Raza Rumi. No arrests have been made.

And the ISI, the military spy agency, has been accused in some of the most
chilling abuses of reporters, including the 2011 killing of Syed Saleem Shahzad,
who was killed after reporting about links between military officials and
militant groups.

In such an environment it is becoming increasingly difficult for journalists to
report and survive, and even the most bold have grown discouraged.

Even entire media groups have been shaken, like The Express Tribune, a popular
English publication and publishing partner of the International New York Times.
Its journalists or offices have been attacked eight times over the past eight
months, leaving several dead.

Accordingly, Kamal Siddiqui, the editor in chief of The Express Tribune, sent a
startling email to all its employees in February forbidding them to write
anything against militant groups or their allies, like the right wing religious
party Jamaat-e-Islami. A popular political party, Tehrik-e-Insaf, which is led
by the former cricket player Imran Khan, was also included on list of
not-to-offend subjects, because of the party's opposition to any military
operations against the Taliban.

Fear of the military has left its mark as well.

On March 21, The International New York Times front page printed in Pakistan was
dominated by a huge patch of blank space at the top of the page.

Everywhere else, that spot carried an edited version of a magazine article by
The New York Times reporter Carlotta Gall with the headline, "What Pakistan Knew
About Bin Laden." It was, in part, an excoriating criticism of Pakistan's
military establishment. The Express Tribune, the distributor of The
International New York Times in Pakistan, removed the article as a precautionary
measure.

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has promised several international groups, including
the Committee to Protect Journalists and the United Nations, that his government
will make every effort to protect journalists. But in the months since his
election last May, things have actually gotten worse.

Now, the defense ministry is pushing the government's media regulatory agency,
Pemra, to actually ban the country's largest television network, Geo. That move
came this week in response to the station's running scathing commentary against
the military in the wake of the attack on Hamid Mir, the station's most
prominent news host. Mr. Mir insists that the ISI was behind the shooting, and
his brother and some other journalists made accusations against the spy agency
on Geo.

The threat of legal action against Geo is another reminder that the military is
a leading voice for censorship, and that the government's regulations allow for
it, regardless of its claims to defend press freedom.

The more the censorship, the lesser the evidence, the greater the threat. And on
it goes.

Kiran Nazish is a Pakistani journalist, and she is the 2014 Daniel Pearl fellow
for The New York Times.


     ·    Bin Laden's Death Made U.S. Safe, Panetta Says, Recalling 'Nail-Biting
          Moments' of Raid
     ·    An Alternative for Afghan Peace Talks
     ·    How Cyberwarfare and Drones Have Revolutionized Warfare
     ·    Money Requested for New Prison at Guantanamo
     ·    Saving Karachi's Street Children, One Goal at a Time


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


