                             208 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 12, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones Plumb New Depths

BYLINE: By WILLIAM HERKEWITZ

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1201 words


ATLANTIC CITY -- Five miles offshore from the Golden Nugget casino, Michael F.
Crowley, a marine scientist at Rutgers University, heaves three lifeboat-yellow
drones off the back of his research vessel.

The gliders, as he calls them, are winged and propellerless, like miniature
Tomahawk missiles. Two are on loan from the Navy, and one, Rutgers's own, is
pockmarked from a past shark attack. As they slink into the Atlantic to begin a
monthlong mission, they join a fleet of 12 others across the Eastern Seaboard,
from Nova Scotia to Georgia.

These drones are the centerpiece of ''Gliderpalooza,'' a collaborative
ocean-survey experiment coordinated by 16 American and Canadian government
agencies and research teams. By pooling their resources, including satellites,
radar stations, research buoys and the gliders, the teams hope to capture the
most complete picture yet of the Atlantic's many mysterious underwater movements
-- from deepwater currents to migrating fish.

Ocean researchers are also planning to deploy gliders in the Western Pacific to
help forecast storms like Typhoon Haiyan. While a typhoon's path is largely
influenced by atmospheric changes, gliders can help predict a storm's intensity,
which is affected by ocean temperatures.

''If we can better predict the intensity, we can better predict the human
impact,'' said Scott M. Glenn, an oceanographer at Rutgers, ''and that's
critical, especially in Asia, where so many people die when these typhoons make
landfall.''

The mid-Atlantic experiment heralds a new direction in ocean research. Despite a
network of ocean-observing satellites and several projects that have seeded the
seas with data-logging buoys, the sheer size and complexity of the oceans still
mask much of what goes on underwater. At a time when forecasts of storms,
currents and the effects of climate change have never been needed more, the
researchers hope their flotilla of gliders will provide a new perspective.

''We have satellites that give us wonderful maps of the ocean at the surface,''
said Dr. Glenn, the leader of the Mid-Atlantic Regional Association for Coastal
Ocean Observing Systems, one of the 16 research groups involved in the project.
(It goes by the acronym Maracoos.) ''But the ocean is 3D, and we want to explore
what's going on beneath the waves.''

The battery-powered gliders continually dive in long swooping curves, taking
snapshots of the ocean's temperature, currents and other features at a range of
depths. They reach a maximum depth of roughly 650 feet, though they can be
configured to go deeper; that is relatively shallow for most of the ocean, but
more than deep enough for continental shelves, which are on average 460 feet
below sea level and can extend from a few thousand feet to hundreds of miles
offshore.

Each glider costs $125,000 to $150,000, depending on instrumentation, a bargain
compared with traditional methods. ''A research vessel can cost anywhere from
$35,000 to almost $100,000 per day,'' said Oscar M. Schofield, an ocean
scientist at Rutgers who is leading the experiment. ''If you were to try to do
this same experiment with ships, it would cost on the order of millions to tens
of millions of dollars.''

While each of the 15 gliders has its own mission, the data they collect is being
combined at Rutgers to investigate much larger questions. ''We know that our
ocean has changed quite a bit over the last 20 years,'' Dr. Schofield said,
''but we have so little data, it's hard to even start unraveling what the
drivers of that change are.''

Perhaps the most pressing question is the shape and movement of the seasonal
''cold pool,'' a poorly understood body of water that rests at the bottom of the
Northeast Continental Shelf.

Researchers and fishermen have known for almost a century that while the coastal
Atlantic warms in spring and summer, an enormous stretch of water stays
abnormally frigid, trapped at the bottom. This cold pool stretches almost the
length of the continental shelf, in a shifting band from Cape Cod to Cape
Hatteras.

As fall returns and the surface of the Atlantic starts to chill, the cold pool
will either slowly homogenize with the cooling surface waters or mix together
rapidly as storms move over the ocean. But much is still largely unknown.

''The cold pool affects lots of migratory fish,'' which follow the cooler
waters, Dr. Schofield said. ''But it's also important for informing storm
forecasting, because the ocean's temperature is essentially the fuel tank for
storms.''

In August 2011, when Hurricane Irene moved over the cold pool, ''the hurricane
mixed the warm water at the top of the ocean and the cold pool at the bottom,
which extinguished the intensity of that storm,'' Dr. Glenn said. He added that
one reason Hurricane Sandy struck so fiercely in 2012 may have been that the
storm traversed the sea after the cold pool had already equalized with the
ocean's surface temperature, ''and so that mixing, that fire extinguisher,
wasn't there.''

Ocean drones have been used around the world for a decade, often to survey
conditions too dangerous for humans.

''But this represents an important step in the maturation of the technology,''
said Timothy J. Cowles, a researcher with the Ocean Observatories Initiative,
who is not involved with Gliderpalooza. ''It's one thing to have a single glider
making its own measurements, but it's quite another thing to have an entire
fleet of gliders coordinated between various research groups.''

Though the gliders swim at a snail's pace, a little over one mile an hour, their
mobility grants the researchers an unprecedented capacity to adapt their
experiments, said Joshua T. Kohut, a Rutgers oceanographer with the Maracoos
research team.

''Every two to three hours they come to the surface, which gives us an
opportunity to provide new instructions,'' he said. ''If we see the cold pool
has shifted or something has moved, we can respond to that.''

There are several models of submersible research drones on the market, but the
Gliderpalooza fleet consists of propellerless Slocum Gliders, designed by the
Teledyne Webb Research Corporation. They move by adjusting their buoyancy --
taking on and expelling small amounts of water to rise and fall in the ocean.
Two wings transform this up-and-down movement into forward momentum, propelling
the robot in a continuous chain of swoops.

The Navy, the largest user of underwater drones, has 65 gliders helping forecast
ocean weather worldwide through the Naval Oceanographic Office, including the
two on loan for Gliderpalooza.

''Participating in this experiment gives us the opportunity to evaluate the
quality of our own ocean models and to share the lessons we've learned,'' said
Kenneth P. Grembowicz, the oceanographic director at the office.

Many of the research teams are already planning new, collective experiments for
their gliders. Of the two glider missions on track for next year, one will study
and forecast storms on the East Coast, while another will take Gliderpalooza's
multi-institution approach and apply it on a global scale. ''These are an
infinite number of ways we can explore the ocean that we couldn't before,'' Dr.
Glenn said. ''This is opening up whole new horizons.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/12/science/earth/ocean-drones
-plumb-new-depths.html

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Michael F. Crowley, a marine scientist at Rutgers, with a
glider on loan from the Navy being used in a large-scale ocean-survey experiment
in the Atlantic. (D1)
Researchers, who have relied on satellites, hope to get a different perspective
from the gliders.
 Nilsen Strandskov, a Rutgers glider technician, monitored the craft from
onboard a ship. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL KIRBY SMITH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (D4)
MAP: Underwater drones operated by marine  scientists from Rutgers University
have  traveled more than 93,000 miles. An  ocean survey focused on the Eastern
Seaboard will involve a fleet of drones  from 16 agencies and research groups.
(Source: Rutgers Institute of Marine and Global Studies)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


