                              20 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 3, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unarmed Drones Aid U.N. Peacekeeping Missions in Africa

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1443 words


GOMA, Democratic Republic of Congo -- The call came after 8 in the evening, from
peacekeepers posted in a remote corner of the country's restive east. The troops
sensed suspicious movement nearby. Venturing out into the forest at that hour
was far too risky. Would ground control send a drone to have a look?

From here, a remotely piloted aircraft set off, its owl eyes designed to peer
through the darkness and send back a live picture of what was happening on the
ground. In a windowless trailer at the airport here in Goma, pilots steered it
past a row of volcanoes toward the jungle.

In an age of ubiquitous surveillance, even rebels in the bush can expect to be
tracked, as United Nations troops cautiously deploy a tool familiar to most
modern militaries around the world: the drone.

The United Nations insists on calling the aircraft unarmed, unmanned aerial
vehicles, the term drone having acquired a bad reputation because of the armed
versions that American forces use against targets in Pakistan and elsewhere.
United Nations officials insist that they do not plan to use drones to kill
anyone, only to get a picture of trouble and grief on the ground, to protect
civilians and their own troops.

''We have a mandate here to neutralize armed groups -- you can't do it without
intelligence,'' said Martin Kobler, who leads the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

''They have also a psychological effect,'' he added. ''Everyone knows they are
flying.''

More and more, drones are flying over some of the toughest peacekeeping missions
in the world, improving the United Nations' intelligence-gathering capability,
but also raising new issues about what to do with so much important data.

Dutch troops are using drones to gather intelligence on the armed Islamist
insurgents operating in the deserts of Mali. Swedish troops are expected to take
some drones along when they are sent to Timbuktu, Mali, this year.

The United Nations has received a nod from the government of Mali to use drones
more broadly in its peacekeeping mission there. Likewise from the government of
the Central African Republic. The United Nations has been rebuffed in its
efforts to put them to use in South Sudan, where the government, facing a civil
war, has flatly denied permission.

Never before have foreign troops been able to collect so much fine-grained
information about people and places of interest: who sells guns to whom, where
illegal gold mines operate, the precise location of a rebel base. All of it,
United Nations officials say, is classified and available only at the discretion
of its lawyers.

It remains to be tested whether and how the information will be shared with, for
instance, a host government, or a sanctions committee impaneled by the United
Nations Security Council, or even a war crimes tribunal.

On the Security Council, which authorizes peacekeeping missions, Russia and
China favor proceeding slowly as an expert panel studies the drones' legal
implications, while the United States and Britain have cited their usefulness.
Human Rights Watch called for greater transparency and requested that any
information picked up by peacekeepers about atrocities against civilians -- the
burning of villages, for instance -- be shared with the United Nations' human
rights monitors.

Congo is the first testing ground for drones in peacekeeping. The experience
here offers a glimpse into both the allure and the limitations of the new
technology, in what is one of the most stubborn conflicts facing the United
Nations. Its peacekeepers are charged with routing the various rebel groups that
have spent 20 years killing and raping people, as well as plundering the
country's rich mineral resources, often with the help of the armies of
neighboring countries.

Here in Goma, United Nations officials say that remotely piloted aircraft can be
more useful than helicopters for surveillance because drones can fly low without
being easily seen or heard, and they can remain over an area gathering
information for hours at a time. A helicopter crew that tried to do the same
would risk being shot down.

''With U.A.V.s, you do it quietly, discreetly, you do it in the middle of the
night,'' said a United Nations military officer who is part of the drones team,
referring to unarmed, unmanned aerial vehicles, the other name for unarmed
drones.

The limits, though, are already obvious. The five drones the United Nations has
for this mission, leased from an Italian company called Selex, have a flying
range of about 125 miles, about 200 kilometers, from the ground control station
here in Goma, so they can reach only a small part of even the most active
conflict zone in a very large country. Discussions are underway to establish a
second control station north of here, closer to an active operation against a
rebel group near the Ugandan border, said Mr. Kobler, leader of the United
Nations Mission in Congo.

The drones also face a tough opponent in Mother Nature. When the World Food
Program wanted the drones to check whether a certain road was passable for aid
convoys, the jungle canopy there proved to be so thick that the drones' cameras
could not get a good enough picture of the road from above.

Even the peacekeepers who sensed the suspicious movement around their post in
the forest north of here did not ultimately get much help. A fierce thunderstorm
occurred shortly after takeoff, and the pilots steered the drone back to Goma
before it could be battered.

Selex, which is part of Finmeccanica, a giant Italian aerospace and industrial
conglomerate, supplies the United Nations with private contractors to fly the
drones, operate their cameras and help analyze the pictures they take. The Congo
peacekeeping mission expects to spend up to $15 million a year on the drones,
officials said, noting that it is a tiny portion of the mission's $1.46 billion
annual budget.

In his office here in a trailer near Lake Kivu, the force commander, Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, said the images from the drone cameras had already
helped him get a better idea of where guerrillas operate and what they are up
to.

They can help him discern whether a particular village is just a village, with
clothes laid to dry in the sun, or whether it is also a shelter for a militia,
where, say, a sentry post is erected each night in the banana grove, or where
trucks snake along the red earth roads ferrying coltan, a mineral used in the
production of cellphones and one of the many natural resources that fuel Congo's
wars.

One United Nations official recalled an episode this spring in which
peacekeepers came under fire from a rebel group that had taken position on a
forested hilltop. The peacekeepers had a good idea of where the rebels were
shooting from, but they had no idea whether there were civilians around. Sending
a reconnaissance helicopter meant risking having it shot down by rebels armed
with heavy weapons.

So a drone was sent from Goma. It quietly circled over the ridge line, flashing
video images to the screens in the control room. The drone confirmed the
coordinates of the gunmen. More important, it showed that there were no
civilians nearby. An attack helicopter was sent immediately. After a couple of
strikes, the rebel base was finished, the official recalled.

The drones flying from Goma are nearly 20 feet long, or six meters, somewhat
smaller than the familiar American Predator armed drone. The United Nations
drones have cameras that can capture still pictures and video day or night, and
infrared sensors that can pick up hot spots, which around here could be a burned
village or a thermal vent from a volcano.

The drone business has added to the weirdness of this town.

Veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have found work here as privately
contracted drone experts. A.T.M.s dispense crisp American currency. Local bars
hold special evenings to court foreigners. The nights are swathed in darkness
for anyone without a generator. There are only two and a half paved roads in the
entire city.

Goma is calmer now than it was a year ago, when a rebel army called M23 had the
run of the place. The countryside just outside remains a place of terror,
though, and reports of rapes and killings still pour in. Nearly a million
civilians are displaced across North Kivu Province, afraid to return home.

Drones or no drones, Congolese say they are still waiting for the United Nations
to deliver results. ''If the presence of these drones were associated with
action on the ground, we would say these drones are useful,'' said Justine
Masika, a women's rights advocate who works with rape survivors. ''What we need
now is peace.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/03/world/africa/unarmed-drones
-aid-un-peacekeepers-in-africa.html

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An Italian-made surveillance drone being used by United Nations
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of Congo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


