                             2028 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            January 7, 2014 Tuesday

Yahoo Unveils New Digital Magazines and Ad Products

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 919 words



HIGHLIGHT: Yahoo&#8217;s Marissa Mayer unveiled a bevy of new products and
advertising options in front of a packed audience at the International Consumer
Electronics Show.


The long lines of people swerved around the blackjack tables, skirting the slot
machines and doubling back around. No, people were not waiting to see the latest
drones or curvy televisions. They were waiting to hear Marissa Mayer, the chief
executive of Yahoo, speak about updates for a company that was once left for
dead.

The more than one-hour Yahoo keynote presentation at the International Consumer
Electronics Show in Las Vegas clearly delivered for the audience. Ms. Mayer
announced a mobile acquisition, introduced a number of new Yahoo products,
entertained the audience with a live enactment of a "Saturday Night Live" skit -
with real "SNL" actors - and shared a number of new ad products.

Ms. Mayer began her presentation talking about the continual rise of the
audience at Yahoo. "This fall we surpassed more than 400 million monthly mobile
users," Ms. Mayer said, noting that this number excluded Tumblr, the social
network Yahoo acquired last year for $1.1 billion.

She also said that the company had acquired Aviate, an "intelligent homescreen"
start-up that automatically organizes apps based on contextual clues around how
someone interacts with a mobile phone. She said Aviate would be used within
Yahoo apps to help suggest content for people to engage with.

The acquisition of Aviate seems to be part of a much larger theme by Ms. Mayer
and Yahoo that involves finding ways to simplify and distill the amount of
content people have to slog through daily.

Along this theme, Nick D'Alosio, the founder of Summly, which Yahoo acquired
last year for an estimated $30 million, showed off a new app from Yahoo called
Yahoo News Digest, which, he said, aims to simplify the news.

Yahoo News Digest provides people with two daily digests of news, which are a
"perfect blend of technology and journalism," Mr. D'Alosio said. Each news story
in the digest is created from multiple sources and news outlets, almost like an
up-to-date, digitally created Wikipedia entry.

"We want to give users a daily source of knowledge that we believe is missing
today," Mr. D'Alosio said during his peppy presentation.

Based on most of Tuesday's presentations, it is clear that Yahoo is going to
continue to focus on content creation and placing ads next to that unique
content.

One of the boldest, yet most expected, announcements was a new slick product
called Yahoo Digital Magazines, which are Tumblr-powered sections of Yahoo News.

One of the first Digital Magazines is a new technology section, called Yahoo
Tech, which is being led by David Pogue, the former technology columnist for The
New York Times.

David Cooperstein, an analyst with Forrester Research, said that Ms. Mayer's
focus on content was "going where no tech company has gone before" and that the
move would appeal to advertisers who are seeking quality and a more mainstream
audience.

Ms. Mayer "is taking the road not yet traveled," Mr. Cooperstein said in an
email, noting that this is the first time a tech company is using big-name
talents to create content. "The other folks - Google and Facebook - are more
reliant on audience participation to grow content," he said.

Katie Couric also appeared onstage with Ms. Mayer to talk about why she chose to
join Yahoo as the company's global anchor. "Very few of us head to the front
steps to get our newspaper, but instead we reach for our mobile phones to get
our headlines," Ms. Couric said, noting that one of those digital destinations
is Yahoo.

"I think accuracy has been the casualty of immediacy; linking has replaced
reporting," Ms. Couric said, pointing out that Yahoo and Ms. Mayer are
continuing the pursuit of "real journalism."

Of course, all of this content and journalism is the perfect place to put new
types of advertising, which is exactly what Ms. Mayer is planning.

The company is introducing several new ad products under a unified brand called
Yahoo Advertising. The company said it was also introducing a new buying
platform, called Yahoo Ad Manager, which will offer a number of tools for
advertisers to manage the kind of ads they buy and the audience they can reach.

Yahoo is also expanding some of the advertising tools on Tumblr.

David Karp, the founder of Tumblr, said that the average Tumblr post was
reblogged 15 times but that the average sponsored Tumblr post, which is an
advertisement, was reblogged 10,000 times. The company is now going to integrate
Yahoo Advertising features into those Tumblr sponsored posts that will allow
advertisers to target users based on gender, geography and other data points.
"This will make better ads," Mr. Karp said.

Some aspects of the keynote presentation seemed to upset the audience. Mr. Pogue
took swipes at some tech news outlets, saying that bloggers tend to
overcomplicate the way they write.

Yahoo also took a moment to make fun of itself.

The "Saturday Night Live" performers took to the stage to offer a live version
of "Weekend Update," the parody news show. In the skit, an actor played as the
Rev. Al Sharpton referred to Yahoo as Yoo-hoo, the chocolate drink.

"Who woulda thought that a chocolate milk company would turn into one of the
biggest technology companies in the world?" the fake Al Sharpton said.

It remains to be seen if Yahoo can continue on that trajectory.


     ·    Trying to Reinvent Itself, Yahoo Searches for a New Look
     ·    Yahoo Completes Tumblr Acquisition
     ·    Daily Report: Internet Giants Push to Improve Secrecy
     ·    After N.S.A. Disclosures, Yahoo Moves to Encrypt Internal Traffic
     ·    Disruptions: Under a New Chief, Yahoo Still Seeks Its Voice


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


