                             2015 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Carpetbagger)

                          December 11, 2013 Wednesday

Yuval Adler on 'Bethlehem' and Heidegger

BYLINE: LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 1132 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Israeli director Yuval Adler came to film in a roundabout way
that includes a doctorate in philosophy.


[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Before beginning a career in film, Yuval Adler, the director of "Bethlehem,"
Israel's submission for the foreign-language Oscar, worked in a lot of different
fields. After earning a degree in mathematics in Tel Aviv, he was a numbers
cruncher in New York "for some guy who was doing hedge fund stuff," then became
an artist, living in a studio in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. He also earned a Ph.D
in philosophy from Columbia University, writing his dissertation on
finger-pointing as an example of a linguistic phenomenon called lexicality.

"Bethlehem" is the first feature for Mr. Adler, 44, who also did a stint in
Israeli intelligence, assigned to what he described as technical tasks,
operating drones and maintaining their engines. In the film, he examines the
complicated relationship between Razi, an Israeli operative played by the
singer-songwriter Tsahi Halevi, and one of his Palestinian informants, a
teenager played by Sahdi Marei, who also falls under the suspicion and scrutiny
of  a leader (Haitham Omari) of the Al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.

Like Mr. Adler, all three of his main actors are newcomers to film, and also to
acting: Mr. Omari was working as a television cameraman for the Al Arabiya
network when he was invited to audition. That may have made for a certain
learn-as-you-go element to the filming, but the finished product won a top prize
at the Venice Film Festival before pretty much sweeping the Ophir Awards,
Israel's version of the Oscars.

In New York this fall, at a screening for friends and relatives, Mr. Adler said
that he had "always liked to read about the behind-the-scenes of things" and was
merely indulging that impulse when he began working on "Bethlehem." But the
project soon took him in directions he had not anticipated, as he made clear in
this interview, which has been edited and condensed:

Q.

You were in military intelligence yourself. Did this story come from that
experience?

A.

It happened later, actually. I was in New York, and the seed was seeing a video
of an execution of a collaborator, an informant. It was shocking because you saw
some guys dragging a person and just shooting him, with a hundred people just
standing by. This was around 2004 or 2005, and immediately you say how does this
informant thing work? Who are these people? What is the situation in the
Palestinian territories now, that you can execute somebody in the middle of the
street? How does the secret service use this chaotic situation to its advantage?

Q.

You ended up writing the script with the journalist Ali Waked. What made you
seek out an Arab as your co-author?

A.

I knew I wanted to make a movie that would be going between both sides. I wanted
that other perspective, of course. We describe two worlds here, one of which I
know very little about. So we had to write it in Hebrew and Arabic. When I met
Ali, he was a reporter on Palestinian affairs on a very large Internet site, so
he knew all these people. He had a lot of friends who were militants, sources.

Q.

When you went to him, was he  enthusiastic or reluctant?

A.

Actually he had to be convinced. He says that some people came to him in the
past, people who do Israeli films about this, they typically want to show that
the occupation is a terrible thing. But that's not what we set out to do. What
we wanted to do is really get to the inner workings, just show what goes on
between a secret service guy and an informant, a source and a handler, and then
the world around it.

Q.

Presumably you are aware there is another film working similar territory. Have
you seen "Omar"?

A.

Yes. It's a very different film, it's a film that's like - it's hard for me. I
think it's a film that is trying to say something about stuff, and we are a
different film, we try to avoid saying and need to show. I'll keep it to that
generality. So in that sense, even though I feel there is something similar
about the subject, we're different.

Q.

Do you think it's purely accidental that two films like this appear at same
time?

A.

It's not just us and "Omar," suddenly there are two Truman Capote films, or two
Robin Hood films. People decide in their minds that is the issue, and suddenly
you have two films about something. Maybe it's in the air, though I'll tell you
generally that the whole intelligence thing became a big thing in America,too.
In 2007, there wasn't an "Argo" or "Zero Dark Thirty" or "Homeland," but
suddenly you have a movement of films that deal with intelligence work.

Q.

Why is this film called "Bethlehem," rather than something else with fewer
religious or historic associations?

A.

First of all, we chose the city because this is a film that moves between
Palestinian and Israeli society, and Bethlehem and Jerusalem are perfect for
that, they are so close. There's a valley between them, and we used that valley
in the last scenes, as a no man's land in between. If I had put it in Nablus,
you would not get this thing.

Q.

Because you have a Ph.D in philosophy, I was wondering whether there are skill
sets from that field that carry over to directing a film. Is there any
relationship at all?

A.

There is, but not directly. In philosophy you have to have a certain openness to
phenomenon, and I think that sensibility is very good in film. You don't come
already with a paradigm. There is no technique or worldview that I bring
intellectually to the film. It's just that ability to look, or as Heidegger
would put it, to let the thing show itself. Because when you talk, it doesn't
show itself. You look and you open up, and suddenly the thing shows itself.
That's what you need to learn to do.

Q.

The last two movies that Israel has submitted to the Oscars, "Footnote" and
"Fill the Void," were very much inward-looking films focusing on some narrow
aspect of Israeli life. Now, with your film, your academy seems to be looking
outwardly again, at the conflict with the Palestinians.

A.

I think in general people in Israel like that we don't always send films like
"Waltz With Bashir" or even "Ajami." There is this sense, and it actually worked
against us, that 'Oh, you're about this, so no, we're sick of it.' But everybody
who saw the film said, "No, no, this is a completely different take on it."
There were like 30 films and and we won and now we're the nominee.

Q.

What do you want from the Oscar process?

A.

I don't know, what everybody wants. I'm a very superstitious guy, and in the
Oscar of course you hope for the best. But it's really a process where they tell
me what to do. I'll do what I need to do. You want to get to the five.


     ·    A Geopolitical Twist in the Foreign Film Race
     ·    A Foreign-Language Race Up for Grabs
     ·    Getting Israel's Security Chiefs on Camera
     ·    A Muted Reaction
     ·    From All Over the Globe, Films That Look Inward


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


