                             2004 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (At War)

                           November 26, 2013 Tuesday

The Man Behind the MRAP Moves On

BYLINE: THOM SHANKER

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 952 words



HIGHLIGHT: Ashton B. Carter, the departing deputy secretary of defense, played a
central role in the initiative to rush MRAPs to Afghanistan for the troop surge.



WASHINGTON - Amid the awards and decorations on display in the Pentagon office
of Ashton B. Carter, the departing deputy secretary of defense, is a metal
bearing, larger than a golf ball, which wears the scars of battle.

If the signature weapon of tenacious insurgents over the past decade-plus of
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq was the improvised roadway explosive, then the
signature weapon of the American response was the Mine-Resistant
Ambush-Protected vehicle, or MRAP.

The ball bearing so prized by Mr. Carter came from one of the vehicles, easily
recognizable by their angular shape, to deflect blast, and outsize outside
armor.

First as the Pentagon's under secretary for acquisition, technology and
logistics, and then as the department's deputy, Mr. Carter played a central role
in the initiative to rush MRAPs to Afghanistan for the troop surge,
circumventing the calcified procurement system that traditionally takes years to
move a weapon from idea to the front lines.

"I very much hope we can retain that agility," Mr. Carter said in an exit
interview just days before leaving the Pentagon. "Rapid fielding - not on a Cold
War schedule of years and decades, because that's how slowly the Soviet Union
changed, but on weeks and months, because that's how fast the battlefield has
changed in Iraq and Afghanistan."

MRAP purchases began in earnest under former Defense Secretary Donald H.
Rumsfeld for the war in Iraq, a nation with a relatively modern system of road
infrastructure and overall flat deserts.

"When we went to Afghanistan, we realized that the insurgents there were going
to use IEDs just like the Iraqi insurgency had done, but in an even more
insidious way, because the terrain is much more rugged, there are fewer roads -
and so fewer alternatives to driving on roads, where they know you're going to
come," Mr. Carter said.

Mr. Carter's boss at the time, former Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, liked
to complain that the troops in Iraq and Afghanistan were operating on a war
footing - but that the Pentagon was not.

So as roadside bombs in Afghanistan began claiming a rising toll measured by
death, maiming and traumatic brain injuries, Mr. Gates ordered up a more
maneuverable MRAP better suited for Afghanistan's terrain - but providing equal
protection to the larger armored transports.

And he ordered the effort be put on a fast track, breaking traditional
procurement procedures.

The new, all-terrain MRAPs had independent suspension and an even tougher
passenger capsule. Seats were suspended from the ceiling, rather than attached
to the floor, because when a bomb goes off beneath a vehicle, the floor
accelerates faster than the ceiling. Additional padding was added to the floor,
as well.

As each new MRAP came off the line, Mr. Carter and his team talked to the troops
to see what they thought.

Troops complained that the slits cuts into armored walls for the driver to see
needed to offer a wider view for driving in the mountains or through villages.
That was done. Troops said they needed a small, rear hatch in order to grab
water and food from the inside the tiny MRAP capsule without getting out every
time they got hungry or thirsty on daylong patrols. That was done.

Over just 16 months, the fast-track MRAP program produced 8,000 all-terrain
armored vehicles, each production line including improvements suggested by the
fighting force.

As he prepares to leave the Pentagon, Mr. Carter acknowledged that some
procurement programs - sophisticated warplanes and warships - by necessity take
years to unfold.

"But in many other areas, we need to be quick, quick, quick," he said.

He urged the Pentagon procurement system to heed the lesson of the MRAP program
- and he urged Congress to grant the Defense Department flexibility to spend its
increasingly smaller annual budgets in the smartest way.

In particular, he complained that some weapons programs deemed no longer
necessary by the Pentagon's civilian and military leadership had, nonetheless,
been put back in the budget by members of Congress.

He cited Pentagon proposals to end purchases of some new transport aircraft and
to retire four Aegis missile cruisers in the next fiscal year. Both reductions
have been stalled in Congress.

Over all, the Defense Department spent about $50 billion to research, develop,
purchase and maintain a fleet of over 27,000 MRAPs for Iraq and Afghanistan.
About 4,000 were lost to roadside bombs or vehicle accidents. About 6,500 remain
in Afghanistan today.

As the armed services assess their future needs in an unpredictable world, the
Pentagon has decided to keep about 10,000 of the vehicles, mostly the smaller,
more agile armored models, but also some of the larger, hardened vehicles for
combat engineers.

The rest will be sold to allied and partner nations - or turned to scrap to
avoid their falling into the hands of adversaries.

"When you're in a war, you can't only ask yourself, 'Is this going to be useful
to me 10 and 20 years from now?' " Mr. Carter said. "If it's going to win the
war now, it's still worth having."

Mr. Carter, who holds a bachelor's in physics and medieval history from Yale
University and a doctorate in theoretical physics from Oxford University, tells
of his most recent visit to Afghanistan, where he watched as MRAPs destined for
disposal were chopped up.

"It was a very nostalgic moment for me," Mr. Carter said. He snapped a photo to
share with Mr. Gates. "I sent Bob a picture and said, 'Can't believe it. They're
taking our babies apart.' "


     ·    How Cyberwarfare and Drones Have Revolutionized Warfare
     ·    Guide to a Few Nonprofit Groups Providing Care to Veterans
     ·    Women in Combat? Some Marines React
     ·    A Veteran's Plea to President Obama
     ·    Waging War on a Shoestring


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


