                             2097 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                              June 13, 2014 Friday

Avoiding Another Iraq Quagmire

BYLINE: CAROL GIACOMO

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 416 words



HIGHLIGHT: President Obama on Friday ruled out sending American ground troops
back into the country.


Given that he built a political career on opposition to the Iraq war, it was a
relief but no surprise when President Obama on Friday ruled out sending American
ground troops back into the country.

During televised remarks at the White House, he acknowledged that the recent
assault on several Iraqi cities and towns by Islamist insurgents "poses a danger
to Iraq and its people and, given the nature of these terrorists, it could pose
a danger eventually to American interests as well."

But he correctly noted that what Iraq faces is "not solely or even primarily a
military challenge" and put the burden for the first response where it most
belongs - on the Iraqis themselves.

"The United States is not simply going to involve itself in a military action in
the absence of a political plan by the Iraqis that gives us some assurance that
they're going to work together," he said. "We're not going to allow ourselves to
be dragged back into a situation in which while we're there we're keeping a lid
on things" while local political leaders fail to address the underlying deep
divisions within Iraqi society.

As we argued in an editorial today, Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki
has been "central to the political disorder that has poisoned Iraq, as he
wielded authoritarian power in favor of the Shiite majority at the expense of
the minority Sunnis, stoked sectarian conflict and enabled a climate in which
militants could gain traction."

Mr. Obama asserted that Iraq needs support to "break the momentum of extremist
groups" and said he is considering a range of options. But he made clear that
there would be no quick action as he decides "in the days ahead" whether to use
military force.

Such a delay would allow the administration time to gather more intelligence
about what's really going on in Iraq and to consult with Congress. It should
also put pressure on panic-stricken Iraqi leaders to give serious consideration
to the possibility that the country will splinter into smaller states, or or
fall into the hands of insurgents - if they fail to take tough political choices
that are long overdue.

Mr. Maliki has asked for air strikes and drone strikes and these are among the
responses Mr. Obama is believed to be mulling. CNN reported that the Pentagon
was moving an aircraft carrier to the region.

But no airstrikes or new weapons will save Iraq if political leaders can't rise
above their sectarian self-interest to unify a diverse people in common cause
against an existential threat.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


