                             2077 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday

Lytro Goes After Prosumer Photographers With New Camera

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 675 words



HIGHLIGHT: The new Lytro Illum camera offers photographers a range of new
features, while still allowing them to refocus a photo after the fact


When the Lytro camera debuted in 2012, it was the talk of techies and
photographers. What else would you expect from a camera that was developed in
Silicon Valley and used both photography expertise and a lot of fancy
programming code?

The first Lytro was capable of performing photography magic. You could take a
picture as you would with any normal camera, but the digital file it created
could be refocused after the fact.

While seeing this magic trick in real life was enough to make your mind melt a
little, it wasn't enough to make people buy one of the company's $400 cameras.
Carrying an additional camera was more work than it was worth for many
consumers.

To solve this problem, Lytro is making its camera even bigger and more
expensive. Stay with me here - I know this doesn't make much sense yet.

The company on Tuesday announced a new Lytro camera, the Lytro Illum. Unlike
it's predecessor, which looked somewhat like a cube-shaped toy, this new Lytro
looks like a real camera.

The Lytro Illum comes packed with features. It has an 8x zoom lens, which is the
equivalent of a 30-250mm camera lens. It can shoot at f2.0, which lets in a
tremendous amount of light. And it has a 1/4000 of a second shutter speed, which
means it can be used for sports and high-speed photography.

But why would Lytro make a bigger camera with more controls instead of a
smaller, simpler model?

Over the last two years, Lytro said it had been working with customers and
photographers to understand the kind of camera consumers want. This research led
the company to realize its core customers were not moms and pops, who either own
a point-and-shoot camera or smartphone.

Instead, the company needed to make products for "prosumer "photographers,
including people who take pictures for work, or skilled photography hobbyists.

"We realized that our core audience was photographers, not just everyday
people," Jason Rosenthal, Lytro's chief executive, said in an interview in San
Francisco. "Photographers want control of their photos and the new Lytro - with
the new hardware and new software - gives them control over every aspect of the
image."

Going after professional and serious photographers is a smart move by Lytro.
While the company's first camera was fun, it was still more effort than a simple
smartphone camera.

Lytro cameras capture images as rays of light instead of pixels, which makes it
difficult to compare the image quality with other standard digital cameras (it
would be like comparing apples and steaks), but Mr. Rosenthal said the new
camera had four times more resolution than the first Lytro.

The new Lytro Illum has a 40 megaray customized sensor, or 40 million rays,
which is used to capture the color, intensity and direction of the light rays
flowing into the camera.

While the new camera can take amazing images, and the ability to refocus after
the fact still seems like a magic trick, some of the photos shot with the camera
can sometimes look a little digital. It's almost like you can tell that they
were shot with a digital camera and not with film. This can easily be fixed in
post-production by applying a filter or toning down the sharp highlights of an
image.

The quality of the Lytro images is still far better than any point-and-shoot or
smartphone camera. And it's way better than Google's attempt to use fancy
software techniques to fake these types of blurry photos.

All of the technology in the Lytro does comes at a price. The new Illum is
$1,600. But when compared with other high-end digital cameras, it's actually not
that expensive. The body alone for the Canon 5D Mark III is $3,400. Throw in a
comparative lens and you're over $5,000 for a similar camera.

The Lytro Illum can be ordered on the company's website for an introductory
price of $1,500. It will also be available in some stores this year.


     ·    Google Uses Algorithms to Create SLR-Like Photos
     ·    Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land
     ·    Picking a Bag for a Camera
     ·    A Lesson Learned About the Intensity of Camera Enthusiasts
     ·    Wirelessly Expand Your Smartphone or Tablet Memory


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


