                             2095 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday

Morning Agenda: An Impasse in Bank of America Settlement

BYLINE: SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 1872 words



HIGHLIGHT: Bank of America&#8217;s mortgage settlement is said to be deadlocked.
| The manager of Harvard&#8217;s endowment plans to step down. | A.I.G. has
named its next chief executive. | The banking industry is trying to adapt to
stricter regulations and low market volatility.


 BANK OF AMERICA SETTLEMENT DEADLOCKED  |  Bank of America and the Justice
Department have reached an impasse in negotiations over a multibillion-dollar
settlement, raising the stakes in an investigation into the bank's role at the
center of the mortgage crisis, DealBook's Jessica Silver-Greenberg, Ben Protess
and Michael Corkery write. The talks stalled on Monday after the bank's latest
offer, at more than $12 billion, was said to be far short of prosecutors'
demands. The Justice Department has sought a settlement worth roughly $17
billion, which would be the largest payout by any bank to date.

On Tuesday, as Bank of America sought to continue negotiations, the Justice
Department is said to have moved to put the finishing touches on a civil
complaint against the bank. The lawsuit, which is not imminent, would accuse the
bank of selling mortgage investments that led to billions of dollars in losses.
The bank could still raise its offer to avert such a suit.

The bank's resistance to a deal stems partly from a debate over mortgage
securities sold by Merrill Lynch, the investment house Bank of America purchased
during the depths of the financial crisis. Bank of America has argued that it
would have avoided liability altogether if the government had not pressured it
to go through with the acquisition. For the Justice Department, the sticking
point is the size of the settlement and the method of distributing the money.

HARVARD ENDOWMENT CHIEF TO STEP DOWN  |  Jane L. Mendillo, the manager of
Harvard's $32.7 billion endowment, plans to step down by the end of the year,
William Alden writes in DealBook. Ms. Mendillo, who in 2008 became the president
and chief executive of the Harvard Management Company, which oversees the
endowment, was responsible for repairing the university's portfolio after the
financial crisis. But the performance of the endowment has fallen short of the
returns of other Ivy League endowments.

Over the five-year period that ended June 30 of last year, the university's
endowment, the biggest in the nation, had an annualized return of 1.7 percent,
the worst among the Ivy League. Harvard did not give a reason for Ms. Mendillo's
departure. In an interview, Ms. Mendillo said she felt that the time was right
to move on.

A.I.G. NAMES NEXT C.E.O.  |  The American International Group on Tuesday named
Peter D. Hancock as successor to Robert H. Benmosche, the insurer's chief
executive and outspoken leader who oversaw its recovery from the financial
crisis, DealBook's Michael J. de la Merced writes. Mr. Hancock, the head of
A.I.G.'s property casualty business, will take over as chief executive on Sept.
1 and become a director. Mr. Benmosche will also resign from the company's board
and become an adviser to Mr. Hancock.

Mr. Hancock's appointment signals the end of Mr. Benmosche's tenure atop A.I.G.,
a five-year rebuilding period during which the insurer came back from its
near-death experience in the fall of 2008. Mr. Benmosche came out of retirement
in 2009 to turn around A.I.G. and repay the federal government's $182 billion
bailout. A.I.G. fully repaid its bailout by the end of 2012, with $23 billion in
profit.

ON THE AGENDA  |  The Treasury's monthly budget report for May is out at 2 p.m.
Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew speaks at a breakfast meeting of the Economic
Club of New York at 8 a.m.

TV watch: Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, is on CNBC
at 8:10 a.m. Gary D. Cohn, the president and chief operating officer of Goldman
Sachs, is on Bloomberg TV at 11:10 a.m.

On the Hill: The House Subcommittee on Communications and Technology holds a
hearing at 10:30 a.m. titled "Media Ownership in the 21st Century." The House
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade holds a hearing at 11:30 a.m. titled
"The Production and Circulation of Coins and Currency."

REMAKING INVESTMENT BANKS  |  Stricter regulations and low volatility in the
markets are squeezing investment banks, Steven M. Davidoff writes in the Deal
Professor column. The decline in volatility has reduced already low investment
bank trading revenue, and new rules have restricted the way investment banks can
make money and imposed higher capital requirements. "The conventional wisdom has
been that these banks are making choices about how to restructure their
business, but in truth their options are limited," Mr. Davidoff writes.

Some banks, including Morgan Stanley, have been shifting their focus away from
investment banking. Others, like Goldman Sachs, are trying to stay the course as
traditional investment banks. Citigroup and Bank of America are focusing on
getting smaller, while Barclays and JPMorgan Chase are being pressed to leave
investment banking altogether. It may not be clear where it all ends, Mr.
Davidoff writes, but one thing is certain: "There are revolutionary changes
afoot in the world of investment banking as they all search to do what they do
best [#x2012] make money."

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Google to Buy Skybox Imaging for $500 Million  |  Though Google will initially
use Skybox's satellite offerings to improve its mapping service, the technology
giant is most likely to use its latest acquisition to help expand its Internet
access services [#x2012] joining balloons and drones.
DealBook »

Alibaba to Buy Remaining UCWeb Shares  |  The e-commerce giant Alibaba Group is
stepping up its spending before its listing in the United States by buying the
remainder of shares in the mobile browser company UCWeb, Reuters reports.
Alibaba said in a blog post that the deal would be the biggest merger in Chinese
Internet history.
REUTERS

Allergan Rejects Valeant's $53 Billion Offer  |  Allergan, the maker of Botox,
formally rejected a $53 billion offer from Valeant Pharmaceuticals on Tuesday,
setting in motion the next phase of what is becoming one of the year's most
protracted takeover battles.
DealBook »

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Lenders Fear Spread of Chinese Commodities Fraud Case  |  The authorities are
investigating loans based on collateral of metals at a Chinese port, with
implications for Western banks and the Chinese credit market.
DealBook »

Hong Kong Regulators Tense About China Loans  |  A surge in lending to Chinese
companies is leading Hong Kong regulators to impose strict financial rules four
years before they are required under new global standards.
DealBook » | Three Reports Point to Economic Growth

Morgan Stanley Sees Itself as Two Firms in One  |  As revenue from traditional
lines of business like trading has slowed, banks have had to look elsewhere for
more stable, less risky lines of business. For Morgan Stanley, the answer has
come from wealth management.
DealBook »

Wells Fargo Considering Specific M.&A. Deals  |  John R. Shrewsberry, the chief
financial officer of Wells Fargo, said on Tuesday that the bank was considering
certain types of mergers and acquisitions, including asset-oriented deals, even
though it is already one of the largest banks in the United States, The Wall
Street Journal writes.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

PRIVATE EQUITY »

S.E.C. Official Points to Disclosure Failings by Private Equity Firms   |  Igor
Rozenblit, the co-chief of the Securities and Exchange Commission's private
funds unit, said at a conference on Tuesday that the private equity industry had
more work to do concerning disclosure to investors, building on comments made a
month earlier by one of the agency's directors, The Wall Street Journal reports.

WALL STREET JOURNAL

HEDGE FUNDS »

Detroit Denies Last-Minute Reprieve for Goats  |  A hedge fund manager will sell
baby goats to butchers sooner than expected now that Detroit officials have
failed to grant any reprieve to let them to graze in the city.
DealBook »

European Hedge Fund Manager to Join Pimco  |  Geraldine Sundstrom, one of the
most prominent women in the European hedge fund industry, will become a
portfolio manager for the giant asset manager Pimco in London, The Financial
Times writes. Ms. Sundstrom left Brevan Howard Asset Management in February
after poor fund performance.
FINANCIAL TIMES

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Euronext's I.P.O. Will Be a Tough Sell  |  Anchor investors have a vested
interest in backing Euronext's planned I.P.O., but some of the group's target
growth goals look to be a stretch, writes Swaha Pattanaik in Reuters
Breakingviews.
DealBook »

Alibaba Introduces U.S. Consumer Site  |  The Alibaba Group, which is expected
to go public later this year, is introducing on Wednesday 11 Main, its first
direct-to-consumer online store for the United States, The Financial Times
reports. The online shop will operate like Alibaba's Chinese site TMall.
FINANCIAL TIMES

HealthEquity Files for I.P.O.  |  HealthEquity, a custodian of health savings
accounts, said in a filing that it planned to raise up to $100 million in an
initial public offering, but that is just a placeholder until closer to the
offering date, The Wall Street Journal writes.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Silicon Valley Tries to Remake the Idea Machine  |  Hoping to invent the future,
the technology industry is looking to recreate its past, Claire Cain Miller
writes in The New York Times Magazine.
NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE

European Tech Start-Ups Pay Off for Index Ventures  |  Buoyed by big payoffs
from backing tech firms, the European venture capital firm Index Ventures has
raised a new $542 million fund to focus on mobile, financial services and online
marketplaces.
DealBook »

Traffic Snarls Expected in Europe as Taxi Drivers Protest Against Uber  |  The
start-up that digitally links passengers and freelance drivers has expanded
beyond the United States to cities including London, Paris and Berlin [#x2012]
all of which will be the sites of Wednesday's protests, the Bits blog reports.
NEW YORK TIMES BITS

Obama Criticizes Silicon Valley's Gender Gap  |  President Barack Obama on
Tuesday jumped into the debate over gender diversity in the technology industry,
saying that the government needed to help promote the fields of science,
technology, engineering and math to women, Fortune writes.
FORTUNE

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

E.U. to Investigate Countries' Business Tax Breaks  |  Brussels officials are
taking a tougher stance against deals by European Union members to let companies
like Apple and Starbucks lower their taxes, The New York Times reports.
NEW YORK TIMES

Commodities Regulator Names New Enforcement Chief  |  The Commodity Futures
Trading Commission has hired the former prosecutor and defense lawyer Aitan D.
Goelman as head its of enforcement division.
DealBook »

European Antitrust Authorities Contend That ICAP Colluded to Rig Rates  |  The
top antitrust enforcer for the European Commission says that the British
financial firm ICAP colluded to try to fix a benchmark interest rate tied to the
yen.
DealBook »

A Legislative Assault on the Financial Stability Oversight Council  |  Two bills
proposed in the House clearly show a political motivation to obstruct the work
of the panel responsible for identifying potential threats to the financial
system, Stephen J. Lubben writes in the In Debt column.
DealBook »

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


