                             2088 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                              May 20, 2014 Tuesday

Charges of Chinese Cyberspying, Wanted Posters Included

BYLINE: AUSTIN RAMZY

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 1214 words



HIGHLIGHT: The five members of China&#8217;s military accused of hacking against
American companies are at the top of the F.B.I. &#8220;Cyber&#8217;s Most
Wanted&#8221; list, but little has been revealed about them beyond their names
and aliases.


A United States indictment accusing members of China's military of computer
hacking against American companies has put a face on a practice the Obama
administration has long complained of, the use of state cyberwarfare
capabilities to steal corporate secrets. While little is publicly known about
the five indicted members of the People's Liberation Army, the F.B.I. has
released photos and aliases of the men accused of being members of the Chinese
military's computer espionage Unit 61398, also known as the "Comment Crew."

The members of the Shanghai-based unit went by online handles such as
"UglyGorilla," "WinXYHappy" and "KandyGoo." With the announcement on Monday of
the 31-count indictment filed at a federal court in Pittsburgh, the five were
placed at the top of the F.B.I. "Cyber's Most Wanted" list.

They were shown in "Wanted by the F.B.I." posters, a nearly century-old practice
of telling the public whom law enforcement officers are trying hardest to
capture. But unlike other wanted posters, those produced for the five hacking
suspects reveal little beyond their names and aliases. It was not clear how the
photos of the men, two of whom are shown in military uniform, were obtained.


As Michael S. Schmidt and David E. Sanger write, the charges were "almost
certainly symbolic since there is virtually no chance that the Chinese would
turn over the five People's Liberation Army members named in the indictment."

The "Comment Crew" was outlined publicly last year in a report by the United
States-based security firm Mandiant, which said a building off Datong Road in
Shanghai was most likely a P.L.A. cyberspying headquarters because of the large
number of attacks that emerged from there.

The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs denounced the indictment. A ministry
spokesman, Qin Gang, said the case was "based on fabricated facts, grossly
violates the basic norms governing international relations and jeopardizes
China-U.S. cooperation and mutual trust," according to a statement posted on the
ministry's website.

The ministry said it summoned the United States ambassador to China, Max Baucus,
Monday evening to register its complaints regarding the legal case. It also said
that China would suspend its participation in a United States-China working
group on cybersecurity.

China's Ministry of National Defense also condemned the indictment, saying "the
Chinese government and military have never engaged or participated in any theft
of commercial secrets over the Internet," according to a statement posted on its
website on Tuesday. It accused the United States of "hypocrisy and double
standards" and said that WikiLeaks and the revelations of the former National
Security Agency contractor Edward J. Snowden had shown that the United States
has the technology and capabilities "to carry out large-scale, organized
cybertheft, bugging and monitoring against foreign politicians, businesses and
individuals."

In a news analysis, David E. Sanger writes that the Obama administration is
drawing a fine line between hacking done for national security purposes and that
done for commercial gain, a division that is not recognized by China. And the
United States does not always respect that line, either, Mr. Sanger writes:

Even before Mr. Snowden walked out of the Hawaii facilities of the N.S.A. with a
trove of documents, it was clear that the United States was not above economic
espionage, as long as it was not for the direct benefit of specific companies.

For example, the United States spies regularly for economic advantage when the
goal is to support trade talks; when the Clinton administration was locked in a
high-stakes negotiation in the 1990s to reach an accord with Japan, it bugged
the Japanese negotiator's limousine. At the time, the chief beneficiaries would
have been the Big Three auto companies and a smattering of parts suppliers. It
is also widely believed to be using intelligence in support of trade
negotiations underway with European and Asian trading partners. But in the view
of a succession of Democratic and Republican administrations, that is fair game.

Companies can also be targets. Documents released by Mr. Snowden showed that the
American government pried deep into the servers of Huawei, one of China's most
successful Internet and communications companies. The documents made clear that
the N.S.A. was seeking to learn whether the company was a front for the People's
Liberation Army and whether it was interested in spying on American firms. But
there was a second purpose: to get inside Huawei's systems and use them to spy
on countries that buy the company's equipment.

The indictment lists Westinghouse Electric, SolarWorld, United States Steel
Corporation, Alcoa and Allegheny Technologies as the companies targeted by the
hackers along with a labor union, the United Steelworkers, which had encouraged
the United States to pursue trade cases against China.

The indictment does not specify the Chinese state-owned enterprises that would
have benefited, listing them simply as SOE-1, SOE-2 and SOE-3. However,
descriptions of the cases give strong signals as to their identities.

The indictment says that Westinghouse signed a contract to construct four
reactors in China for SOE-1 on or around 2007, which coincides with the American
nuclear power plant builder's contract to build reactors for the China National
Nuclear Corporation, or C.N.N.C.  The State Nuclear Power Technology
Corporation, which is partly owned by C.N.N.C., contracted with Westinghouse on
the project, indicating that it or C.N.N.C. is most likely SOE-1.

Allegheny Technologies Inc., or A.T.I., had a joint venture with SOE-2,
according to the indictment, and A.T.I. and the Chinese company were also
involved in litigation before the World Trade Organization, both of which
describe A.T.I.'s relationship with the Chinese steel maker Baosteel.

SOE-3 is probably the Aluminum Corporation of China, or Chinalco. The indictment
says that in 2001 Alcoa entered into a partnership with a Chinese aluminum
company to purchase shares, which would have been Chalco.

The indictment raises further questions about the United States' strategy in
pursuing such a public case, Nicole Perlroth writes, and whether the legal
challenge will be expanded:

Beyond Unit 61398, the National Security Agency and its intelligence partners
are currently tracking more than 20 Chinese hacking groups - over half of them
Chinese military and naval units - as they break into an array of American
government agencies and companies, ranging from drone and nuclear weapon parts
makers to technology, retail and energy firms and nonprofit research
organizations, according to a half-dozen United States officials who declined to
be named because of the classified and ongoing nature of the investigations.

While most of those hacking groups are military units, they include private
companies and academic institutions, Ms. Perlroth writes, and the ways they are
organized and contracted are far from clear.


     ·    A Magazine Cover for a Famously Humble Ambassador
     ·    Pushing Back Against Government Surveillance
     ·    After Obama Visit, Planned Naval Drills With Russia Reported
     ·    F.B.I. Video Warns of Efforts to Recruit American Students as Spies
     ·    Chinese Government Expands Freedom of Information


LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


