                             2026 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                           December 26, 2013 Thursday

'I Have Been Totally Abandoned and Forgotten,' Captive Says

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 921 words



HIGHLIGHT: Warren Weinstein was abducted from the eastern Pakistani city of
Lahore in August 2011. For the second time, he has appealed directly to the
White House.


An American kidnapped in Pakistan more than two years ago has sent an
impassioned video message to President Obama, imploring the administration to
negotiate with his captors for his release and saying he felt "abandoned and
forgotten."

As my colleague Salman Masood reported, Warren Weinstein, 72, was abducted from
the eastern Pakistani city of Lahore in August 2011 when a group of armed men
broke into his house.

The video was released by Al Sahab, the media wing of Al Qaeda, and first
reported on Thursday by journalists working in Pakistan, including for The
Associated Press and The Washington Post.

Here are excerpts:

My name is Warren Weinstein. I am addressing this video to President Obama.

It has been more than two  years since I was taken prisoner by Al Qaeda while I
was working as a consultant on U.S. government programs in Pakistan. I am now
over 72 years of age. I am not in good health. I have a heart condition. I
suffer from acute asthma. The years have taken their toll.

I have been cut off from my family. My wife who is over 70, my two daughters, my
two grandchildren, my son-in-law and perhaps new members of the family whom I
have never met.  Needless to say I have been suffering deep anxiety every part
of every day. Not knowing what is happening to my family. Not knowing how they
are. And because I am not with them.


In the 13-minute video, Mr. Weinstein mentioned his public and government
service over 30 years, such as his work in the Peace Corps in West Africa and
for the Agency for International Development. At the time he was abducted, he
worked as the Pakistan director for J. E. Austin Associates, an international
development consulting company based in Arlington, Va.

Nine years ago I came to Pakistan to help my government  and I did so at a time
when most Americans would not come here. And now when I need my government it
seems that I have been totally abandoned and forgotten.

You are now in your second term as president of the United States. And it seems
you can now take hard decisions without worrying about re-election. And so I
again appeal to you to instruct your appropriate officials to negotiate my
release.

In order to alleviate my pain and suffering and to help me to re-establish my
health I have asked my captors if they will allow my family to visit me. They
have agreed to do so. But they have done so on the basis that you will make an
agreement, an arrangement with them that will provide a quid pro quo with
respect to their people who are being held as prisoner.

Mr. Obama, you are a family man, and so you understand the deep mental anxiety
and anguish that I have been experiencing for these past more than two years. I
am therefore appealing to you on a humanitarian basis, if nothing else, and
asking that you take the necessary actions to expedite my release and my return
to my family and to my country, to our country.

I am also appealing to you as someone who has served his country and who now
needs his country to help him.  I hope and I pray to God that you as leader of
the United States along with your administration will feel an adequate level of
responsibility towards me to work for my release.

The video was the second since his capture in which he directly addressed Mr.
Obama. He appeared in another video in 2012 saying he was fine, and getting
medications, but he asked Mr. Obama to cede to his captors' demands. "My life is
in your hands, Mr. President," he said. "If you accept the demands, I live. If
you don't accept the demands, then I die."

[Video: The Site Intelligence Group posted another Al Sahab video of Mr.
Weinstein last year.  Watch on YouTube.]

In the video released on Thursday, Mr. Weinstein also directed his plea to
Secretary of State John Kerry, emphasizing that he had worked on conflict
resolution in parts of Africa and Asia.

I understand how difficult it is to work in these areas, yet I am appealing to
you to take interest in my case and to use your skills to help the Obama
government to achieve my release.

As a first step I would ask that you take action with respect to their people
who are being held as prisoners. Action that would be acceptable to my captors
so that they will allow my family to visit me. I think you can well understand
how important that is to me. And how much it will do to help me re-establish my
good health.

If anyone in the administration, if anyone in the Obama government, can
understand my predicament and the need for serious and straightforward
negotiation to obtain my freedom it is yourself. Like Mr. Obama, you are also a
family man, so I am asking you to please make the time and make the effort to
take up my case and negotiate my release and reunite me with my family.

I hope that one day soon I will be able to meet you as a free man and to thank
you for your efforts.

Mr. Weinstein appeared gaunt. He was dressed in a tracksuit and a dark cap. He
asked the media to pursue his story, and then finished with a message to his
family, telling them not to lose hope.

I would like them to know that I love them very much. That I think about each
and every one of them every moment of every day of my captivity.

Unless you continue to try to get President Obama and his administration to
actively pursue my release, we may never see each other again.


     ·    Updates on the Killing of Bin Laden, May 4
     ·    Updates on Bin Laden's Death, May 2
     ·    The Aftermath of Drone Strikes on a Wedding Convoy in Yemen
     ·    Video of the Libyan Prime Minister Speaking After His Release
     ·    A Bin Laden Son-in-Law's Video Messages


LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


