                             2099 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (Sports)

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday

France vs. Honduras: Live Blog

BYLINE: LAWRIE MIFFLIN

SECTION: SPORTS

LENGTH: 373 words



HIGHLIGHT: France, even while missing possibly its best player, has plenty of
depth, and Honduras will try to counter a shortage of talent and depth with
physical play in their World Cup opener.


France is suddenly a trendy pick, even after Franck Ribery was ruled out with a
back injury. And it is Honduras that could face depth problems today and
throughout the tournament.

| Amazon on the Amazon?

The French complained to FIFA about an unmanned, camera-equipped drone flying
over their practice field last week. Rather than Honduran spycraft, could it
have been Amazon sending packages up the Amazon?

| Today's lineups

France
1 Hugo Lloris
2 Mathieu Debuchy
3 Patrice Evra
6 Yohan Cabaye
4 Raphael Varane
5 Mamadou Sakho
19 Paul Pogba
14 Blaise Matuidi
10 Karim Benzema
8  Mathieu Valbuena
11 Antoine Griezmann

Honduras
18 Noel Valladares
21 Brayan Beckeles
7  Emilio Izaguirre
8  Wilson Palacios
5  Victor Bernárdez
3 Maynor Figueroa
17 Andy Najar
19 Luis Garrido
13 Carlo Costly
11 Jerry Bengtson
15 Roger Espinoza

Referee: Sandro Ricci (Brazil)

| Kickoff approaches

Hello, and welcome to the first game of Group E, France against Honduras in
Porto Alegre.  Let's see if these two can serve up anything as exciting as the
previous game.

| This Could Be a Physical One

France came to Brazil without two of its best players - Franck Ribery (injured)
and Samir Nasri (not selected), but the wealth of midfield talent at Didier
Deschamps's disposal means the two may hardly be missed. Watch for the way
France's powerful, mostly young midfielders exchange and overlap to support the
forwards, either Real Madrid's Karim Benzema or Arsenal's Oiliver Giroud, or
both.

For Honduras, watch for the fouling. Their tackling was branded "horrific" by
England's Steven Gerrard after a pre-Cup tuneup match last week, one that saw
defender Brayan Beckeles red-carded. Their only hope of success is rugged
defense, so much will depend on the referee.

The French know better than anyone how important it is to win the first game. As
defending World Cup (1998) and European (2000) champions, they lost three
straight in group play in 2002 and went home in disgrace. (Just as Italy did
four years ago.)  With a rejuvenated squad and a sober, pragmatic coach, they
believe they've got a shot to go deep into the tournament this year. Honduras,
meanwhile, rank among the weakest of the 32 teams; bookmakers agree, making them
1,500 to 1 to win. (France is 20-1.)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


