                             2064 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            March 29, 2014 Saturday

Cloud Computing's Watershed Week

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 833 words



HIGHLIGHT: Moves by older incumbents and young giants show that 2014 is the year
computing everywhere comes into its own. Now it&#8217;s time for big
development. Looking for the next frontier? There was plenty of that, too.


 In the technology world, March 2014 went out like a plan.

It may be no accident that in the last week of the year's first quarter there
were so many significant moves by big companies, particularly in giant systems
of connected computers. Cloud computing and the Internet of Things, these moves
suggest, are moving from their rough pioneering days to something bigger and
more stable.

To consider just a few of the biggest moves over the week: Google harmonized its
cloud computing business to a single entity, with a pricing model intended to
hold customers by enticing them to build ever cheaper and more complex software.

Cisco announced it would spend $1 billion on a kind of "cloud of clouds"
project. Later in the week it was part of a consortium of  big multinationals
that will set engineering standards for wiring  people, machines and computers
together in large industrial settings.

Microsoft's new chief executive made his first big public appearance, offering
Office for the Apple iPad, partly as a way to sell more of its cloud-based
Office 365 product. Intel announced a big investment of money and technology in
Cloudera, a move that establishes a clear leader in the business of doing big
data analysis in the cloud.

At a user conference in San Francisco, Amazon Web Services announced the general
release of its cloud-based desktop computing business, as well as a deal
withInfor to offer cloud-based enterprise software tools to industries like
healthcare and manufacturing.

None of these were impulsive, breaking announcements. Rather, they were more
like deals that were first hatched in late 2013 as strategic plays for the
coming year. And, at the end of the start of 2014, the bets have been placed.

Some of these, like the moves by Cisco, Microsoft and Intel, seem like efforts
by incumbents to catch up with the times. (if that sounds like criticism,
consider the alternative.) Others, like the announcements by Google and A.W.S.,
further develop cloud computing. The consortium deal tames its next step by
establishing practices.

What all of them do is admit that cloud computing soon will not be another
business. It will be a part of almost every business, probably one that
continues to grow.

"What is surprising to us is how long it took," said Adam Selipsky, vice
president of marketing at A.W.S., the biggest company in cloud computing. "This
is a multi-trillion-dollar opportunity. We assumed from the beginning it was
unlikely we'd be the only participant."

A.W.S. began in 2006, and already takes credit for enabling the creation of
businesses like Airbnb, which is taking on the hotels business; Spotify, doing
the same to music; Dropbox, a challenge to traditional data storage; and
Pinterest, which disrupts things like tearing pages out of catalogs and sharing
them. With most everyone on cloud computing, there should be more of that, from
AWS and other cloud outfits.

Established companies like Netflix, Kempinski Hotels, and the Australian bank
Suncorp have or are in the process of primarily running their business on A.W.S.
Charles E. Phillips, the head of Infor, said his company is "essentially going
all in" on a cloud-based enterprise software strategy, changing its compensation
to sales people and offering to take all of a customer's data over to A.W.S.
from their existing computers for $55,000.

"Friends don't let friends build data centers anymore," he said. That's likely
to become a common view, though companies like Cisco still back the idea that
private computer centers will remain important for a long time.

Mr. Selipsky saw the market changing from start-up curiosity to established
practice in other ways. "We've seen a huge interest from educational
institutions in teaching a cloud curriculum," he said. "There's demand in
computer science and engineering departments in skills like building
applications on inexpensive commodity hardware," with abilities to grow globally
fast.

That twinge some feel at times like this is akin to seeing the fences go up on
the frontier, the record companies signing your favorite underground band, or
the parents coming down to the basement party just when it was getting good. We
may be past the wild part, but there's far more potential with this inevitable
outcome.

If you do feel that way, don't worry. This is also the week that Facebook made
big investments in virtual reality and solar-powered drones that send high-speed
data. A representative from Google gave a talk at the University of California,
Berkeley, about Google's experiments in quantum computing that was cautiously
optimistic, but not conclusive. Some disagreed.

There's still plenty of frontier out there for everybody.


     ·    The Tech Bubble's Silver Lining: Cheap Services for Everyone
     ·    Tech Companies Offer Update on Government Data Requests
     ·    Tech Rivals Lay Down Arms for Youth Coding
     ·    Google Asks Secret Court for Permission to Publish National Security
          Request Data
     ·    Daily Report: Tech Companies Reveal Some Numbers on Requests for
          Customer Data


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


