                             2003 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                            November 22, 2013 Friday

Bitcoin Gets a Cautious Nod From China's Central Bank

BYLINE: ADAM CENTURY

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 521 words



HIGHLIGHT: The deputy governor of China&#8217;s central bank said there were no
plans to recognize the digital currency, but he added that Chinese citizens were
free to participate in the Bitcoin market.


This week, the Chinese government issued its most direct statement to date on
the legitimacy of Bitcoin, the thus-far-unregulated digital currency that has
taken China, the United States and other countries by storm in recent months.

Speaking at an economic forum on Wednesday, Yi Gang, the deputy governor of the
People's Bank of China and director of the State Administration of Foreign
Exchange, said that it would be impossible for China's central bank to recognize
the Bitcoin as a legitimate financial instrument in the near future. But, Mr. Yi
added, people are free to participate in the Bitcoin market and he would
personally adopt a long-term perspective on the currency.

The statement comes during a week of remarkable turbulence on China's numerous
Bitcoin exchanges. On BTC China, the world's largest exchange platform for the
digital currency, the value of a Bitcoin more than doubled from about 3,000
renminbi, or about $500, on Sunday to nearly 7,000 renminbi on Tuesday. By
midday on Wednesday it was back below 4,000 renminbi and on Friday it was
hovering around 5,000 renminbi.

Such volatility in large part reflects uncertainty over how the Chinese
government - as well as other governments - may decide to regulate the currency.
As a result, even minor policy or media signals have triggered wild fluctuations
in the currency's value.

Analysts suspect that the currency's sharp rise on Tuesday came in response to
the United States Federal Reserve chairman Ben S. Bernanke's letter to the
United States Congress, in which he wrote that financial innovations like
Bitcoin "may hold long-term promise, particularly if the innovations promote a
faster, more secure and more efficient payment system."

Favorable media coverage on CCTV, China's state-run broadcaster, has also pushed
up the currency's value. A segment that aired on Oct. 28 about the world's first
Bitcoin ATM, in Vancouver, precipitated a rise on China's Bitcoin exchanges.

Although Mr. Yi's remarks were the most direct government statement to date, his
words are far from conclusive. He stopped short of calling Bitcoin illegal and
he explicitly stated that ordinary Chinese citizens retain the freedom to trade
in Bitcoins, given its status as a form of online trading.

At the same time, China has historically maintained very strict control over its
currency, the renminbi, and some experts speculate that the government could
still outlaw or restrict Bitcoin if it grows too large or proves socially or
financially destabilizing.

According to industry analysts, the government already has the legal grounds to
crack down on Bitcoin, if it chooses. In 2009, the Ministry of Commerce and the
Ministry of Culture jointly issued rules prohibiting both the use of virtual
currency to purchase actual goods and services and the exchange of virtual
currency for renminbi.


     ·    As China Mocks U.S. Debt Fight, Its Loyalty to Treasuries Remains
     ·    Bitcoin Scandal Reflects Popularity of Virtual Currency in China
     ·    Beijing Seeking a Break in the Impasse over North Korea
     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    One Place Where the U.S. Can Rest Easy About China's Influence?


LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


