                             2047 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                          February 26, 2014 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Online Reviews Matter More Than Most Owners Think

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 583 words



HIGHLIGHT: Why content marketing is hot. A new invoicing tool. And business
owners who can&#8217;t answer a simple question about their businesses may be in
trouble.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today?

Management

Here is a police strategy that businesses should adopt: "Work with what you
have."

Chris Griffiths says that owners who can't answer this simple question may be in
trouble.

Washington

Here's the entitlement debate in two tweets (from Orrin Hatch).

The Economy

Consumer confidence fell in February.

Home Depot sees post-winter repairs increasing its spring sales.

According to Russell Investments, the country's most common economic indicators
are within their typical ranges.

Employees

Employers are using new metrics to hire people.

What if you're dealing with a dispute at work and one of the disputing
colleagues is also a friend?

Here are five tasks every entrepreneur should outsource even on a start-up
budget.

Online

Small businesses, according to a survey, are underestimating the importance of
online reviews.

This is a list of 18 social media search engine optimization resources to
improve your search ranking.

Marketing

These are Apple, Ford and Microsoft's biggest brand blunders.

Content marketing is hot, and these stats prove it.

And here are 25 content marketing platforms.

Twitter just announced that it would start showing promoted accounts in its
search results.

Start Up

A cluster of solar companies is growing in Oakland, Calif.

While it can't replace investor judgment and mentoring skills, this tool may
help determine whether a start-up is worthy of investment.

Bitcoin

Here is everything you need to know about the Bitcoin/Mt. Gox debacle.

Bitcoin has chief executives and lawmakers are scrambling.

Ideas

Drone technology is changing photojournalism.

Around the Country

In what could be a seismic cultural shift, McDonald's considers extending its
breakfast hours.

Graffiti costs business owners in Knoxville, Tenn., thousands of dollars.

Around the World

Ukrainians withdrew 7 percent of their bank deposits in two days.

Health Care

Nearly two-thirds of small businesses that offer health insurance to their
workers may pay more for coverage under the Affordable Care Act. But how much
more?

Here is why smaller companies are the future of medical innovation: "Where these
companies shine is in their pursuit of radical therapies rooted in the basic
science of how our bodies fight disease. It could not be more different than the
cautious, conservative approach favored by big pharma."

Franchise owners in Louisiana who say they believe their companies will take
financial hits from implementation of the Affordable Care Act are uniting behind
a proposal that would define a full-time employee as one who works 40 or more
hours per week. But the Congressional Budget Office finds that the proposal
would cause one million workers to lose their health insurance and would
increase the deficit by $74 billion.

Technology

Microsoft releases Office 2013 Service Pack 1.

Sage introduces an online invoicing tool for small businesses.

A study finds that spending on information technology by small and medium-sized
businesses in the United States will approach $152 billion in 2014.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa. consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    'I Have Been Told That I'm Different'
     ·    Why Most Small-Business Owners Will See Premiums Rise Under A.C.A.
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Best Apps for Start-Ups
     ·    Introducing a New Shipping Policy - and Pondering How to Sell It


LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


