                             2000 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                           November 19, 2013 Tuesday

Photo of Palestinian Mother Was the Wrong Choice

BYLINE: MARGARET SULLIVAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 591 words



HIGHLIGHT: Times editors agree that the photo choice represented an error in
judgment.


Hundreds of readers wrote to me in recent days to protest the prominent use of a
photograph that accompanied an article in The Times last Thursday.

The photograph was an emotional and sympathetic portrait of a distraught
Palestinian woman, whose son had killed an unsuspecting young Israeli soldier on
a public bus.  Although it was a powerful image (in fact, partly because it was
such a powerful image),  it was a poor choice, failing to put the focus where it
belonged.

Allan Lieberman of Long Island expressed outrage and accused The Times of bias,
as many other readers did. "In the eyes of The New York Times, Israeli victims
of terror are mere footnotes to a one-sided narrative of Palestinian suffering
and Israeli responsibility for that suffering," he wrote to me in an email.

Freya Morrison of Toronto wrote: "Using a photo of the murderer's mother to
represent the item regarding the fatal stabbing of Eden Atias is the epitome of
slanted journalism and bad taste.  Let's get it straight.  The Israeli soldier
is the victim here.  How dare you make it appear otherwise?"

I spoke on Monday afternoon to two senior editors at The Times.  Both agreed
that the photo was a regrettable choice.  The dominant image with an article
should reflect the overall point of the article and the reason for its
newsworthiness.

"This did not represent the essence of the story, which was clearly the moment
of the Israeli soldier being stabbed," said Michele McNally, the assistant
managing editor in charge of photography.  She said a less-senior picture editor
chose the photograph, along with one representing what she considered the other
side of the story, which showed an Israeli police officer at the crime scene.

The selection of the Palestinian mother's "art" with the article was an effort
to achieve balance, but such an effort was not appropriate in this case, Ms.
McNally said.  In the print editions of the newspaper, the two photographs were
published on an inside page with the Palestinian photograph above the other.  On
the website and in other digital presentations, the Palestinian photograph was
by far the more dominant image and remains so.

It was only later in the news cycle that photographs of the soldier's funeral -
which would have been an appropriate choice for a dominant image - became
available, she said. (A photograph of the victim would also have been
appropriate, she said.)

"We should have waited for that or substituted it once it came," she said.

Coverage of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is one of the subjects I hear the
most about, with readers on both sides convinced that The Times is biased.

The foreign editor, Joseph Kahn, told me that reporters and editors do their
utmost to present news on this topic accurately and fairly.

"We are, have been and need to be very attuned to the message that images, as
well as words, send to readers on one of the most delicate subjects The New York
Times covers," Mr. Kahn said.  "We don't always get it right."

The prominent use of this photograph was a case of getting it wrong.

An earlier version of this blog post referred incorrectly to the positioning of
two photographs in the print editions of The Times. One was atop the other; they
were not side by side.


     ·    Responding to Reader Comments on War Photographs and Drone Victims
     ·    Photo Caption Should Have Been Better. But 'Orwellian'? No.
     ·    Analyzing Obama on Health Care in The Times
     ·    Roundup: Staff Departures, an 'Incorrect Promise' and More
     ·    Editorial Is Under Fire for Saying President 'Clearly Misspoke' on
          Health Care


LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved
﻿
