                             2054 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 17, 2014 Monday

Privacy in the War Without End

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 740 words



HIGHLIGHT: When the United States ends its wartime military presence in
Afghanistan at the end of 2014, President Obama will most likely recast the
terms under which the government uses technology to fight terror and spy on
people, says a former diplomat. That could matter for privacy laws.


How should we think about balancing civil liberties and national security? It
may depend on what a speech later this year tells us about how a modern war
really ends.

At the end of 2014, most of the United States military forces should be out of
Afghanistan (some may remain, depending on a number of Afghan and American
factors). When they do, according to a former American diplomat, President Obama
is likely to make a speech that marks the closing of a military conflict that
began soon after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001. What he says may set a future
context for what propelled both the Afghanistan conflict and the legal
justifications for widespread data-gathering.

"In the legislative framework, are we still a nation at war? Is that conflict
temporary or permanent? What tools do we want the government to have?" said
Philip J. Crowley, the former United States assistant secretary of state for
public affairs, and currently a professor at George Washington University. "If
the Authorization to Use Military Force does still hold, you're in permanent
conflict. If it doesn't, you go to an old or a new 'normal.'"

Mr. Crowley, who was speaking at a meeting of the World Affairs Council on
Saturday in San Francisco, said the question might matter more for the uses of
technology in national security than for any combat troops. "Our army will not
be at war, but our technology will be, in the form of drones and online"
security enforcement, he said.

Part of the difficulty is the unconventional nature of threats from terrorism
and disruptions of vital economic and infrastructure networks. They are often
from sources that don't wish to be seen. "The challenge is that war is moving
from mostly overt with some covert, to being entirely covert," Mr. Crowley said.
"In order to maintain the support of the American people, they are going to have
to be more transparent about what they are doing."

Steven Shapiro, national legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union,
who was speaking on the same panel as Mr. Crowley, agreed that leaving
Afghanistan would be a "central moment," but added "in a larger sense, it
doesn't matter: Technology will go on. The threat of terrorism will go on.
Therefore the argument in favor of ever more robust information gathering isn't
going to go away."

The central issue to Mr. Shapiro seemed to be the likelihood that the United
States will continue to define its anti-terror conflict on a permanent basis,
without stating what might qualify as the end of the "war." It's a tough
problem: If we are at war with "terror," victory means no longer being scared of
threats.

"There is always a rejigging of security and privacy in wars," he said, dating
at least to the revocation of habeas corpus in the Civil War, and continuing
through the imprisonment of antiwar dissidents in World War I, and the
incarceration of Japanese-Americans in World War II. "The implicit understanding
is that when the war is over we'll go back to normal. Now we have to think of
them as permanent and not temporary."

The surveillance elements of the war on terror that seem to have raised the
greatest ire among Americans, the two men agreed, was the briefly floated idea
of "total information awareness" and the disclosures by Edward J. Snowden of
immense data intercepts by the National Security Agency. "It's bulk versus
precise collection" that upsets people, Mr. Crowley said.

"There is a deference to the executive branch and the military at times of war,"
he said. Now, however, "there is a move to contest a variety of tools and
practices."

Mr. Shapiro was somewhat darker. "The answer you get from people that they
aren't really willing to admit is, 'I'm willing to sacrifice his privacy, but
not my privacy,'" he said.

Moreover, privacy has moved from a concept about behavior largely within a
citizen's home, to data about themselves.

"We're only starting to grapple with what it means as we put online data about
our lives, and aspects of ourselves that can be discerned," Mr. Shapiro said.
"The line between our public and our private lives is less discernible. The
statutes we have appear old and outdated."


     ·    Facebook's Zuckerberg Complains to Obama Over Government Spying
     ·    Daily Report: Obama and Tech Leaders Confer on Public's Lack of Trust
     ·    Daily Report: Europe Moves to Reform Rules Protecting Privacy
     ·    A Call for a Highly Encrypted Future
     ·    Snowden Tries to Rally Tech Conference to Buttress Privacy Shields


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


