                             2017 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                           December 12, 2013 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Politeness-Based Pricing

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 582 words



HIGHLIGHT: The misery index hits a four-year low. How the proposed budget deal
would affect Americans. The most watched commercial on YouTube.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    The misery index has fallen to a four-year low.
     ·    The labor force is shrinking because more baby boomers are retiring.
     ·    A manufacturing group predicts that inflation-adjusted gross domestic
          product will expand 2.6 percent in 2014 and 3.2 percent in 2015.


Budget


     ·    The United States government ran a much smaller deficit through the
          first two months of the budget year than the same period last year,
          signaling further improvement in the nation's finances.
     ·    Here are four ways the proposed budget deal will affect Americans.
     ·    Rana Foroohar thinks that the budget deal could be a tipping point for
          the economic recovery: "But the real proof of whether we're truly in a
          stronger recovery will come toward the end of the first quarter of
          2014 when business leaders are asked why they aren't investing more of
          the $2 trillion on their balance sheets."
     ·    The deal does not extend unemployment benefits.


Retail


     ·    The coffee prices at this cafe vary depending on how polite you are.
     ·    A new consumer satisfaction study finds that Apple and Target are the
          best in mobile shopping.


Finance


     ·    Some believe that enforcement could be the biggest problem with the
          new Volcker rule.
     ·    Rick Parkes says squirrels can teach much about investing (it's about
          accumulation, preservation and distribution).


Management


     ·    President Obama's debate trainers demonstrate how to improve your
          public speaking.
     ·    These are the 10 best medium-sized companies to work for in 2014.
     ·    For the first time, young women are earning almost as much as men.


The Holidays


     ·    A small-business owner asks Santa for a few special gifts to help him
          grow his business.


Social Media


     ·    Twitter introduces a "broad match" for keywords and lets advertisers
          target synonyms, different spellings and tweet lingo.
     ·    This was the most watched commercial on YouTube in 2013, and here are
          the top trending videos of 2013.
     ·    Seventy percent of 32,000 small-business professionals surveyed by
          communications firm J2 Global say they have used or plan to use the
          Facebook mobile app for business development and marketing in 2014.


Around the Country


     ·    Amazon's grocery service officially launched in San Francisco.
     ·    ADP's Regional Employment Report found that Texas and Florida were the
          leaders in employment growth among large states from October to
          November.
     ·    A Domino's franchise in Pennsylvania stirs controversy by firing a
          deaf employee.


Around the World


     ·    This is a map of all the countries that contribute to a single jar of
          Nutella.


Health Care


     ·     Only 5 to 15 percent of Affordable Care Act enrollees have paid their
          first month of premiums.
     ·    About three-quarters of Vermont's small-business employees are
          enrolled in their state's health insurance plan.
     ·    Sarah Kliff writes about some of the new law's biggest losers.
     ·    Some small businesses are already changing their approach to how they
          offer health benefits to their employees.


Technology


     ·    Microsoft builds a new tool to help Gmail users move to Outlook.
     ·    Yahoo email customers are the latest victims of a cloud outage.
     ·    A small-business owner says 3D printing doubled his sales .


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: 577 Million Vacation Days
     ·    Today in Small Business: A $10 Minimum Wage?
     ·    Today in Small Business: Amazon's Trojan Rabbit
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Business Lessons of Walter White


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


