                             2084 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             April 28, 2014 Monday

Today in Small Business: When Employees Can Unionize

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 489 words



HIGHLIGHT: Gas prices continue to rise. Simple and effective ways to use QR
codes. And when it makes sense to take a private jet.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Gasoline prices are continuing their move upward.

There's a huge wave of economic data coming this week, and this is how Bill
McBride, an economist and blogger, ranks the most important reports.

The Silicon Valley Bank says the "innovation economy" is surging forward.

Employees

A McDonald's employee was presented with a special commendation after a customer
took the time to write a two-page letter expressing gratitude.

Here's a legal breakdown of when small-business workers can unionize.

Washington

Republicans and Democrats focus on small businesses in their weekly addresses.

Management

Here is when it makes sense to take a private jet.

A chief executive says his salary is ridiculous.

Ideas

A website is helping daters with their online dating game by taking over
profiles on services like Tinder, OkCupid and Plentyoffish.

This entrepreneur is like a wedding planner for relocating seniors.

Here's how to get rich just by moving.

Retail

A 10-year-old comes up with an idea that could change shopping malls.

Start-Up

A therapist helps Silicon Valley co-founders succeed with their start-ups.

With no breakout hits, New York's tech scene is still getting started.

Operation Underground Railroad, a tech start-up, issaving kids from human
traffickers.

Flickr's co-founder raises $42 million for his mission to make email obsolete
and businesses more productive.

Social Media

Here's a tour of Twitter's new design and a few to-dos for your small business.

Online

  Here is something you should ask your search engine optimization company: How
have you changed your S.E.O. strategy in the last year or two?

Here are some tips for getting your website "spidered" quickly.

Around the Country

Why Manhattan is booming but full of empty storefronts.

North Dakota has big hopes for the growth of the drone industry.

Small-business owners in New York are taking advantage of a little-publicized
tax break.

California's tax policies may have caused one of Los Angeles's largest employers
to move to Texas.

Restaurants in North Carolina find themselves in the middle of the gun debate.

Around the World

The top three tech hubs in Europe are in Munich, London and Paris, according to
a new report.

Technology

Giant 3-D printers are used to construct 10 houses in one day.

Microsoft is warning Internet Explorer users about attacks that try to exploit a
previously unknown security flaw.

Here are some simple and effective ways to use QR codes.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Funds and Downloads Dwindling, a Start-Up Is Put on Hold
     ·    Up for Discussion: How to Create an Advisory Board
     ·    Today in Small Business: What Start-Up Founders Pay Themselves
     ·    Today in Small Business: Bacon-Filled Chocolate Bunnies
     ·    A Non-Techie Tries to Build a Tech Company


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


