                             2049 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

Comcast Indefinitely Extends Low-Cost Broadband for Poor Families

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 478 words



HIGHLIGHT: Comcast, which is preparing to ask federal regulators to approve its
proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable, said Tuesday it would continue a program
that gives low-cost broadband service and computers to poor families and give $1
million in neighborhood grants to support digital literacy.


WASHINGTON - Comcast, which is preparing to ask federal regulators to approve
its proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable, said Tuesday it would extend
indefinitely its program that provides low-cost broadband service and computers
to poor families and give $1 million in neighborhood grants to support digital
literacy.

Comcast's Internet Essentials program, which offers $9.95 a month broadband
service in poor neighborhoods, has already signed up 300,000 families for home
Internet service, Comcast said.

As a condition for approval of its 2011 takeover of NBC Universal, Comcast made
a three-year commitment to operate the program, which also offers Internet-ready
computers to eligible families for $150. The company has sold more than 23,000
of those computers.

"In just two and a half years, this groundbreaking initiative has connected more
than 1.2 million low-income Americans, or 300,000 families, to broadband
Internet at home," David L. Cohen, executive vice president of Comcast, said.
The company estimates that 2.6 million families in the company's service areas
qualify for the program.

Internet Essentials offers Internet service to any family with a child enrolled
in a school where more than 70 percent of the students are eligible for the
National School Lunch Program. Comcast said it is the nation's largest broadband
adoption program.

Already the country's largest cable television company and broadband provider
and seeking to become even larger, Comcast has historically contributed heavily
to minority interest groups and invested in low-income neighborhoods.

In a 10-year period ending in 2012, the Comcast Foundation donated $8.6 million
to at least 54 groups that wrote letters to the Federal Communications
Commission or otherwise supported the NBC takeover.

Mr. Cohen has adamantly rejected the suggestion that its support of nonprofit
groups and charities, particularly groups that serve African-Americans, Latinos
and Asians, was motivated by a desire to build political allies as the company
looks to close its $45 billion deal for Time Warner Cable .

"People would like to take this 20-plus-year-old incredible commitment to
communities and these organizations and would like to make it a bad thing - that
we are buying off support for the transaction," Mr. Cohen said in an interview.
"That is simply not true. And I believe it is offensive to the organizations we
support."

On Tuesday, he added that "addressing the digital divide head-on has long been a
priority for our company. We believe the Internet has the power to transform
lives, strengthen communities and inspire a new generation of leaders."


     ·    Mark Zuckerberg Starts Spending His Billion-Dollar Charitable Fund
     ·    Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan
     ·    Physician, Review Thyself
     ·    Daily Report: Mixed Responses at Microsoft to Rise of New Strategy
          Chief
     ·    The Housing Market With Nowhere to Go (but Up)


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


