                             2039 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                            February 10, 2014 Monday

Word of the Day | writhe

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 262 words



HIGHLIGHT: This word has appeared in 13 New York Times articles in the past
year.


writhe \[#x2c8]rith\ verb

: to move in a twisting or contorted motion (especially when struggling)

The word writhe has appeared in 13 New York Times articles in the past year,
including on Oct. 29 in the theater review "A Fairy Tale, but Not to Read to
Your Children" by Ben Brantley:

The lecture has only just begun on the Shiva stage at the Public Theater, and
yet, already, your eyelids are getting heavy, so heavy. That disagreeable man at
the podium, shiny with self-satisfaction, has promised to read from his memoirs,
and the tome in front of him is the size of the collected works of Joyce Carol
Oates. His voice is a nasal, complacent drone that could put a rabid pit bull to
sleep.

But the state of hypnosis into which you subsequently fall, and remain for
roughly three hours, is no coma of boredom. It's more like one of those dreams
that make you writhe and sweat and cry out in your sleep.

It seems that you've fallen into a fairy tale, a nasty and erotic fairy tale
that, no matter how bewitching it seems at moments, murmurs a cautionary whisper
all the while: Something is very wrong in this world, it says, and life may not
be any better when you wake up. So, thank you (I guess), Wallace Shawn, for
guiding us so skillfully into your personal nightmare, and making it feel like
our very own.

The Word of the Day and its definitions have been provided by Vocabulary.com and
the Visual Thesaurus.

Learn more about the word "writhe" and see usage examples across a range of
subjects on the Vocabulary dictionary.

Click on the word below to map it and hear it pronounced:

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


