                             2057 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday

Iraq and Crimea

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 411 words



HIGHLIGHT: President Obama&#8217;s speech ran off the rails when he defended the
war in Iraq.


In his speech in Brussels today, President Obama struck a principled and
forceful stand against Russian machinations in Crimea and Ukraine. He spoke
eloquently about the history of Europe and European independence movements, and
about the role of what we used to call "the West" in opposing Soviet
dictatorship, domination and expansion.

Now, he said, "Russia's leadership is challenging truths that only a few weeks
ago seemed self-evident, that in the 21st century, the borders of Europe cannot
be redrawn with force, that international law matters, that people and nations
can make their own decisions about their future."

He affirmed, in just the right way, that the United States will stand with its
NATO allies against any military moves that Russia might make against them
(although it's hard to imagine that happening). And he expressed optimism, which
I fear will be misplaced, that the other NATO countries will shoulder their
share of the burden of self-defense.

But Mr. Obama's speech ran off the rails toward parody when he defended the war
in Iraq-which he initially opposed and which the previous administration started
on the basis of false intelligence and trumped up claims of threats against the
United States and its allies. (Not all that different from the false claims Mr.
Obama said Mr. Putin made regarding threats to Russian and Russian-speaking
people in Ukraine.)

"Russia has pointed to America's decision to go into Iraq as an example of
Western hypocrisy," he said. "Now, it is true that the Iraq war was a subject of
vigorous debate, not just around the world but in the United States, as well. I
participated in that debate, and I opposed our military intervention there."

Intervention? The word is "invasion."

Vigorous debate? That's a phenomenal understatement.

Mr. Obama went on: "But even in Iraq, America sought to work within the
international system. We did not claim or annex Iraq's territory. We did not
grab its resources for our own gain. Instead, we ended our war and left Iraq to
its people in a fully sovereign Iraqi state that can make decisions about its
own future."

Talk about leaving out big chunks of the narrative. Mr. Obama would have been
better off not mentioning Iraq, and letting Vladimir Putin and others point that
out.


     ·    Where's That Aid Package for Ukraine?
     ·    What's a Logical Drone Strikes Policy? Hint: Not the Current One.
     ·    Press Wars in Ukraine
     ·    Barack Obama, Between Two Ferns
     ·    Not 'Looking Backwards' at Torture, Continued


LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


