                             2041 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (The Caucus)

                           February 13, 2014 Thursday

Conservative Group Takes Sides in Michigan G.O.P. Primary

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 651 words



HIGHLIGHT: Americans for Properity is taking sides against Representative Justin
Amash.


The country's biggest conservative political organization announced Wednesday
that it was diving into a bitter Republican primary in Michigan, its first such
intervention into the broader battle between GOP-leaning business groups and Tea
Party conservatives.

The group, Americans for Prosperity, will spend about $230,000 on advertisements
thanking Representative Justin Amash, for fighting against President Obama's
signature health care law, officials there said - a shot across the bow of
establishment donors who are rallying behind his challenger, Brian Ellis.

The ads do not attack Mr. Ellis, and officials at Americans for Prosperity said
the commercial should not be construed as an endorsement of Mr. Amash. But the
decision to get into a hotly contested primary on behalf of one of the most
aggressive lawmakers hints at the delicate line the group is trying to walk: to
maintain its credibility with other conservatives seeking to reshape the
Republican Party without committing itself to an expensive internecine struggle
that could endanger its chances of retaking the Senate this year.

"Congressman Amash has been a rock-solid vote for free-market issues in the
House, and has been a leader on efforts to stop Obamacare," said Tim Phillips,
the president of Americans for Prosperity. "A.F.P. is well known for holding
members accountable when they vote the wrong way; we think it's also important
to thank those who do the right thing and stand up against big-government laws
like Obamacare that are hurting so many American families."

Americans for Prosperity, co-founded by the billionaire David Koch, has spent
about $27 million in recent months, most of it attacking Democratic candidates
for the Senate over health care. In the process, the group has become the
Republican leadership's most critical ally in the battle to win control of the
Senate. And unlike other conservative groups that have criticized the party
establishment, like the Senate Conservatives Fund or the Club for Growth,
Americans for Prosperity has so far steered clear of contentious Republican
primaries in states like Kentucky and Texas.

But in backing Mr. Amash, the group is siding with an outspoken lawmaker who has
repeatedly clashed with his own leadership in the House of Representatives. Mr.
Amash, whose libertarian politics are often compared to those of former
Representative Ron Paul of Texas, has pushed to strip financing for the National
Security Agency's data-mining efforts and restrict the use of drones. He has
voted against the most austere budget proposals, arguing that they do not go far
enough to restrain government, and last year he voted against a spending bill
negotiated by Republican leaders that ended the two-week government shutdown.

In November, a number of prominent donors from Michigan's business community
announced that they would be supporting Mr. Ellis, citing Mr. Amash's tactics on
the shutdown among other issues. Mr. Amash has also drawn criticism from Karl
Rove, the Republican strategist.

But Mr. Amash also has prominent allies. Chief among them are member of the
DeVos family, Michigan's most influential Republican donors, who have given
generously to Mr. Amash's congressional campaigns as well as to Americans for
Prosperity.

Mr. Amash is also being backed by other right-leaning groups. FreedomWorks has
endorsed Mr. Amash through its political action committee and pledged to match
money spent by business-oriented groups on behalf of Mr. Ellis. Last month, the
Club for Growth began running ads attacking Mr. Ellis as a "big-taxing,
big-spending, corporate-welfare-loving politician."


     ·    Club for Growth Leads Conservative Charge, Sometimes at Republicans
     ·    Hastings Joins Roster of Retiring House Members
     ·    Applaud, Tweet and Repeat at the State of the Union
     ·    Hispanic Groups Start $5 Million Voter Registration Drive
     ·    Koch Brothers' Group Uses Health Care Law to Attack Democrats


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


