                             202 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      July 10, 2014 Thursday 11:48 PM EST

Forum plants conceptual seeds of drone use on farms

BYLINE: Nicole Clark

SECTION: Metro; Pg. T21

LENGTH: 532 words


Last month, area farmers left their fields to brainstorm about how drones might
improve crop management.

About 30 people, including farmers, foresters, local government officials and
businessmen, attended a forum June 25 at the College of Southern Maryland's
Leonardtown campus.

Drones can be programmed to examine each plant in a field, look closely at small
groupings or give farmers a broad aerial view. They offer the potential to
collect data through time, predict trends and save farmers manpower and
resources.

The farmers were asked to consider being part of a research project, led by the
University of Maryland, to determine how unmanned aircraft could be used in
commercial air space by 2015. In December, the Federal Aviation Administration
acknowledged that there are six official test sites across the United States
studying the issue.

Drones "can help you manage acres, or even feet," said Chris Cullins, a farmer
in Clements. "If you start using them for two to three years, you might start to
see patterns and have good data."

"This is the beginning of how we look at opportunities to broaden the county's
economy," said Robin Finnacom, acting economic development director in St.
Mary's County. St. Mary's is dependent on work that takes place in support of
Naval Air Station Patuxent River, and as Department of Defense spending winds
down, government and industry officials are looking for new ways to generate
income.

"Right now, drones are flying in the continental United States," said Matt
Scassero, director of the University of Maryland unmanned aerial systems test
site.

Government agencies, universities and agricultural extension offices are using
drones, or hoping to, "for the public good." Countries, such as Japan, are using
unmanned aircraft to apply chemicals to crops. It makes sense to begin research,
Scassero said, to determine whether unmanned aircraft could work for farmers in
Southern Maryland.

It's possible, Scassero said, that the aircraft, their sensors and the data they
collect could lead to more efficient use of fertilizers and pesticides, pinpoint
when crops are stressed and help farmers manage disease and increase yield.

During the conference, the farmers and foresters sat at a table and listened to
a high-tech sales pitch from engineers, former military pilots and businessmen.
They learned technical jargon, such as "payload" (weight of cameras, fertilizer
and other equipment drones might carry) and "just 20 minutes to deploy" (how
long it takes to get a drone out of the box, assemble it, conduct a flight check
and send it on its mission).

They asked questions, such as whether drones could help predict an infestation
of gypsy moths or determine where soil is wetter or drier. How much would it
cost? Would landowners have to purchase a drone or could they subscribe to a
service?

The answer to most of the questions is, "it depends," Scassero said. But,
researchers would be on hand to help participating farmers solve problems,
conduct research and create algorithms to help the aircraft fly.

Cullins planned to go back to his family and talk about participating in the
research project.

"It's pretty cool," he said.

nclark@somdnews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


