                             2082 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday

Classical Playlist: Carter, Rand Steiger, Mozart and More

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 869 words



HIGHLIGHT: Times critics share what they&#8217;ve been listening to lately.


 CARTER, SESSIONS AND ECKARDT
Miranda Cuckson, violinist, and Blair McMillen, pianist
 (Urlicht AudioVisual)
The violinist Miranda Cuckson and the pianist Blair McMillen, who are
individually brilliant and adventurous artists, bring out the best in each other
in their frequent collaborations, including their latest recording of
contemporary works. Their incisive, animated playing cuts through the density
and complexity of Carter's Duo for Violin and Piano to reveal the music's wit
and fancifulness. Jason Eckardt wrote his glistening, jittery and playfully
frenetic "Strömkarl" last year as a companion piece for this recording. Ms.
Cuckson is outstanding in Sessions's magisterial, technically challenging Sonata
for Solo Violin (1953). (Anthony Tommasini)

STEIGER: 'A Menacing Plume'
Rand Steiger, Olivier Pasquet and Miller Puckette, digital audio signal
processing; Talea Ensemble, conducted by James Baker
 (New World Records)
Few composers blend classical instrumentation and digital technology as
organically and eloquently as Rand Steiger, a Queens-born composer currently
based at the University of California, San Diego: a point made immediately and
resoundingly in the luscious opening bars of "Résonateur," the first selection
on this compelling new CD. The disc mixes hallucinatory, electronically enhanced
pieces with visceral acoustic works; in both cases, the performers of New York's
invaluable Talea Ensemble supply persuasive authority. (Steve Smith)

HENNIX: 'Chora(s)san Time-Court Mirage / Live at the Grimm Museum, Volume One'
Catherine Christer Hennix, vocals and electronics;
Amelia Cuni, vocals; Robin Hayward, microtonal tuba; Hilary Jeffery, trombone;
and Michael Northam, sound engineering
 (Important Records)
Recorded in 2011 and released in 2012, this live disc features a single
49-minute work: "Blues Dhikr Al-Salam (Blues Al Maqam)," a slowly unfolding,
earthy drone work by Catherine Christer Hennix, who is scheduled to play a rare
New York concert at the Issue Project Room on Wednesday. A composer, performer
and mathematician born in 1948 and now based in Berlin, Ms. Hennix initially
absorbed the music of Stockhausen and Xenakis, and then studied with La Monte
Young and Pandit Pran Nath; like Mr. Young, she fuses elements of microtonal
Minimalism, Hindustani raga, the blues and more to mesmerizing effect. (Smith)

MOZART: Sonatas
Kristian Bezuidenhout
 (Harmonia Mundi)
Kristian Bezuidenhout offers joyous, deeply expressive readings of a selection
of Mozart's keyboard music, including the Sonatas K. 331, K. 282 and K. 309; the
12 Variations on "Ah, vous dirai-je Maman" and the Adagio in F. Mr. Bezuidenhout
performs on a fortepiano, the predecessor of the modern piano and an instrument
whose trajectory profoundly influenced Mozart's development as a keyboard
composer. (Vivien Schweitzer)

FUJIKURA: 'ice'
Daniel Lippel, guitarist; International Contemporary Ensemble, conducted by
Jayce Ogren and Matthew Ward
 (Kairos)
One of two impressive new albums devoted to music by Dai Fujikura (the other,
"Ampere," is available as a download from his own Minabel imprint), this disc
emphasizes the guitar in its acoustic and electric guises. Daniel Lippel, an
exciting soloist and a key member of the International Contemporary Ensemble,
plays above, among and alongside his colleagues, fluttering and roaring in works
that allude to Mr. Fujikura's Japanese heritage while also asserting his
cosmopolitan style; especially appealing is "ice," a dazzling concerto for
ensemble with a haunting coda for bass flute. (Smith)

'SARASATE'
Julia Fischer, violinist; Milana Chernyavska, pianist
 (Decca)
The German star violinist Julia Fischer turns her intelligent gaze on the
virtuoso violinist-composer Pablo de Sarasate in this recording, ignoring
critics who view his dances and caprices as mere encore candy. Listen to the way
she makes her instrument sound like a guitar in "Serenata andaluza," like
birdsong in "El canto del ruiseñor," and like a whole panoply of instruments -
flutes, castanets, accordions and rhythmic foot stomping - in the "Spanish
Dances" and make up your own mind. (Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim)

SOPER: 'Voices From the Killing Jar'
Kate Soper, vocalist, clarinetist, pianist, percussionist; Wet Ink Ensemble
 (Carrier)
When Kate Soper's new CD came out in January on the increasingly crucial Carrier
label, I set it aside in order to concentrate on her enthralling new
music-theater piece, "Here Be Sirens." Returning now to this dramatic song
cycle, which entangles the stories of eight entrapped women from myth and
literature - Iphigenia, Emma Bovary, Lady Macduff, Daisy Buchanan and so on - I
find in full measure the same characteristics that made "Sirens" so captivating:
keen intelligence; lacerating wit; a time-traipsing style with extravagant
sounds extracted from frugal resources; and, not least, Ms. Soper's lithe voice
and riveting presence. (Smith)


     ·    Classical Playlist: Jeffrey Mumford, Mozart, Brahms and More
     ·    Classical Playlist: Simone Dinnerstein, Avi Avital, Mark Padmore and
          More
     ·    In Performance: Julia Bullock
     ·    Terry Riley Music Among Highlights of River to River Festival
     ·    Classical Playlist: Beethoven, Mahler, Aaron Copland and More


LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


