                             2035 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                            January 31, 2014 Friday

Malaysian Admiral Plays Down Talk of Chinese Naval Incursion

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 702 words



HIGHLIGHT: The top Malaysian naval commander has taken umbrage at reports that
Chinese ships entered into disputed waters claimed by Malaysia.


The headline to the official news article left little doubt as to how China felt
about certain territorial claims made by Malaysia in the disputed South China
Sea: "Chinese ships patrol southernmost territory," it read, on a story from
Xinhua, the state-run news agency.

But the top Malaysian naval commander has taken umbrage at that. The commander,
Admiral Abdul Aziz Jaafar, has said that Chinese naval ships did not encroach on
what he calls Malaysian waters, despite the Xinhua article.

The Chinesereport said earlier this week that a three-ship flotilla from China
held an oath-taking ceremony on Jan. 26 in the area in question, which is called
Zengmu Reef by the Chinese, in which naval officers had sworn to "safeguard
sovereignty." The report, which said the Chinese Navy regularly patrols the
area, signaled that the Chinese consider the waters to be territory controlled
by Beijing, despite claims to the contrary by Malaysia.

Any such naval patrol would be a major provocation in the eyes of the Malaysian
government and other Southeast Asian nations that feel increasingly threatened
by what they view as aggressive Chinese expansionism in the South China Sea.
Vietnam and the Philippines are among the other countries that have loudly
denounced Chinese actions in the region. Some Chinese officials have justified
Chinese claims to large parts of the sea by citing a map known as the "nine
dashes" or "cow's tongue" that was drawn up in the early 20th century by the
Kuomintang government, which the Communists overthrew in 1949.

The area near Malaysia mentioned in the Xinhua article is at the southern point
of that map.

Despite that report, Admiral Aziz, the Royal Malaysian Navy chief, insisted that
Chinese naval ships did not enter Malaysia's exclusive economic zone around
James Shoal, which is what Malaysia and some other nations call Zengmu Reef,
according to a report on Wednesday by New Straits Times, an English-language
newspaper in Malaysia.

The report, citing the admiral, said the Chinese were holding a high-level
maritime exercise involving the navy and air force that took place "away from
the country's exclusive economic zone."

The report by New Straits Times said the exercise involved the Liaoning, China's
first aircraft carrier; a submarine; two frigates; an amphibious landing craft
called the Changbaishan; and support from air force jets. Admiral Aziz said the
exercise took place northwest of the disputed Spratly Islands, an area that is
more than 1,000 nautical miles away from Malaysia's exclusive economic zone.
Such zones are generally 200 nautical miles away from land features.

"We are aware of this and our naval and air forces are monitoring the situation
with heightened surveillance," Admiral Aziz said, according to the report.
"There has been no act of provocation on the part of the Chinese or threat to
our sovereignty, as they are conducting their exercise in international waters."

In April 2010, a Chinese ship reportedly placed a steel marker off James Shoal
to designate sovereignty, prompting Malaysia to increase its security presence
in the area and consider building a naval base at Bintulu, Sarawak, on the
island of Borneo, which is about 80 kilometers, or 50 miles, southeast of the
shoal, according to the article in New Straits Times. Last March, Chinese ships
conducted drills around James Shoal, which led to diplomatic protests by the
Malaysian government.

The Xinhua report this week said the military patrol at Zengmu Reef was done by
the Changbaishan and two destroyers, the Wuhan and Haikou. It did not mention
any involvement by the Liaoning or a submarine. During the ceremony, officers
aboard "swore an oath of determination to safeguard the country's sovereignty
and maritime interests," the report said. It added that the fleet commander,
Jiang Weilie, "urged soldiers and officers to always be prepared to fight,
improve combat capabilities and lead the forces to help build the country into a
maritime power."


     ·    Typhoon Haiyan Through the Lens of China's 2008 Quake
     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    First Water, Then Soldiers, Flood a Chinese Town
     ·    Crackdowns on Live Poultry Sales Mar Holiday Season
     ·    China Reports Problem With Its Lunar Rover


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


