                             2073 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

With a Do-Nothing Congress, It's Time for Executive Action

BYLINE: ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 524 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Brennan Center has a wishlist for the president.


With Congress determined to do nothing for the foreseeable future, the Brennan
Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law has come up with 15
executive actions that President Obama could take in three areas: voting rights,
criminal justice and the rule of law.

Some are a bit airy - writing reports and convening commissions - but several
are concrete. Mr. Obama should pay attention.

In the area of voting:

Instruct federal agencies - like the Veterans Affairs Administration, the Indian
Health Service and the United States Citizenship and Immigration Service - to
encourage the many millions of Americans they work with each year to vote and
help them register, as motor vehicle bureaus do in some states.

 Order federal contractors to disclose their political spending. The Brennan
Center said the administration drafted an executive order like that in 2011 but
dropped it after encountering opposition from Congress (surprise!).

Ask the Securities and Exchange Commission to require that corporations disclose
their political spending (something Congress would never do).

Ask the Federal Elections Commission to bolster requirements for disclosing
outside spending on political ads.

In the area of criminal justice:

Direct the Justice Department to identify prisoners who received unreasonably
long sentences as part of the so-called "war on drugs" and consider commuting
them. (The Justice Department has already asked defense lawyers to come up with
lists of prisoners who deserve a presidential pardon or commutation, but it
could take a more active role.)

Order federal agencies to stop asking job applicants if they have a criminal
record, except for law enforcement positions. That question denies millions of
people even the chance of a job interview and contributes to recidivism rates.
The center said 68 million Americans now have criminal records (a
disproportionate number are African American).

Order the attorney general to ban discriminatory law enforcement practices, like
the New York Police Department's Muslim surveillance program (which, by the way,
is ending. Police Chief William Bratton announced on Tuesday he would disband
the unit that in charge of the surveillance).

As for the rule of law:

Ask the attorney general to "survey the use of 'secret law' in the federal
government and develop procedures to make the law public." That's one area where
Congressional inaction is not primarily to blame; Mr. Obama's record on
transparency is frankly terrible.

If Mr. Obama were to follow any of these recommendations, the right would almost
certainly accuse him of behaving like a dictator. But as Michael Waldman,
president of the Brennan Center, wrote in his foreword to the report: "President
Obama has issued executive orders at a slower pace than all recent predecessors.
Obama issued 147 such orders in his first time" - compared to 247 by Richard
Nixon, 169 by Gerald Ford, 213 by Ronald Reagan and 173 President George W.
Bush.


     ·    The Obama Deportation Debacle
     ·    Iraq and Crimea
     ·    Where's That Aid Package for Ukraine?
     ·    What's a Logical Drone Strikes Policy? Hint: Not the Current One.
     ·    Barack Obama, Between Two Ferns


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


