                             2080 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday

Morning Agenda: Big Pharma's Deal Bonanza

BYLINE: SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 1953 words



HIGHLIGHT: Pharmaceutical companies are on the prowl for deals. | The Allergan
bid charts new territory for takeovers. | Preet Bharara&#8217;s perfect record
is in jeopardy. | Comcast looks to divest subscribers.


The pharmaceutical industry is regaining its swagger, Michael J. de la Merced,
David Gelles and Rachel Abrams write in DealBook. On Tuesday alone,
pharmaceutical companies announced $74 billion worth of potential deals,
including an unconventional $45.6 billion bid for Allergan, the maker of Botox,
and a flurry of swaps and sales between Novartis of Switzerland and
GlaxoSmithKline of Britain. More deals in the cash-rich industry are expected.

The wave of deals underscores the most extensive effort yet by drug makers to
bolster their businesses, in many cases pursuing growth as onetime blockbuster
products lose patent protection. Instead of spending money researching new
products, several companies are instead looking to buy likely winners. Indeed,
some drug makers see deal-making as a normal course of business. Among them is
Valeant, a Canadian pharmaceutical company known as a serial acquirer, which on
Tuesday unveiled its unsolicited takeover bid for Allergan.

Valeant's current approach has raised eyebrows, since it has teamed up with
William A. Ackman, a brash hedge fund mogul known to fight loudly for change at
corporations. Combined, Allergan and Valeant would have annual sales of more
than $15 billion, with $2.7 billion in cost savings. At Valeant's single-digit
tax rate, that could be worth $25 billion. Both Mr. Ackman and J. Michael
Pearson, Valeant's chief executive, estimated that a combined company would be
valued at more than $200 a share.

Robert Cyran and Richard Beales of Reuters Breakingviews write: "Remember the
dawn raid, when a would-be acquirer built up a stake before the target realized
it was under attack?" Mr. Ackman "has come up with a kind of drone strike
version." By teaming up with Valeant, Mr. Ackman and his hedge fund, Pershing
Square Capital Management, can skip the step in which, after buying a stake in a
company he thinks is ripe for a shake-up, he then tries to make something
happen. Instead, they write, he already has a ready-made buyer.

NEW TERRITORY FOR TAKEOVERS?  |  "The $45.6 billion unsolicited offer for
Allergan by Valeant Pharmaceuticals and William A. Ackman's hedge fund is many
things including bold, novel and mega in all ways," Steven M. Davidoff writes in
the Deal Professor column. "It is a new twist in the struggle between companies
and shareholder activists and could ignite a furious battle not just for
Allergan but over the laws governing takeovers and activism."

By teaming up with Mr. Ackman's hedge fund, "Valeant may have unleashed a
monster," Mr. Davidoff writes. "Activists and corporations may team up on
hostile takeovers, but the companies that join with activists may soon discover
they are targets themselves." And, he adds, the pairing will also increase
pressure on private equity firms to become more like activist hedge funds.

DOUBTS RAISED IN INSIDER CASE  |  Preet Bharara's perfect record is in jeopardy,
Ben Protess and Matthew Goldstein write in DealBook. Mr. Bharara, the United
States attorney in Manhattan, has won 80 insider trading convictions without a
single defeat, but on Tuesday, a federal appeals court in Manhattan raised
doubts about the government's case against two former hedge fund traders, Todd
Newman and Anthony Chiasson.

During the hearing, the judges implied that Mr. Bharara's office steered insider
trading trials to Judge Richard J. Sullivan, who oversaw Mr. Chiasson's and Mr.
Newman's trial and a subsequent case against another trader. And the defense
lawyers contended that Judge Sullivan's instructions ran afoul of a 30-year
United States Supreme Court ruling that helped define insider trading. The
lawyers have argued that the flawed instruction warrants a new trial, if not
having the convictions thrown out all together.

"A victory for Mr. Chiasson and Mr. Newman would offer a blueprint for traders
to defend future cases and imperil at least one other milestone conviction:
Michael Steinberg, of SAC Capital Advisors, the once-mighty hedge fund that Mr.
Bharara indicted last year," Mr. Protess and Mr. Goldstein write. But the
appeal, they add, is hardly a slam dunk. For one, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit is known for siding with the government and has
rejected every other insider trading appeal filed during Mr. Bharara's tenure.

ON THE AGENDA  |  The Purchasing Managers' Manufacturing Index is out at 9:45
a.m. New home sales for March are released at 10 a.m. Facebook and Apple report
earnings after the market closes. Mohamed A. El-Erian, formerly chief executive
and co-chief investment officer of Pimco, is on Bloomberg TV at 9:30 a.m.

COMCAST LOOKS TO DIVESTITURES  |  Comcast is seeking to divest nearly four
million subscribers as part of its efforts to appease antitrust regulators
scrutinizing the proposed acquisition of Time Warner Cable, David Gelles writes
in DealBook. In one likely situation, Charter Communications would buy about 1.5
million subscribers from Comcast. Charter would also swap some subscribers with
Comcast, including those in the Los Angeles area, allowing Comcast to
consolidate its footprint there. In addition, Comcast would spin off a new
public company with about 2.5 million subscribers.

Together, the sale of subscribers and a spinoff is expected to deliver $18
billion to $20 billion to Comcast, which it could use to buy back shares and pay
down the debt it will take on to complete the deal for Time Warner Cable. Even
without its planned acquisition, Comcast is growing. The cable operator reported
strong first-quarter earnings on Tuesday, including revenue that was up 13.7
percent from the period a year earlier, to $17.4 billion. It also added 24,000
television subscribers.

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Chernin Teams With AT&T in Online Video Investment Venture  |  Peter Chernin, a
former News Corporation president, has joined with AT&T to commit more than $500
million to a new investment vehicle focused on online video. DealBook »

Permira to Acquire German Chemical Maker CABB International  |  Funds advised by
Permira will acquire the German specialty chemical company CABB International
from the private equity firm Bridgepoint Capital for an undisclosed amount.
DealBook »

WhatsApp Hits 500 Million Users  |  WhatsApp, the messaging application recently
scooped up by Facebook for up to $19 billion, now has 500 million active monthly
users, with 48 million active users in India alone, ReCode reports. RECODE

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Investors Back Citigroup Pay  |  Big shareholders voted in favor of Citigroup's
executive pay plans for 2013 at the bank's annual meeting in St. Louis on
Tuesday, The Financial Times writes. Some investors voiced their displeasure at
the bank's failure to pass the Federal Reserve's annual stress test. FINANCIAL
TIMES

Is Citigroup Too Complex?  |  Michael E. O'Neill, the chairman of Citigroup, and
Michael L. Corbat, the bank's chief executive, acknowledged on Tuesday at the
annual meeting that the company must do more to simplify itself, Reuters writes.
REUTERS

Report Hints at More Job Cuts at Barclays  |  The British bank Barclays could
eliminate 7,500 jobs at its investment bank to improve returns at its securities
unit, according to a report by Sanford C. Bernstein, Bloomberg News writes.
BLOOMBERG NEWS

PRIVATE EQUITY »

Ardian Raises $10 Billion, Mostly to Invest in Buyout Funds  |  In its latest
round of fund-raising, the private equity firm Ardian, formerly AXA Private
Equity, outpaced the $8 billion it raised in 2012. Ardian was spun off from the
French insurer AXA Group last year. DealBook »

Bain Goes Off Script for Its Latest Deal  |  With Viewpoint Construction
Software, Bain Capital is demonstrating its willingness to make investments that
are smaller than the leveraged buyouts for which it is better known. DealBook »

Top Italian Banks Tap Private Equity for Help With Troubled Loans  |  UniCredit
and Intesa Sanpaolo have signed a memorandum of understanding "to optimize the
performance and maximize the value" of a portfolio of corporate loans facing
restructuring. DealBook »

HEDGE FUNDS »

Einhorn Betting Against Tech  |  Greenlight Capital, the hedge fund run by David
Einhorn, said in its quarterly letter to clients on Tuesday that it was shorting
a group of technology stocks as evidence of a bubble mounted, Bloomberg News
writes. BLOOMBERG NEWS

Corporate Governance in Silicon Valley Under Fire  |  Jeff Ubben, whose hedge
fund ValueAct is a leading investor in Microsoft, eBay and Adobe Systems,
criticized what he said was excessive compensation for Eric Schmidt, the
chairman of Google, The Financial Times writes. FINANCIAL TIMES

Darden Shareholders Said to Consent to Special Meeting  |  The hedge fund
Starboard Value won consent on Tuesday from shareholders of Darden Restaurants
to hold a special meeting on Darden's proposal to spin off its Red Lobster
chain, CNBC reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.
CNBC

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Numericable Set to Price Largest Ever Junk Bond Offering  |  Numericable, the
French cable unit of Altice, is expected on Wednesday to price a junk bond
offering worth about 8.4 billion euros, or almost $12 billion, to help finance
the acquisition of Vivendi's mobile unit, SFR. DealBook »

Ares I.P.O. Likely to Raise Up to $419 Million  |  The investment firm Ares
Management said on Tuesday that it expected to raise up to $419 million in its
initial public offering, Reuters writes. REUTERS

VENTURE CAPITAL »

If a Bubble Bursts in Palo Alto, Does It Make a Sound?  |  Silicon Valley's
isolation from the rest of the economy guarantees it can't hurt us (or help us)
much, Annie Lowrey writes in The New York Times Magazine. NEW YORK TIMES
MAGAZINE

Weebly Raises $35 Million  |  Weebly, which helps people and companies build
websites, has raised $35 million from Tencent and Sequoia Capital, giving it a
valuation of $455 million, ReCode reports. RECODE

Dorian Nakamoto Appears to Thank Bitcoin Community  |  Dorian Nakamoto, the man
Newsweek identified last month as the creator of Bitcoin, thanked the Bitcoin
community and again denied being behind the virtual currency in a video posted
on YouTube on Tuesday, TechCrunch reports. TECHCRUNCH

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Justices Skeptical of Aereo's Business  |  The Supreme Court signaled on Tuesday
that it was struggling with two conflicting impulses in considering a request
from television broadcasters to shut down Aereo, an Internet start-up that uses
arrays of small antennas to stream over-the-air signals to subscribers. Most of
the justices suggested that the service was set up to circumvent the law, but
they were also clearly concerned about stifling innovation, The New York Times
writes. NEW YORK TIMES

At Stake in the Aereo Case Is How We Watch TV  |  The case has a little bit of
everything, including the first big test at the Supreme Court of who owns and
has rights to things stored in the cloud, David Carr writes in the Media
Equation column. NEW YORK TIMES

New York's Case Against Airbnb Is Argued in Albany  |  Eric T. Schneiderman, the
New York State attorney general, has issued a subpoena for Airbnb's list of
hosts in New York City because he thinks some of them are breaking the law. It
is illegal in New York to rent an apartment for less than 30 days, The New York
Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Testing the Limits of Inside Information Cases  |  The question is how far down
the chain of information prosecutors can go in bringing insider trading charges,
Peter J. Henning writes in his White Collar Watch column. DealBook »

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


