                             2007 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                           November 26, 2013 Tuesday

Qualcomm Investigated Under Antitrust Law

BYLINE: ADAM CENTURY

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 709 words



HIGHLIGHT: The timing of the inquiry has led some to question whether the
Chinese government may be trying to gain leverage for its upcoming royalty
negotiations with the American company.


Qualcomm, the San Diego-based mobile chip maker, has become the target of an
antitrust investigation led by the National Development and Reform Commission,
China's top economic planning body  -  a disclosure that sent Qualcomm shares
tumbling 1.5 percent and raised concerns about the company's prospects in its
fastest-growing market.

''The NDRC has advised that the substance of the investigation is
confidential,'' Qualcomm said on its website Monday. ''The Company is not aware
of any charge by the NDRC that Qualcomm has violated the AML," or Anti-Monopoly
Law.

The Chinese government has been heightening its corporate scrutiny in recent
months, focusing on corruption as well as business practices that contribute to
higher consumer prices. On Sunday, Chinese state media outlets reported that the
reform commission would center its antitrust investigations on six industries -
aviation, chemical, automobile, household appliances, medical and
telecommunications  - and step up its fight against pricing monopolies.

Qualcomm receives most of its revenue from smartphone chips, and the majority of
its profit comes from licensing cellphone network and handset technology. The
company reaped 49 percent of its total revenue from China in the financial year
that ended in September, a sum that amounted to $12.3 billion. A portion of this
revenue came from phones that were assembled in China but sold in foreign
markets.

News of the investigation comes as China Mobile, the country's largest cellphone
carrier with 800 million subscribers, is preparing to introduce high-speed 4G
wireless upgrades next year, which will probably require the use of technology
developed by Qualcomm. The timing of the investigation has led some to question
whether the Chinese government may be trying to gain leverage for its upcoming
royalty negotiations with the American company.

Tavis McCourt, a financial analyst at Raymond James, said his company suspected
''this investigation is related to the forthcoming launch of TD-LTE by China
Mobile in early 2014 and the negotiations on chip pricing and license pricing,''
Reuters reported.

There are three government entities entrusted with investigating and enforcing
the Chinese Anti-Monopoly Law, which was passed in 2007: the State
Administration for Industry and Commerce, the Ministry of Commerce, and the
reform commission. The fact that the antitrust investigation is coming from the
commission, which is in charge of price supervision and inspection, suggests
that the government's objective is to make 4G service more affordable before its
introduction next year.

This year, the commission led an inquiry into six foreign dairy companies,
including Mead Johnson Nutrition and Groupe Danone, after allegations that they
broke anti-monopoly rules and fixed prices. The investigation resulted in a fine
of $109 million, a record for anti-monopoly violations in China, according to
Xinhua, the state-run news agency.

The previous record was set in January 2013, when the commission penalized six
liquid crystal display makers from South Korea and Taiwan roughly $56 million
for price fixing.

The commission's investigation into Qualcomm also comes just days after the
company's chief executive, Paul E. Jacobs, acknowledged that American
restrictions on Chinese telecommunications companies and revelations concerning
surveillance by the National Security Agency had hurt Qualcomm's business in
China.

According to recent news reports, executives at Cisco Systems have said that
Chinese customers with ties to the government may be reducing purchases of Cisco
equipment in response to the N.S.A. disclosures and a law passed by the United
States Congress this year that prohibits federal agencies from buying
information technology equipment from Chinese companies without approval. On
Nov. 14, Cisco reported that orders from China fell 18 percent in the current
quarter, while worldwide revenue was expected to decline 8 percent  to 10
percent in the same period.


     ·    Bitcoin Gets a Cautious Nod From China's Central Bank
     ·    Facing a Flood of Junk Text Messages in China
     ·    Beijing Seeking a Break in the Impasse over North Korea
     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video
     ·    One Place Where the U.S. Can Rest Easy About China's Influence?


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


