                             2074 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Don't Turn Left

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 623 words



HIGHLIGHT: The good side of a bad online review. Stop trying to go viral. And
does the S.B.A. make it too easy for banks to lend money to small businesses?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

Economy

This is the economy in charts.

Rising food and housing costs are pushing up inflation, which could cause your
grilling season budget to up in smoke.

Coca-Cola sales beat estimates thanks to China.

Home builder confidence edged up in April.

Employees

A security company learns the hard way that employees cannot volunteer to work
overtime at less than the required rate.

Here are eight elements a human resources system should include - and 10 H.R.
practices your competitors will thank you for.

Subway is being sued by a California woman after an employee wrote "Big Mama" on
her order.

These are the best career choices in 2014.

Logistics

Here's the case for almost never turning left while driving.

Social Media

 Here's how to track your brand on Tumblr.

And here's the positive side of getting a bad online review: Making the effort
to show your concern "will win over enough new fans in the long run to more than
offset the one or two unhappy reviewers."

Stop trying to go viral: Instead, "create helpful, evergreen content that is
relevant to your brand."

A recent acquisition is a sign that Twitter is getting serious about selling big
data.

Management

Two business owners take different paths when confronted with the truth about
their businesses.

This is the inside story of a $30 million payment start-up that turned into a
Silicon Valley disaster.

Sales and Marketing

Here are four sales tips you can take from the "smoothest business proposals" of
all time.

A banjo company got priceless publicity when an April Fool's Day joke was taken
seriously.

Here are five questions that will help you improve your marketing results.

Customer Service

Here are five reasons the customer is not always right.

Washington

A senator questions whether the Small Business Administration's flagship loan
program encourages banks to lend money to small businesses with little concern
for whether it will be paid back.

Ideas

Here are five wonder materials that could change the world.

Looking for a business idea? Consider these niche cleaning businesses.

Retail

The future of digital retail is described in these three infographics.

Here are nine things every e-commerce business should do.

Here's how American grocery shopping is changing.

Cash Flow

This is why all companies, regardless of size, should track inventory.

Around the Country

In Washington, streetcars are expected to give a retail corridor a boost.

Small colleges are battling a death spiral as their enrollment drops.

Take a flight through New York courtesy of a drone.

Cities across Oklahoma are now prohibited from establishing mandatory minimum
wage or vacation and sick-day requirements under a new bill.

A former "mini-wolf of Wall Street" opens a pet business in a small town in
Illinois.

Around the World

Credit is drying up in China, and smaller companies are feeling the pinch.

The owner of a collapsed Bangladesh factory faces murder charges.

A glow-in-the-dark road is unveiled in the Netherlands.

Technology

These are tech tools to help you keep organized for the next tax season.

Microsoft announces new tools for bringing the cloud to the "Internet of
things." It also wants its customers to upgrade with the latest patch for
Windows 8.1.

This 1981 computer magazine cover shows why we're so bad at tech predictions.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    Software That Helps Small Businesses Ship Like Amazon
     ·    Today in Small Business: Etsy Goes Wholesale
     ·    A Non-Techie Tries to Build a Tech Company
     ·    Today in Small Business: Mobile Yoga


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


