                             2062 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 28, 2014 Friday

The Tech Bubble's Silver Lining: Cheap Services for Everyone

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 1199 words



HIGHLIGHT: Box&#8217;s documents filed for its initial public offering show that
the cloud-storage firm is losing a lot of money. There&#8217;s another way to
say this: It&#8217;s giving customers lots of services for free. And it&#8217;s
not alone.


 Box is losing money. A lot of money. In documents it filed for its initial
public offering, the cloud-storage firm disclosed this week that it took in $124
million in 2013, but spent $257 million.

Its losses have grown substantially over the last two years because the vast
majority of its 25 million users don't pay anything for the company's services.
Box has hired an army of sales and marketing people in an effort to convert some
of its free users into paying customers. Still, the company says it does not
expect to turn a profit "for the foreseeable future."

There are two ways to think about Box's finances. You could argue, as many have,
that the losses are proof we're in an incipient tech bubble. Box's I.P.O. is one
of the most anticipated tech offerings of the year; it is widely seen as a
precursor to a raft of offerings by other start-ups selling cloud services,
including  Dropbox. But if investors go gaga over a company that's losing
hundreds of millions of dollars a year, doesn't it prove we're back to where we
were in the late 1990s, with soaring valuations for companies that don't have a
solid business future?

Perhaps. But there's another, happier way to think about Box's numbers: Whether
or not Box's business pans out, isn't it amazing that investors are financing a
company that is giving away 25 million cloud-storage accounts for free?

Box isn't alone in its apparent generosity. Thanks to the high hopes and deep
pockets of tech investors, a host of high-profile tech firms are now offering
incredible business and consumer services at impossibly low prices. The trend is
playing out across a range of industries, including business I.T. services,
communications, media, payments, local delivery and e-commerce. And because
these start-ups are exerting pricing pressure on established market players,
even customers who don't use their services might benefit from their rise.

This is the silver lining of a tech bubble. If investors and acquirers keep
throwing money into tech - at companies from Box to Dropbox to Square to Uber to
WhatsApp to Postmates and more - we'll get more great products at low prices. We
might even get services completely for free, even if it imperils the companies
offering them. So as long as you don't make the mistake of investing in dubious
tech dreams, you may be able to ride out the bubble to some pretty great swag.

Why are these companies setting their prices so low? They aren't stupid, nor are
they altruistic; they all want to make money someday. But many start-ups are in
new kinds of businesses in which growth is considered more important than
profit, at least in the short run. Box offers a telling example. The company
believes it can be an important player in a cloud-services industry that will
eventually be worth tens of billions of dollars. If that's the case, then
grabbing as much of the market as possible now, before other players do, makes
sense - even if doing so comes at a steep cost for the next few years.

Box may or may not be right about this plan. But it doesn't have much choice
about keeping its prices low, because every other player in the cloud-storage
business is acting on the same profits-be-damned calculus. Dropbox, like Box,
has also been raising money at a rapid clip to finance a wild expansion.
Meanwhile, huge rivals like Google and Microsoft are also pushing into the
market with eye-popping prices. Google recently slashed the price of its online
storage to $9.99 per month for 1 terabyte of space, from $49.99 a month. The end
result for consumers and businesses: Thanks to all these firms clawing for a
foothold in a future megabusiness, we can all get boatloads of online storage
for very little money.

The price declines in cloud storage might look like a special case, because the
underlying infrastructure in that business - data capacity on servers - is
always getting cheaper. But we see similar price trends in other businesses
being attacked by start-ups.

Look at communications services. As I wrote last month, Internet-based texting
apps like WhatsApp have saved customers billions of dollars by providing a much
cheaper alternative to carriers' exorbitant texting plans. WhatsApp's rise
forced carriers to slash their S.M.S. fees. Now Facebook's acquisition of the
firm is cementing those price cuts. Facebook has said it doesn't expect WhatsApp
to make money until it has billions of users. That gives the company several
years to figure out a business plan - several years in which users can expect to
get nearly free texts, thanks to Facebook's largesse.

Then there's local delivery. In New York and San Francisco, there are many new
firms looking to deliver food and other items at extremely low cost. I've become
a fan of Google's Shopping Express same-day shopping service, which sends
Googlers to local retailers to pick up items for you, at no charge. The service
is so convenient I often order single items when I don't have time to go out.
There's no way Google made a profit on my $3 baby shampoo order, or my $2.50
order of Hershey's chocolate syrup. But as long as Google has money to burn, and
as long as it sees local delivery as an important business that it has to defend
against the likes of Uber, Postmates, Instacart and Amazon - well, as long as
all that, Google is going to be o.k. losing a bit on my chocolate syrup order.

And that gets us to the granddaddy of profitless consumer friendliness, Amazon.
For years, the e-commerce giant has made tiny profits, yet investors, expecting
a future bonanza, constantly drive up the company's stock price. This is a
fantastic state of affairs for consumers. Freed from the pressures of profits,
Amazon is able to spend billions of dollars every year building huge warehouses
that can ship us all our stuff in a couple days' time. It is sending armies of
trucks into urban areas to deliver groceries. It's working on drones to ship you
batteries. As Matthew Yglesias once wrote at Slate, "Amazon, as best I can tell,
is a charitable organization being run by elements of the investment community
for the benefit of consumers."

Sure, there are hidden costs to all this spending in search of future growth.
The bubble is fueling dislocation and yawning inequality across the San
Francisco Bay Area. My no-cost Google orders are probably environmentally
taxing, though no more so than if I'd run to the store for my chocolate syrup.
And because lots of these start-ups are going to fail, you may be sorry if you
choose the wrong one. You could lose your data, or your privacy, if your wrong
choice tries to sell your data.

These are all legitimate worries about the bubble. But it's worth keeping in
mind that not all effects of the bubble are terrible. To the extent that tech
companies are forgoing profits, it means they're doing other valuable things
with their money - including offering cheaper services, investing in future
innovations or hiring lots of people. Or all three.


     ·    Google's Bigger, Cheaper Cloud
     ·    Did Big Internet Companies Handicap Start-Ups in FISA Rule Changes?
     ·    Cloud Computing's Watershed Week
     ·    Tech Companies Offer Update on Government Data Requests
     ·    Daily Report: U.S. Eases Some Rules on Data Disclosure


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


