                             2089 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday

Google Plans to Show Ads Through Your Thermostat and Car

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 444 words



HIGHLIGHT: According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
Google wants to put advertisements on your thermostat, in your car and on your
refrigerator.


Science fiction got a few things right.

Our home appliances are becoming intelligent, drones are flying through the
skies and cars are starting to drive themselves. But they can't fly - yet.

But it seems science fiction thinkers may have missed one big and possibly
frightening (or annoying) prediction: that these devices would be another place
for advertising.

According to a December letter sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission,
which became public on Tuesday, Google hopes to put ads "on refrigerators, car
dashboards, thermostats, glasses, and watches, to name just a few
possibilities."

How would this work? Imagine that it's a cold winter day. The snow starts
floating down, a wind kicks up and you go to your thermostat to kick up the
heat. In Google's world, that action could be met with an advertisement on your
thermostat for a new wool sweater.

Google said in its S.E.C. filing that this plan to advertise in places beyond
the desktop and cellphones came about partly because the company expects people
to be using several different kinds of Google services and products in the near
future. If that is the case, which it probably is, the company said its
advertising would be able to follow customers between those experiences.

Google hopes to offer advertisers a new feature called "Enhanced Campaigns,"
which are advertisements that can be aimed at people across several kinds of
devices or experiences, including cellphones, cars or thermostats.

"Enhanced Campaigns allows our advertisers to write one ad campaign, which we
serve dynamically to the right user at the right time on whatever device makes
the most sense," Google wrote in the filing. "Because users will increasingly
view ads and make purchase decisions on and across multiple devices, our view of
revenue is similarly device-agnostic."

While this might sound like dollar signs for Google, it could be a bit
frustrating to the company's users. As much as I want my car to drive me to work
in the morning, I don't want it trying to sell me everything we see along the
route. "Hey, Nick, should we stop for an Egg McMuffin?"

But that (driverless) ship may already have sailed.

In its letter to the S.E.C., Google said it was disclosing this information
because the company expected that multidevice advertising campaigns could
deliver meaningful levels of new revenue in the future.


     ·    Daily Report: Google's Results Disappoint as Ads Are Less Profitable
     ·    Did Anyone Look at That Ad?
     ·    Daily Report: Closing In on the Internet-Enabled Home
     ·    Daily Report: With $3.2 Billion Deal for Nest, Google Makes a Play for
          Your Home
     ·    Google and Nest: Two Companies in the Business of Understanding You


LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


