                             2070 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              April 7, 2014 Monday

Today in Small Business: An Undertaker on Twitter

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 409 words



HIGHLIGHT: How to get out of a bad franchising agreement. Access to capital is
improving for small businesses. What should Apple do with $159 billion?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

Economy

A recovering United States may be outpacing other major economies.

A bond market crash is one of five signs that the global economic recovery could
be an illusion.

Social Media

 A funny undertaker has 17,000 Twitter followers.

Finance

Access to capital is improving for small businesses, according to a new index.

Here are seven trump cards small businesses hold over large businesses.

Crowdfunding can be a slippery slope for businesses that hit it big.

What should Apple do with $159 billion

Management

This is how to get out of a bad franchising agreement.

Three great reasons to start or expand your business virtually, rather than with
physical real estate.

Here's what boomer businesses have going for them.

Here are four financial mistakes a business owner should avoid this year.

Around the Country

Seattle's City Council is debating aplan to raise the minimum wage to $15 an
hour.

A small-business summit is coming to Southwest Virginia.

In Louisiana, a survey shows small businesses are optimistic - and women's
organizations there are helping business owners find customers.

Brooklyn's cachet as a global brand is shifting New York City's center of
gravity.

Taxes

This is a list of five deductions your accountant should know about.

Start-Up

Kareem Abdul-Jabbar enters the start-up world.

Washington

This week the president will sign executive orders to close the wage gap for
women.

Ideas

Here are 10 things inventors should never do.

The Northeast is one of the densest innovation hubs in the world.

Amazon announces a new handheld scanner for ordering home-delivered groceries.

Technology

Gravity hits high-flying tech stocks.

Wi-Fi speeds are about to increase.

A drone falls on an athlete's head during a triathlon.

The latest wave of "stick-on circuits" could make cheap, flexible electronics
mainstream.

Google is planning Android TV.

Hundreds of people played Tetris on a Philadelphia office building to mark
Philly Tech Week.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    Ezekiel Emanuel Further Explains His Prediction That Employers Will
          Drop Health Insurance
     ·    Finding Ways to Market an E-Commerce Business
     ·    Today in Small Business: Gay Rights in the Workplace
     ·    Today in Small Business: What to Pay Yourself


LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


