                             2087 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                              May 19, 2014 Monday

Camera Maker GoPro Files to Go Public

BYLINE: NICK WINGFIELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 621 words



HIGHLIGHT: GoPro is an unusual specimen for a Silicon Valley I.P.O., a hardware
company without the flash of a social network or e-commerce start-up. The
company said in the filing that it planned to raise up to $100 million in an
initial public offering, a figure that could change later.


The action camera maker GoPro filed paperwork on Monday to sell shares to the
public, offering clues about how it navigated the treacherous waters of the
digital photography business.

The company, based in San Mateo, Calif., said in the filing that it planned to
raise up to $100 million in an initial public offering, a figure that could
change later.

GoPro is an unusual specimen for a Silicon Valley I.P.O., a hardware company
without the flash of a social network or e-commerce start-up. But its cameras
have become beloved accessories for surfers, snowboarders and mountain bikers,
who use the rugged, waterproof devices to record their most glorious moments of
action.

GoPro's filing showed the numbers behind the company's ascent. In 2014,  the
company had revenue of $986 million, up 87 percent from the year before. And
while many technology start-ups treat profits as something they will eventually
get around to, GoPro recorded net income of $61 million in 2013, up from $32
million the year before.

GoPro said it had sold more than 8.5 million high-definition cameras since 2009,
including over 3.8 million of them in 2013.

In a possible red flag, GoPro said its revenue fell 8 percent, to $236 million,
during the first three months of 2014, from $255 million during the same period
the year before. The company said revenue during the earlier period was
unusually high because of production delays for a new product. That resulted in
revenue shifting out of the holiday quarter of 2013, the company's strongest
selling period.

Jeff Brown, a spokesman for GoPro, declined to comment.

GoPro said it would use the proceeds of the I.P.O. to pay off the outstanding
balance of a $111 million loan and to acquire or invest in other businesses. The
company had 718 employees at the end of March.

Nicholas Woodman, the founder and chief executive of GoPro, is likely to become
a billionaire in the offering, if the company ends up receiving the kind of
market value that many analysts predict. Mr. Woodman holds shares with more than
48 percent of the voting power of the company before the offering.

Mr. Woodman, 38, received a salary and bonus of $1.8 million in 2013. The
company gave him just under $50,000 for personal use of cars. In 2013 and the
first quarter of 2014, GoPro also had expenses of $185,000 related to the use of
Mr. Woodman's private plane.

GoPro warns in the filing of many potential risks, the most daunting of which is
from mobile devices made by much larger electronics companies. Smartphones and
tablets have helped hammer the market for dedicated digital cameras and
camcorders by absorbing many of their functions into their products.

Citing statistics from IDC, the technology research firm, GoPro said digital
camera unit shipments fell 47 percent between 2011 and 2013 while digital
camcorder shipments fell 33 percent during that period.

GoPro has long argued that smartphones and tablets are not likely to displace
its cameras because most people don't want to use their iPhones and iPads on a
surf board and in other precarious situations. That could change though, if big
mobile companies adapt their products, GoPro warned in its filing.

"It is possible that, in the future, the manufacturers of these devices, such as
Apple Inc. and Samsung, may design them for use in a range of conditions,
including challenging physical environments, or develop products similar to
ours," the company said.


     ·    Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land
     ·    Daily Report: Tech I.P.O.'s Cloaked in Secrecy Becoming the 'New
          Normal'
     ·    Daily Report: GoPro, Known for Extreme Videos, Aims to be a Media
          Company
     ·    A Small, Versatile Way to Record Your Life
     ·    Disruptions: A Tiny Camera for the Stratosphere


LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


