                             2032 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                           January 22, 2014 Wednesday

Bugs in Chrome Browser Could Give Access to Microphones

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 653 words



HIGHLIGHT: A software developer discovered a way for malicious websites to use
Chrome to listen to conversations happening near a computer, even after the
website has been closed.


[Video: Tal Ater demonstrated how the Chrome vulnerability works. Watch on
YouTube.]

Web developers can exploit bugs in Google's Chrome browser to listen through a
computer's microphone - even if the browser is not open, according to a
developer who publicly reported the vulnerability Wednesday.

The developer, Tal Ater, works at a tech start-up in Tel Aviv and also created a
popular library for adding voice recognition to websites. While working on these
tools, he found several bugs that together could be exploited to listen to
people's conversations near a computer surreptitiously.

"What you see here essentially turns Google Chrome into an espionage tool that
compromises your privacy in your office or your home, even when you're not using
your computer," according to a video demonstrating the technique on Mr. Ater's
site.

Chrome users can ensure that malicious sites do not have access to their
microphones by refusing to grant them access, which sites must request. They can
see which sites they have given permission in a six-step process. (Click the
Chrome menu; click "settings"; click "show advanced settings"; click "content
settings" under "privacy"; click "manage exceptions" under "media"; view the
list and rescind permission if desired.)

In a statement, Google said, "The security of our users is a top priority, and
this feature was designed with security and privacy in mind."

The company added that a Chrome user must first turn on speech recognition by
clicking a button, allowing a website to have access to the computer's
microphone, and that the feature was in compliance with web standards. Also,
some sites request permission to get access each time the site is opened.

Still, Mr. Ater said, a malicious website could pretend to be innocuous,
persuade someone to grant access to the microphone and keep it running in the
background, even after the site is closed.

Mr. Ater said that he had no knowledge of anyone exploiting the bugs, and that
he went public about the vulnerability only after alerting Google in September.
He received a response from Google saying the company would make changes to fix
it, but four months later he found the bugs still existed.

Google ultimately decided not to make all the changes because users must grant
sites access to the microphone, and also because the voice recognition tool
complies with web standards, according to a person with knowledge of the
decision, who would only speak anonymously. Google is working on better visual
cues to show that access to the microphone has been given, the person said.

The vulnerability highlights a growing privacy concern. Internet and cellphone
users readily grant permission to apps and sites for access to personal
information like contacts or location, as well as tools like the microphone. Yet
they often do not realize that these apps and sites continue to collect
information in the background, even if it is irrelevant to the service being
offered, according to recent research from Carnegie Mellon.

The vulnerability also strikes at the heart of voice recognition tools, which
both Google and Mr. Ater are hoping will transform technology. Google's ultimate
vision is that people can simply talk to computers built into everyday
surroundings and hear the information they need. The company is taking steps in
that direction with tools like Google Glass, the Moto X phone, and Google search
on phones and on Chrome, all of which respond to voice commands.

"I have a vested interest in speech recognition working," Mr. Ater said in a
phone interview from Israel. "I really believe speech recognition can push the
web forward. I've seen it do amazing things, everything from cooking
applications to voice-controlled drones."

Chrome, which has overtaken Safari, Firefox, Internet Explorer and other
browsers as the most popular browser in the world, has long emphasized superior
security as an important selling point.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


