                             2024 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            December 20, 2013 Friday

Online Reaction to Uganda's Antigay Legislation

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 612 words



HIGHLIGHT: Reaction on Twitter was swift after the Ugandan Parliament approved a
law saying that &#8220;aggravated homosexuality&#8221; could be punished by life
in prison.


Being gay in Uganda could mean life in prison.

That was one of the punishments for "aggravated homosexuality" contained in a
law approved by the Ugandan Parliament on Friday, as my colleague Alan Cowell
reported.

Reaction to the legislation, which must be approved by the country's president,
was swift online. Frank Mugisha, a Ugandan gay rights activist who has  shared
his thoughts on his Twitter account, @frankmugisha, as well as updates from an
account that monitors Uganda's legislators.

Breaking News : I am officially illegal : Uganda Parliament passes the
Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009

- Dr. Frank Mugisha (@frankmugisha)20 Dec 13

An initial bill had proposed the death penalty in some cases, but it was
replaced with a life behind bars. David Bahati, a lawmaker who has promoted the
antigay legislation, said existing laws needed to be strengthened to prevent
Western homosexuals from promoting it among young Ugandans.

@SoulSpinning The death penalty was removed from the Bill during the debate, and
the death penalty was replaced with life imprisonment.

- Parliament Watch (@pwatchug)20 Dec 13

The law's supporters celebrated. Martin Ssempa, a pastor in Uganda who has
posted on his Facebook page that he is fighting the "wrongdoings of the gays,"
shared a photograph of himself with Mr. Bahati.

Breaking: Anti-Sodomy bill passed in Ugandans Parliament. Photo with David
Bahati immediately after http://t.co/vXF31KvDsA" @nbstvug

- Martin Ssempa (@martinssempa)20 Dec 13

Gay Ugandans have been persecuted and killed, including Uganda's most outspoken
activist, David Kato, in 2011.

On Twitter, passage of the law became a focus of derision. There were also calls
to boycotts.

Dear #Uganda WTF is 'aggravated homosexuality'? Is that when you wear a really
fierce pair of shoes with a matching belt?

- James S-S (@j_slack_smith)20 Dec 13

New Vision of Uganda reported that the country's prime minister had said there
would be further consultations on the bill, which Parliament approved after
rejecting a maximum term of 14 years in favor of the life term.

Neela Ghoshal, the senior Human Rights Watch researcher who focuses on gender
identity, linked to an article that showed concerns the legislation could
adversely impact the country's response to HIV or AIDS.

Int'l HIV/AIDS alliance: #Uganda #AHB "will have disastrous impact on country's
HIV response." http://t.co/ymDTyMeIEr.

- Neela Ghoshal (@NeelaGhoshal)20 Dec 13

The International HIV/AIDS Alliance said in a statement:

The Ugandan Parliament today passed a bill which would see any person alleged to
be homosexual at risk of life imprisonment.  Other clauses within the bill mean
that the reputation of anyone working with the gay or lesbian population such as
medical doctors working on HIV and AIDS and civil society leaders active in the
field of sexual and reproductive health could be severely compromised.

The passing of the bill is likely to lead to even more HIV infections in
marginalised populations, especially among men who have sex with men and
transgender people.  They will be prevented from having access to essential
public health information, such as how to protect themselves from HIV and how to
access life saving treatment and support services that are stigma-free. The
Alliance calls on the HIV community to mobilise to express their opposition to
the bill becoming law.


     ·    Prominent Gay Rights Activist Is Found Dead in Cameroon
     ·    Human Rights Group Welcomes Obama's Decision to Send Troops to Uganda
     ·    The Aftermath of Drone Strikes on a Wedding Convoy in Yemen
     ·    In Saudi Arabia, Even Writing About Female Drivers Can Mean Trouble
     ·    Video Report Bolsters Claims of Summary Executions of Civilians by
          Syrian Rebels


LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


