                             2037 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Opinionator)

                           February 5, 2014 Wednesday

And Now For Some Good News

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1224 words



HIGHLIGHT: Brooks and Collins talk about what the White House is doing right.


Gail Collins: David, I thought we'd go rogue today and talk about things we
think President Obama is doing well. Unless, of course, you have a more pressing
topic.

David Brooks: Are you hoping to have the world's shortest conversation?

No, I'm kidding. There are many things President Obama is doing well. And I do
believe that we (and when I say "we" I mean me) have a tendency to be too
critical.  That's in part because it's easier to write a good critical column
than a good positive column.

Gail: That's certainly why I've become so attached to Chris Christie.

David: It's because people think you are smarter when you are negative than when
you are positive. Book review readers, for example, believe that authors of
critical reviews are smarter than authors of positive reviews. It flatters our
vanity to be tough. Hence the truism that each journalist is corrupted by one
central bias - the desire to show we are smarter than whomever it is we are
writing about.

Mea culpa. Mea maxima culpa. Let us now praise famous men.

Gail:  Let me go first. How about early childhood education?  We've been talking
a lot about expanding it - without, I'm sorry to say, nearly as much
conversation about how to pay for it. The president has certainly been a good
cheerleader for universal pre-K.

David: He has been an outstanding proponent of early childhood education, and he
even proposed a realistic funding mechanism. I of course want to fund pre-K by
taking money directly away from seniors, but I don't have to face down the AARP.

Gail: I think we agree that the critical point is quality. Without which,
preschool is just well-organized babysitting. The White House has been great on
this, and it doesn't get nearly enough credit.

David: Yes. Head Start needs to see the same reform energy that K-12 is seeing.
In the first place, it needs to be taken out of the Department of Health and
Human Services and put in the Department of Education.

Gail:  Head Start is a glorious concept - so glorious that people are sometimes
afraid to admit that some of the programs are poor, and a lot are mediocre. For
years now, the Obama administration has been working to make the underperformers
better.

David: My reading of the research, by the way, is that while there are many
really good Head Start facilities, as a whole the program produces almost no
lasting benefits. Billions of dollars, millions of person hours, essentially no
lasting benefits.

Gail:  I don't think the findings are that clear. But the one thing we do know
for sure is that quality preschool produces better results than slipshod
programs with poorly trained, poorly paid teachers.

Which gets me to my point. Thanks to the Obama administration, the individual
Head Start programs are being evaluated - mostly through teacher observation. If
they don't measure up, they can lose their funding. Now, many of the worst
programs are gone, and a lot of the less-than-terrific ones have been jarred out
of their complacency and helped to do better.

David: I would significantly raise the pay for Head Start teachers and make it
much easier to replace the failing ones. I would also provide many more
wraparound services. That is to say, treat Head Start centers as places parents
can go to get coaching, nutrition and a feeling of community.

Gail: Yes. But let's also give the president high marks for pushing pre-K in the
right direction. That's my first kudo. Do you want to offer up number two?

David:  I'll go with foreign affairs. I think President Obama has been handed
some extremely miserable situations to deal with, namely Syria and Iran, and he
and his team have done a reasonably good job. The Syria talks are a shambles,
but the situation could be even worse. I understand the risks that the Iran deal
involves - the disintegration of the sanctions regime - but I still think this
was a shot worth taking, if only to get the inspectors in there, if only to give
the Iranians one chance, however slight, to join the community of nations.

Gail: I totally agree about Iran, and good work in getting the Senate posturers
to back down on their sanctions bill.

David: At the end of David Remnick's recent profile of Obama in The New Yorker,
the president unfurled some beautiful sentiments. He said that being president
is like being a swimmer in a relay race. You're just trying to pass things off
to the next guy or gal. That was nicely Burkean, that society is a covenant
between the dead, the living and the unborn.

Gail: You are such a sucker for Burkean.

David: We all get cheap thrills in out own way. Obama said that he was just
trying to write his paragraph in a long story. That was Niebuhrian. His foreign
policy approach is marked by that modest but realistic attitude.

Gail: Excellent point. Now, my next plaudit. It's about border control, and it's
partly a cry of outrage.

David: Uh-oh. Shouldn't we also be writing about all the things the House
Republicans are doing well? Somehow I don't think this is where we are heading.

Gail: The House Republicans have suddenly started talking about passing an
immigration bill. But everything's couched in terms of: "First we must deal with
border security. And of course Barack Obama will never do that."

Obama has been great on border security! Illegal entries at the border are at
the lowest level in decades, and deportations of undocumented people who are
already here are higher than they were under George W. Bush.

David: I should be finding a place to disagree, but so far I just can't.  Go on.

Gail: If anything, I'd complain the White House has gone overboard. Under Obama,
the government spends more on immigration enforcement agencies than all the
other federal law enforcement agencies combined. That includes the F.B.I., the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Drug Enforcement
Administration and so on.

David: Don't forget drones on the border!  All that money to catch people who
want come here and work hard.

Gail: Well, you've argued that in order to make the current population of
illegal residents legal, we have to give the public assurance that they won't be
replaced by another 11 million undocumented arrivals. I guess I agree, but that
works only  if the other side is willing to acknowledge genuine accomplishment.

David: I tolerate more spending on border security strictly for political
reasons, to win Republican support for a broader package. The Senate immigration
bill wasted a huge amount of money on border security, but if it meant passage,
it was a price worth paying.

Gail: Anyway, my large thought for today is that we ought to occasionally take
time to note the useful things, large and small, that government does. And that
this administration has, on many points, been very smart and effective.

David: Yeah, and we haven't even gotten to a bunch of other subjects, like
infrastructure, and the brave decision to move off the green energy corporate
welfare agenda and, I hope, approve the Keystone pipeline.

I am so happy we had this love fest. Next time you must come over to my place
and do the same for Chris Christie.  He may be an egomaniac, but he's all that's
standing between me and the Republican nominee Rand Paul.


     ·    Has the G.O.P. Gone Off the Deep End?
     ·    The Latest in Anti-Politics
     ·    Happy New Year, Politicians. Seriously.
     ·    The Insanity of Our Food Policy
     ·    I Want to Be Friends With Republicans


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


