                             2012 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            December 9, 2013 Monday

Ukraine on Edge as Protesters and the Authorities Face Off

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 588 words



HIGHLIGHT: Battalions of police officers confronted demonstrators in Kiev, a day
after a huge rally in which a statue of Lenin was toppled in Independence
Square.


In the continuing antigovernment demonstrations in Ukraine, Sunday is being
called a historic day, when public protests thundered into a full-throttle civil
uprising with a huge rally, and when demonstrators toppled a statue of Lenin.

On Monday, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty posted avideo shot by its
correspondent Andriy Dubchak, while noting that the police had claimed that only
60,000 demonstrators were there. The footage was recorded from the top of a
frame that had been erected to construct a holiday tree, but whose trim was
instead being used as part of the barricades to keep out the riot police.

The Kyiv Post shared photographs of the toppling of the Lenin statue.

Protesters rid #Kyiv #Kiev #Ukraine #euromaidan of #Lenin statue see #photos
here http://t.co/YhteW95R70 http://t.co/evGP9HZvhp

- KyivPost_photo (@KyivPost_photo)8 Dec 13

But on Monday there was a push back by the authorities, and an uneasy face-off.
Battalions of police officers massed on the edges of the main protest site to
confront demonstrators, as my colleagues David M. Herszenhorn and Andrew E.
Kramer reported.

Mr. Herszenhorn, the New York Times correspondent based in Moscow but reporting
from Ukraine, has been sharing photographs and updates on his Twitter account,
@herszenhorn.

Protesters facing off with police in #Kiev #Ukraine Driving snow adding to chaos
as authorities try to reclaim turf http://t.co/1apnpegOgs

- David M. Herszenhorn (@herszenhorn)9 Dec 13

Guarding barricades around Independence Square. http://t.co/5qWyeeRB5Z

- David M. Herszenhorn (@herszenhorn)9 Dec 13

Maxim Eristavi, editor in chief of Golos106fm, has been sharing images from the
square.

#Euromaidan vs govt troops. Wall-to-Wall right now in downtown #Kyiv
http://t.co/0lDsMNndpw

- Maxim Eristavi (@MaximEristavi)9 Dec 13

On Twitter, The Kyiv Post has been supplying updates saying that the largest
opposition party, Batkivchyna, has reported that its headquarters in Kiev had
been stormed by the authorities, while businesses have closed in the area of the
square.

Stores, restaurants, cafes on Khreschatyk Street and around Independence Square
have closed. #Kyiv #Ukraine #EuroMaidan

- KyivPost (@KyivPost)9 Dec 13

On its Facebook page, the news organization said:

A Kyiv Post source who was inside the Batkivschyna headquarters when law
enforcement stormed the office says that masked men dressed in all black and
carrying machine guns ordered people to stay where they were while the group
physically removed the party's server. Meanwhile, a group of Berkut officers
guarded a bus outside. Some of the men in black had "MVS" Ministry of Interior
symbols on their uniforms. After removing the server, it was quickly loaded on
the bus and then driven away.

It also quoted a member of the group, Ostap Semerak, as saying at 5:50 p.m. that
Batkivchyna had its office taken over by armed special security forces. "In the
corridor we have people with machine guns, trying to break through into server
rooms," he said.

The police said no personnel were taking part in the takeover of Batkivshchyna,
The Kyiv Post said. "The Kyiv police and the troopers of Berkut are not
conducting any operations on Turoivska in the Berkut office," the police said in
a statement.


     ·    Video of Police Brutality in Kiev Fuels Rage
     ·    Police Officer in Brazil Jokes on Facebook About Breaking Truncheon
          Over Protester
     ·    Police Video of Shootings at South African Mine Raises Questions
     ·    A Lot of Music, and a Little Protest, as Hasidic Jews Come to
          Ukrainian Town
     ·    In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


