                             2071 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (At War)

                             April 15, 2014 Tuesday

Days of Tea and Honey: Memories of a Quiet Iraq

BYLINE: BLAKE J. RICE

SECTION: WORLD

LENGTH: 1453 words



HIGHLIGHT: A look back at a time when Marines thought Iraq had finally achieved
a tentative peace and were able to take time to simply share a meal with elders.



Six months ago, a suicide bomberkilled 13 children at a school playground in
Qabak, Iraq, a town near Tal Afar in the northern province of Nineveh. I was
dismayed to read the news. My platoon visited Qabak often during our deployment
in 2009. It was quiet then. Iraq, we thought, had finally achieved a tentative
peace.

What I remember from that country is not the violence but my encounters with
Iraqis: curious children who moved in small bands; idle men with their
questioning stares; and, most clearly of all, village elders - the elders of
Nineveh.

The first elder I met was at least 80 years old, although it was hard to tell
and he wasn't sure himself. He had seen a king in power before the dictatorship.

"We view you as occupiers," he said. "There was order under Saddam. The military
was respected. Now the army has no standards. They recruit anyone."

His family prepared a feast to welcome us Marines to his village. We sat
cross-legged on a blue plastic tarp around a mountain of rice served on a large
silver platter. He reached for the best pieces of chicken and placed them
against my knees on the dish we shared.

The elders stood on ritual. Over tea (dark, with lots of sugar), they asked
questions about America, launching a conversation that could last for hours.
Most questions were about family. Was I married? How many children did I have? I
explained that most Americans don't get married until they're well into their
twenties.

In the wealthier villages, they served bitter coffee with the consistency of
tar. The poorest villages had neither tea nor coffee, just a bowl of water from
the well. I drank from the bowl and passed it to my neighbor.

Most patrols ended with an evening visit to the elder's compound. While Marines
stood watch outside, I would remove my protective gear - helmet, ballistic
glasses, body armor with thick ceramic plates - and set it with my weapon
against the wall of a meeting room often furnished with little more than a few
cushions and a carpet to cover the earthen floor.

There were directives against removing gear but Iraqis considered it rude to
keep it on. It left them with the impression that the elders were somehow
untrustworthy. And Arab hospitality is considered sacred; no harm will come to a
guest once he has passed the threshold of a home.

On one visit, the elder and I sat on his best carpet, illuminated by a
flickering oil lamp that cast long shadows into obscured corners of the meeting
room. Villagers gathered around us, the children smiling at my broken Arabic.

He told me the story of an American convoy that had passed near the village some
time before. One of the lumbering trucks had drifted from the road and flattened
a farm tool. Some in the town walked down a dirt path in the dim twilight to
inspect the damage, he said. At the end of the path on the edge of a barren
field abutting the only paved road for miles around, the elder pointed to a
crudely welded tiller with a harness for draft animals. The tiller was damaged
beyond repair.

I asked him if anyone from the convoy had stopped. He said he wasn't sure. The
convoys traveled at night. No one saw the damage until morning.

I took the elder's name and promised I would submit an official claim card for
damages due. He did not want the money, he said. He was just happy to speak to
an American about the damage. But he took the dinar when I came back with our
battalion's public affairs officer.

For most of our deployment, we in the platoon lived like nomads. At night we
drove into the hills, away from the towns and villages, and placed our vehicles
in a wide circle at 90-degree increments. Coiling up, we called it.

During midnight watches, standing alone in the turret while Marines slept in
filthy sleeping bags on the ground below, I often heard faint voices in the
static between radio checks. At daybreak, we awoke to the sound of the call to
prayer drifting up from a mosque in one of the villages.

In Mir Qasim, I met Mohammad Shafiq, a 32-year veteran of the Iraqi Army. Mir
Qasim was a prosperous village until drought turned its green hills brown. Most
of the villagers moved away when the rains stopped. The rain left behind a
brackish well, tucked into a fold of the landscape, that Mr. Shafiq used to tend
to a vegetable garden.

He offered me a breakfast of flatbread and yogurt with honey.

While we drank tea in the shade on a stone terrace in front of his home, a few
of the Marines helped the village children attach a new rope above the well to
replace the worn length of strand, which lowered jugs a hundred feet into the
water.

In Saddam's army, Mr. Shafiq had been a warrant officer of the air defense
corps, he said, tasked during the 1991 Persian Gulf War with staging what a
hopeless defense against American stealth bombers.

I remembered the coverage on CNN: Wolf Blitzer extolling the virtues of our
superior technology. I was 10-years-old then and it had all seemed like a game.
None of our guys got hurt. But now I pictured my host and his men dying in
flashes of light, confused and impotent.

He brought up the hardships of military life, of being away from home. "Does
your family miss you?" he asked.

"Yes, very much," I replied. Every knock at the door must have been a small
torture for my mother, who feared the worst and didn't hear from me for weeks at
a time.

Mr. Shafiq and I discussed our training.

"How much did you carry in your packs?" he asked.

I couldn't remember. "A lot," I replied.

When he was a young recruit he'd carried 90 pounds of stones in his, he said.

In the months that followed the invasion of 2003, Mr. Shafiq was dishonorably
discharged and labeled a loyalist to the fallen regime. After three decades of
faithful service, he resented the provisional government for disowning him and
many of his comrades.

He refused to let his sons join the new army, even though there were no other
jobs.

"Why did you disband the army?" he asked. "It was our strongest institution.
Many of its officers were against Saddam. They were waiting for a chance to
build a new Iraq. Instead, they joined the insurgency."

I thought and offered, "Wasn't it more complicated than that?"

He laughed. "We lived in peace for generations," Mr. Shafiq said. "I am Sunni
and have a Shia wife. My second wife is Sunni. If I take a third wife, I would
like to marry a Christian."

We climbed a steep hill, following the outline of an eroded stone wall. In
biblical times, a fort stood atop the hill, holding sway over the villages
below. I could see for miles in all directions - a vast, empty country. There
were many more settlements back then, he explained. The wall curved back toward
the village.

The Marines showed the children how to coil the new well rope so that it would
not fray. Mr. Shafiq offered the Marines cigarettes. He insisted I stay for
lunch, but I received a radio call that there had been an attack on a police
outpost. I promised we would visit again.

In July and August, sand storms swept across our corner of Iraq, gathering
strength over hundreds of miles of open desert, like hurricanes over the
Atlantic. On the horizon a brown wave appeared. Very quickly the wave was upon
us and visibility was zero. There was nothing to do but coil up and seal the
hatches of our vehicles against the flying sand.

After one especially long storm, the platoon was granted a reprieve from the
field: two days of rest inside a large Army base 100 miles away. For the first
time in weeks, we could let our guards down. Someone else was on watch.

It was odd to spend the night indoors on a mattress in the neatly ordered rows
of air-conditioned trailers, so much so that I couldn't sleep.

I sat on the edge of my bunk, writing emails from a laptop I kept sealed in a
water-proof bag under the ammo cans in my vehicle. I wrote to a woman I had met
in the months before deployment. But she hadn't written back and I guessed that
my chances of seeing her again were slim.

Earlier that night I had called my mother. Her voice broke at the end of my
allotted 10 minutes. I shouldn't have called, I thought.

On the bunk above mine, our platoon sergeant was snoring loudly in reply to the
air conditioner's drone. He was on his fourth consecutive deployment and had
seen the worst of the violence. Judging from the news, his memories of Iraq from
those dark years were closer to today's reality than mine.

Blake Rice served in the Marines as an infantry officer in Iraq and Afghanistan.
He is the co-founder of District Line Partners, an investment fund in
Washington, D.C.


     ·    Reflections on Falluja and the Impermanence of Victory
     ·    Experiencing War Through a Twin
     ·    A Much-Needed Treat, and a Welcome Surprise
     ·    Veterans Bare Their Souls in Literary Events
     ·    Humbled by the Souvenirs of War


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


