                             2010 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            December 3, 2013 Tuesday

Today in Small Business: Pop-Up Stores

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 373 words



HIGHLIGHT: A Purple Heart recipient becomes an entrepreneur. How to use
Instagram to increase sales. Will the holidays be happy?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    SurePayroll is predicting a surprisingly happy end to 2013 for Main
          Street businesses.
     ·    A factory-activity gauge rises to a two-and-a-half-year high.
     ·    Automakers entered their year-end sales push last month with the most
          cars and trucks on dealer lots in eight years.
     ·    Blogger sentiment in December remained bullish.
     ·    Developers increased construction spending in October at the fastest
          pace in more than four years, propelled by a surge in government
          projects.


Customer Service


     ·    Michael Santoli explains what Jeff Bezos was really delivering with
          his talk of drones in what amounted to "a long corporate promotional
          video" on "60 Minutes": "The real point of Bezos's expert playing of
          the network-media game was to drive home his constant and zealously
          emphasized point about Amazon's mission: We do everything to make
          products cheaper, and life easier, for our customers."
     ·    Shake Shack's chief executive says that "if you're hungry for success,
          you need to be on your customer's side."
     ·    Here is how to increase prices without losing customers.


Retail


     ·    More pop-up stores are appearing for the holidays, as small-business
          owners increasingly use them as promotional tools and test labs.
     ·    Here are eight reasons Cyber Monday is better than Black Friday.


Management


     ·    A report on how small-business owners decide it's time to step aside.


Entrepreneurship


     ·    A Purple Heart recipient shares his story of how he went from being a
          Delta Force soldier to being a father, an educator and an
          entrepreneur.


Finance


     ·    Kanye West is struggling to find funding for a new venture.


Social Media


     ·    Here's how one retailer is using Instagram to increase sales.
     ·    And here's how to use Reddit to increase website traffic.
     ·    Young people are flocking to Twitter.


Around the Country


     ·    Colorado gets $5.7 million from a federal small-business credit
          initiative.


Around the World


     ·    A hookah ban is a blow to a small business in Alberta, Canada.


Health Care


     ·    HealthCare.gov finally worksfor some.


Taxes


     ·    Here are a few tips for lowering your tax bill before the year's over.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


