                             2020 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                           December 17, 2013 Tuesday

Thousands Flee From Fighting in South Sudan

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 776 words



HIGHLIGHT: As fighting continued in Juba, the capital, the U.N.mission there was
providing shelter to civilians but said it could not accommodate all who sought
refuge.


[Video: United Nations video on Thursday of civilians in Juba, South Sudan,
seeking shelter and witnesses speaking about clashes  Watch on YouTube.]
Thousands of civilians have been seeking shelter at United Nations facilities in
South Sudan to escape fighting that has flared in the capital,  Juba, and the
demand for a safe haven has grown so great that the crowds are spilling outside
of the gates.

As my colleague Isma'il Kushkush reported, political tension has hung over the
fledgling country for months, and on Monday, President Salva Kiir said  soldiers
loyal to the former vice president of South Sudan tried to overthrow the
government.

On Tuesday, Hilde Johnson, the United Nations secretary general's special
representative at the United Nations mission in South Sudan, spoke to the
British Broadcasting Corporation about the situation:

We have approximately 12,000 civilians that have sought shelter in the two
UNMISS compounds we have in Juba. We also have people that have been given
protection outside our gates because we cannot accommodate many more. It is a
major logistical challenge. However, the most critical issue now is that they
are safe, protected, can receive water, and if there is any critical medical
needs that they are catered for, but we all would like to see everyone return
home.

listen to 'South Sudan's UN rep Hilde Johnson' on Audioboo

As another day of fighting was reported, the airport was closed, a curfew
imposed and communications shut down. The United States mission in Juba said it
could not operate as normal and was evacuating nonessential personnel, while its
Twitter feed became a source of description about what was happening in the
capital area.

We still hear gunfire in parts of Tongping. We urge everyone to remain indoors
during curfew and keep safe. #SouthSudan

- U.S. Mission in Juba (@USMissionJuba)17 Dec 13

(1/4) The Embassy recommends that U.S. citizens currently in #SouthSudan depart
immediately...

- U.S. Mission in Juba (@USMissionJuba)17 Dec 13

Virginia Moncrieff, a journalist in South Sudan, wrote of heavy gunfire late
into the night and forecast that many people would try to leave.

Huge volley of gun fire just went off. Sounded like it was near the hospital.
Still shots going now. 11.45pm #juba #southsudan

- Virginia M Moncrieff (@VMMoncrieff)17 Dec 13

Bullets now raining on Juba for third straight night #SouthSudan

- Mading Ngor (@madingngor)17 Dec 13

Many people packing tonight in order to evacuate in the morning. Will be a mass
exodus. #SouthSudan #juba

- Virginia M Moncrieff (@VMMoncrieff)17 Dec 13

While some witnesses have spoken of ethnically driven violence, the numbers of
casualties have been hard to pin down, even from official sources.

South Sudan's information minister, Michael Makuei Lueth, told civilians seeking
refuge at the United Nations mission to return to their homes. He also said he
could confirm that 75 people had died in the fighting in the capital. The United
Nations mission posted his statement on its Facebook page.

[Video: Sudan's information minister calling on civilians to return to their
homes. Watch on YouTube.]

Eye Radio Juba also posted updates  on its Twitter feed,@EyeRadioJuba, from the
minister about the number of deaths,  but it was not clear where the final death
toll stood.

Minister of Information now on saying no solid information on deaths and
injuries. No statistics yet released. #southsudan #juba

- Eye Radio Juba (@EyeRadioJuba)17 Dec 13

Radio Miraya, affiliated with the United Nations in South Sudan, reported on
some of the injuries.

Radio Miraya News: 100 gunshot wounds treated at hospital http://t.co/YKZB0bhqa8

- Radio Miraya (@RadioMiraya)17 Dec 13

Hannah McNeish, a journalist based in East Africa, wrote extensively about the
latest unrest and shared some of the reporting on Twitter as well.

@ICRC #SouthSudan says more than 300 wounded people treated in 2 hospitals in
capital Juba after clashes, fears many more can't be reached.

- Hannah McNeish (@HannahMcNeish)17 Dec 13

The State Department deputy spokeswoman Marie Harf  in response to a question on
Monday in Washington, that the United States was concerned about the fighting
spreading in the region.

"Well, we certainly don't want that to be the case," she said. "That's why we're
calling on all parties to resolve their differences through peaceful means. But
certainly it's something we're concerned about and watching."


     ·    U.N. Report Reframes Debate Over Image of a Father's Agony in Gaza
     ·    Leaked Report on Sri Lanka Critical of U.N.
     ·    Reports on Central African Republic's Humanitarian Needs
     ·    Reports From the Central African Republic's 'Darkest Days'
     ·    Let Slip the Drones of Peace


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


