                             2098 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              June 13, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: House Approves Small-Business Tax Break

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 362 words



HIGHLIGHT: Oil prices soar. Why Apple doesn&#8217;t tweet. How Starbucks is
using bad smartphone batteries to boost its business.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Fearing higher interest rates, the Federal Reserve prepares to maintain its
balance sheet for years.

Business inventories posted their largest increase in six months.

The last recession has been linked to more than 10,000 suicides.

Oil prices are soaring.

Washington

The House votes to make permanent a generous tax break that helps small
businesses buy new equipment and improve their property.

Employees

Here are five workplace changes you can make to improve your health.

Retail

Starbucks is using your "crummy" smartphone battery to boost its business.

Start-Up

The deadline has been extended for the "start-up battlefield competition"

A study finds that starting a craft brewery in the United States is as tough as
starting a small business in China or Venezuela.

Around the Country

California threatens to shut down Uber, Lyft, and Sidecar.

A contest will award $25,000 for the best small-business story.

Colorado has $5.5 million to help you finance your business.

These are the best and worst states for small businesses, according to a study.

A Rhode Island bar owner says a proposed seawall would destroy his business.

Ideas

You can fool people into thinking you're a soccer expert with this World Cup
tool.

Opportunities

The automotive sensor market may be worth $35 billion by 2022.

This is how one freelancer turned her hobby into a book deal.

Tesla's patents are now open to you.

Social Media

Ever wonder why Apple doesn't tweet?

Facebook is now letting its users opt out of targeted ads.

Online

After restoring its service, Feedly is hit with another denial-of-service
attack.

A report finds cybersecurity is neglected at most small businesses.

PayPal introduces a website it says will help small businesses make more money
overseas, specifically in China.

These are the industries that will be transformed by drones.

Technology

Comcast turns 50,000 homes into Wi-Fi hotspots.

Dell decides to close its online backup service.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


