                             2042 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                          February 19, 2014 Wednesday

Live Video From Kiev and Images of Violence in Other Ukrainian Cities

LENGTH: 409 words



HIGHLIGHT: Video from Kiev and other Ukrainian cities showed that violence
continued on Wednesday after the authorities used deadly violence to try to
regain control of the capital city&#8217;s streets.


As my colleagues Andrew Higgins and Andrew Kramer report from Kiev, a violent
standoff between protesters and the riot police continued on Wednesday in the
center of the Ukrainian capital.

With opposition television channels forced off the air, hundreds of thousands of
viewers again turned to YouTube for live video from the besieged protest camp in
Kiev streamed by the local broadcaster Espreso.tv and Radio Svoboda, part of the
American-financed Radio Free Europe network.

A BBC News video report showed the smouldering ruins of part of the protest camp
in Kiev's Independence Square on Wednesday afternoon, after the authorities
managed to regain control of some but not all of the area that has been occupied
for months by antigovernment demonstrators.

Ruptly, a Russian state-owned news agency, posted aerial video of the bonfires
around the edge of the protest camp shot from a drone above Kiev.

Meanwhile, activists, bloggers and journalists continued to post updates on the
mayhem in the capital and share video clips documenting violence in other parts
of the country.

One of the most widely-shared clips was graphic video of violence in the city of
Khmelnytsky, where a woman collapsed in a pool of blood following a burst of
gunfire as protesters attacked a local office of the S.B.U., the Ukraine state
security service.

A report on the shooting from the regional channel TV7+ used some of the same
footage and showed more of the protests in Khmelnytsky.

Christopher Miller, an editor at the English-language Kyiv Post, pointed to what
seemed to be more video of the same scene streamed from the phone of a witness.
That video, which was frozen during the shooting, showed the desperate race to
save the woman as she lay bleeding on the pavement outside the building.

The BBC also broadcast video of soldiers surrendering to protesters outside a
burning barracks in the western city of Lviv.

Ukraine's Channel 5 posted video of what the local government described as a
clash among citizens on Wednesday, as a phalanx of pro-government activists -
armed with baseball bats, wearing helmets and "Stop Maidan" stickers, in
reference to the pro-Europe protest movement known as Euro Maidan - attacked
protesters and journalists.


     ·    Online Video of Intense Clashes in Kiev
     ·    Footage of Mayhem on the Streets of Kiev
     ·    Struggle for Kiev Square Unfolds Live Online
     ·    Ukraine on Edge as Protesters and the Authorities Face Off
     ·    Video of Police Brutality in Kiev Fuels Rage


LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


