                             2018 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 16, 2013 Monday

Daily Report: Creating Retail Experiences to Match the Technology

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 247 words



HIGHLIGHT: Electronics retailers like Verizon have gone to great lengths in
recent months to overhaul their stores, while the heavyweights behind many of
the devices &#8212; the Microsofts, Googles and Intels &#8212; have moved to
open retail stores of their own.


Looking for a holiday gift? Come on in. Relax. Take a seat in the leather chair.
Welcome to today's electronics store, Nick Wingfield reports, a place that is
now a little like entering a playground crossed with a cocktail lounge, where
employees use apps to pilot toy drones and music thumps from arrays of wireless
speakers.

Established electronics retailers like Verizon have gone to great lengths in
recent months to overhaul their stores. And the heavyweights behind many of the
devices - the Microsofts, Googles and Intels - have moved to open retail stores
of their own, some temporary, some permanent. In some cases, the brands are
creating upscale enclaves for their products within the jumble of megastores.

Behind all the investments in retailing is one of the technology industry's
favorite buzzwords: "user experience." It reflects a belief that companies need
to obsess not only over details of product design, but also the environment in
which the products are presented to the public. Apple learned this years ago,
creating retail outlets - now totaling more than 400 - that are intended to be
high-traffic emporiums of cool. Read more »


     ·    Verizon Responds to Shareholders' Concerns on User Data
     ·    Daily Report: New York Asks Why Cellphone Carriers Rejected Antitheft
          Switch
     ·    Daily Report: Retailers Turn to Social Media to Showcase Products
     ·    Daily Report: Pressure Mounts on Wireless Providers Over U.S.
          Surveillance Efforts
     ·    Daily Report: New Consoles Enter a Changed Gaming Market


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


