                             2011 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 9, 2013 Monday

Today's Scuttlebot: Protesting Google's Shuttle, and Going Inside Samsung's
Testing Labs

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 508 words



HIGHLIGHT: Monday&#8217;s highlights from around the web include a protest over
the technology industry&#8217;s impact on San Francisco, and the controversy
surrounding a hoax altercation that ensued. Plus, an inside look at how Samsung
tortures its devices.


Every day, The New York Times's staff scours the web for interesting and
peculiar items.

On Monday, a group of demonstrators staged a protest in San Francisco's Mission
District, decrying the city's high rents and increasing wealth divide. They
chose a Google shuttle bus to serve as a symbol of their displeasure.

BREAKING: Protesters halt and block @google bus, protesting San Francisco
evictions #ows http://t.co/LRPwPIrwhx

- Joe Fitz Rodriguez (@FitzTheReporter)9 Dec 13

The protest intensified after a video went viral on the Internet of a man
getting into a verbal spat with one of the protesters. At one point, he said:
"Why don't you go to a city where you can afford it? This is a city for the
right people."

Soon after the video was circulated, reports came out that the altercation was
staged, and the man was also a protester who played the part to intensify the
scene at the bus stop.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

The reported hoax raised questions about the efficacy of the protest and its
underlying cause. A backlash against the industry and its culture has been
mounting in recent months, with previous protests taking place outside Twitter's
Market Street headquarters on the day of its initial public offering.

Most people who work at one of our startups are young ppl who are not rich and
have come to SF to find their fortune like anyone else

- Justin Kan (@justinkan)9 Dec 13

That Google Bus stunt erodes the shockingness of real "let them eat cake" talk,
of which there is plenty.

- Martha Bridegam (@MBridegam)9 Dec 13

It's not like SF invented gentrification. It just doesn't happen to fit with
that city's narrative about itself.

- Christopher Mims (@mims)9 Dec 13

Here's what else we noticed:

Inside Samsung's Testing Labs
CNET |  An inside look at how Samsung tortures its gadgets. - Ashwin Seshagiri

Commemorating Douglas Engelbart's Prescient Presentation
The Atlantic |  'The Mother of All Demos' turns 45. - Ashwin Seshagiri

[Video: "The Mother of All Demos" Watch on YouTube.]

Why Is Microsoft Scared of Chromebooks?
The Verge |  Google Chromebooks seem to be spooking Microsoft after all. -
Claire Cain Miller

More Legal Issues for Snapchat
Techcrunch |  Snapchat filed for a restraining order against a disputed founder
after a leak of confidential documents. - Ashwin Seshagiri

E-Commerce and the Future of Delivery
Bloomberg |  In an interview on Bloomberg TV, eBay's chief executive
@donahoe_john said that drone delivery is a "long-term fantasy." - Ashwin
Seshagiri

Redfin Real-Estate Startup Gets Cold Shoulder in Silicon Valley
The Wall Street Journal |  Silicon Valley prefers computers over people, which
is why start-ups like Redfin had to look elsewhere. (Subscription required.) -
Claire Cain Miller

U.S. Seeks Terrorists in Web Worlds
BBC |  A report from 2008 on suspected surveillance of online worlds by the
United States government. - Ashwin Seshagiri

(The 2008 article serves as a prelude to a report by The Times, in collaboration
with ProPublica and The Guardian, about the government infiltrating multiplayer
online games.)

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


