                             2068 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                              April 4, 2014 Friday

Three Soldiers Killed at Fort Hood Are Identified

LENGTH: 393 words



HIGHLIGHT: One of the three soldiers shot and killed at Fort Hood died while
barricading a door, preventing the gunman from opening fire inside a room packed
with military personnel.


When Specialist Ivan Antonio Lopez opened fire at Fort Hood late Wednesday
afternoon, Sgt. First Class Danny Ferguson leaned up against a door to prevent
the gunman from entering a room packed with military personnel.

But this heroic act cost Sergeant Ferguson his life, his fiancée, Kristen Haley,
told a Tampa, Fla. television station.

"He held that door shut because it wouldn't lock," Ms. Haley told WTSP-TV. "It
seems the doors would be bullet proof, but apparently they're not. If he wasn't
the one standing there holding those doors closed, that shooter would have been
able to get through and shoot everyone else."

Sergeant Ferguson, 39, who had recently returned from Afghanistan, was among the
three people killed and 16 wounded in the Fort Hood shooting. Two other soldiers
shot and killed have been identified. They are Sgt. Timothy Owens, 37, and Sgt.
Carlos Alberto Lazaney Rodriguez, 38.

As my colleagues, Ashley Southall and Steven Yaccino, reported, Fort Hood
officials have not yet released the names of the victims of Wednesday's
shooting, but friends and family members are beginning to speak about loved ones
lost and hurt.

In Puerto Rico, Mayor Carlos Méndez Martínez of Aguadilla told CNN en Español
that Sergeant Rodriguez was planning to retire. "It was a very close-knit
family," Mr. Méndez told CNN. "Excellent, decent, very good people. I know his
family and his parents. They are good people."

Mary Muntean, 77, of Effingham, Ill., told The Associated Press that she had
learned of the death of her son, Sergeant Owens, in a telephone call with her
daughter-in-law, Billy Owens.

On her Facebook page, a teenage daughter of Sergeant Owens posted a photograph
of herself with her father, and this message, upon learning the news:

Today at fort hood there was a shooting...my father sadly died tonight .... I
still feel like it's all a dream.... Can't feel anything ... I just want
everyone to think for a moment .... If you have family your fighting with
forgive them, love them, because you never know when there gonna be taken from
you ..... I love dad and I hate that you were taken away from me .... I love you
daddy


     ·    Media Coverage of the Fort Hood Shooting
     ·    Rumsfeld Derides Obama as 'the So-Called Commander in Chief'
     ·    Mos Def Video Puts Force-Feeding in Spotlight
     ·    What Is Different About This Explosion?
     ·    Video of Drone on Iranian Television


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


