                             2029 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            January 10, 2014 Friday

Ethnic Segregation at a U.N. Camp in South Sudan

BYLINE: SOMINI SENGUPTA and ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 532 words



HIGHLIGHT: Reporting from South Sudan on Friday, the BBC correspondent Alastair
Leithead discovered that civilians taking refuge from fighting at a U.N. base
were being segregated along ethnic lines by the peacekeepers.


Reporting from South Sudan on Friday, the BBC correspondent Alastair Leithead
discovered that civilians taking refuge from fighting at a United Nations base
outside the town of Bentiu were being segregated along ethnic lines by the
peacekeepers.

One image from the video report filed by the BBC News crew, showing a
hand-painted sign directing members of the Dinka and the Nuer tribes to opposite
sides of the camp, caught the attention of Alun McDonald, an Oxfam media officer
who has worked with refugees in South Sudan.

Most depressing photo of the day - a sign at UN camp in South Sudan separates
Dinka and Nuer as they arrive http://t.co/sGdhbrL1jE

- Alun McDonald (@alunmcdonald)10 Jan 14

According to Mr. Leithead, civilians from both tribes have been forced to seek
safety as the fighting raged between forces loyal to President Salva Kiir - a
member of the country's largest ethnic group, the Dinka - and followers of his
former vice president, Riek Machar, a Nuer. Writing on the BBC News website, Mr.
Leithead explained:

There are far more than 8,000 people here now. Many are Dinka, the biggest
ethnic group in South Sudan and the tribe of the president. They claimed that
the night the violence started they were targeted by the Nuer.

Among them are 2,000 Sudanese traders caught up in the crisis and desperate for
their country to send planes to take them home.

Now that government troops appear to be closing in, the latest arrivals here
have been Nuer - afraid of what may happen if the town changes hands.

Kieran Dwyer, a spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping office in New
York, told The Lede that the division of tribes at the base near Bentiu
reflected the wishes of "community leaders," rather than a policy of the
peacekeepers. "The initiative is on request of community leaders. They've
advised that this is the best way to keep things calm and stable inside the
base," Mr. Dwyer said. "If there is any policy here it's not ethnic separation.
It's to work with community leaders."

Still, many close observers of the conflict were taken aback by the partition of
the camp. In a conversation on Twitter, both Rebecca Hamilton, a human rights
lawyer who has written about the impact of citizen advocacy on U.S. policy in
the region, and Amir Ahmad Nasr, a Sudanese blogger, criticized the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan for dividing the civilians.

Ethnicity is used readily enough by unscrupulous #SouthSudan elites right now.
No need for the UN to add to it

- bechamilton (@bechamilton)10 Jan 14

@SamRosmarin @bechamilton @Max_Fisher Talk about wrongly reinforcing and
exacerbating tribal divisions. Garang's Dinka son & co oppose Kiir.

- Amir Ahmad Nasr (@SudaneseThinker)10 Jan 14

The criticism echoes complaints about the role U.N. agencies played in the 1990s
in transporting Bosnian Muslim civilians out of areas of the country seized by
Serb forces, helping to tear apart the fabric of communities that had been
intertwined for centuries.


     ·    In South Sudan, Reports of Massacres and Mass Graves
     ·    Thousands Flee From Fighting in South Sudan
     ·    Video and Images of the Crisis in South Sudan
     ·    Reports on Central African Republic's Humanitarian Needs
     ·    Let Slip the Drones of Peace


LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


