                             2072 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             April 15, 2014 Tuesday

Today in Small Business: Etsy Goes Wholesale

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 613 words



HIGHLIGHT: Looking for the top 100 mom-owned businesses. An app for unlimited
coffee. And there&#8217;s a gefilte fish shortage.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

Tax Day

Here are five questions to ask before filing for a tax extension.

Small-business owners lose more than a week a year to tax preparation and
paperwork, according to a survey.

A report on individual income taxes ranks the United States 25th out of 34
member countries when it comes individual tax burdens.

The Internal Revenue Service said its systems aren't vulnerable to the
Heartbleed bug and Americans should keep filing.

E-Commerce

Etsy has introduced a new site to help its sellers sell wholesale.

Finance

Mortgage-lending is contracting to levels not seen since 1997 as rising interest
rates and home prices drive away borrowers.

Washington

The Congressional Budget Office on Monday cut its estimate of the deficit for
the current fiscal year. Paul Krugman says the C.B.O. could be overestimating
the probable increase in interest rates.

The C.B.O. also says that the coverage provisions of the Affordable Care Act
will cost far less than previously expected.

Entrepreneurship

Here's what entrepreneurs can learn from Oculus VR, the company recently
acquired by Facebook for $2 billion.

Employees

Here's how to avoid annoying everyone around you at work.

You may want to consider using "stay interviews" to retain great employees.

Social Media

 Here's a YouTube video of a Southwest flight attendant having fun delivering
the safety instructions.

After a teenager is arrested for tweeting a "joke" terror threat to American
Airlines, dozens of teenagers are now tweeting bomb jokes to the airline. US
Airways, meanwhile, accidentally includes a lewd photo in a tweet.

A consultant's research shows that most companies have structured their loyalty
programs in a way that delivers the opposite of the relationship consumers want.

A webinar for rural businesses using social media marketing is scheduled for
later this week.

Management

For Passover, here's a look inside Streits Matzo factory. And here's a story
about the gefilte fish shortage.

Ideas

An app similar to Netflix or Spotify aims to provide unlimited coffee in New
York City for a $45-a-month subscription.

Sales and Marketing

How to use customer-relations software for your small business.

This infographic gives you insight about next year's consumer.

Start-Up

A well known venture capitalist firm upped its stake in a beauty start-up.

Payments

Here are some thoughts on how to use bitcoin, but Ramon Ray thinks the virtual
currency is not for small businesses.

Get ready to pay for stuff online with Facebook.

A biometric start-up demonstrates pay-by-palm technology.

Around the Country

Colorado's first marijuana-vending machine is ready to go.

A Seattle business owners makes the case against a $15 minimum wage.

Michigan business owners have an optimistic outlook.

A new competition wants to honor the top 100 mom-owned businesses in America.

Around the World

House prices in the United Kingdom rose to a record high in April.

Google

Google Glass becomes available to everyone and here's how to buy it.

Google acquires a drone company and weighs boosting encrypted sites in its
search algorithm.

Technology

Nearly one in five American adults say their info has been stolen online.

Staples introduces a 3-D printing program for small businesses.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Saving the Family Business
     ·    Today in Small Business: Yelp Has Been Struggling
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Cost of a Bad Hire
     ·    Today in Small Business: Gay Rights in the Workplace
     ·    Today in Small Business: Killing DailyCandy


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


