                             204 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 19, 2014 Tuesday 6:21 PM EST

Popular Science and 25 reasons to love drones

BYLINE: Kathy Lally

SECTION: Health; Pg. E02

LENGTH: 275 words


flight          Drone developers ready for takeoff             '25 Reasons to
Love Drones,' Popular Science

A team of reporters takes on drones in the August issue of Popular Science
magazine, pointing out that the Federal Aviation Administration is working on
regulations that would set off the widespread development and use of small,
unmanned aircraft. The FAA's progress has been slower than expected, but
eventually drones are expected to fill the skies.

"The truth is, we're witnessing a Kitty Hawk moment - the start of an era in
which drones will change the world and the way we live in it," the authors
write.

Today drones may be best known for their military use; the FAA has prohibited
most commercial flights until it can figure out how to make them safe. About 50
military drones have crashed on training flights in the United States since
2001, and about 24 civilian ones have been in accidents over the past year, The
Washington Post reported in June. Eventually drones will help expand Internet
access around the world, enable crop spraying that can improve farming and keep
tabs on the weather, the magazine says. They'll also be fun and useful, the
authors say, giving you the opportunity to take great photos from overhead and
speeding up deliveries to your doorstep.

Of course, drones have their drawbacks. They could be misused, and crowded skies
might mean more accidents - and what about privacy? "In a world where drone
operators will include police and paparazzi, it will be hard to escape from
probing eyes in the sky," Popular Science says.

- Kathy Lally

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


