                             2006 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                           November 26, 2013 Tuesday

Do We Need Art in Our Lives?

BYLINE: MICHAEL GONCHAR

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 367 words



HIGHLIGHT: Should viewing art be part of every child&#8217;s education? Does it
make us smarter or expose us to new ways of seeing the world?



Do we need art in our lives? Should viewing art be part of every child's
education? Does it make us smarter or expose us to new ways of seeing the world?



In the Opinion article "Art Makes You Smart," Brian Kisida, Jay P. Greene and
Daniel H. Bowen write about a recent study on the educational effects of
visiting an art museum.

For many education advocates, the arts are a panacea: They supposedly increase
test scores, generate social responsibility and turn around failing schools.
Most of the supporting evidence, though, does little more than establish
correlations between exposure to the arts and certain outcomes. Research that
demonstrates a causal relationship has been virtually nonexistent.

A few years ago, however, we had a rare opportunity to explore such
relationships when the Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art opened in
Bentonville, Ark. Through a large-scale, random-assignment study of school tours
to the museum, we were able to determine that strong causal relationships do in
fact exist between arts education and a range of desirable outcomes.

Students who, by lottery, were selected to visit the museum on a field trip
demonstrated stronger critical thinking skills, displayed higher levels of
social tolerance, exhibited greater historical empathy and developed a taste for
art museums and cultural institutions.

Students: Read the entire blog post, then tell us ...


     ·    Do we need art in our lives? Does viewing art matter? Does it make us
          smarter or expose us to new ways of seeing the world?
     ·    Do you ever visit art museums? Do you enjoy the experience? What kinds
          of art do you most enjoy looking at? Do you feel that art has changed
          you in any way?
     ·    Should viewing art be part of every child's education?  Explain.


Students 13 and older are invited to comment below. Please use only your first
name. For privacy policy reasons, we will not publish student comments that
include a last name.


     ·    Real vs. Virtual: Examining Works of Art Online
     ·    6 Q's About the News | New Exhibition Features the Paintings and
          Re-Paintings of Vincent Van Gogh
     ·    How Is Math Beautiful? Exploring by Creating
     ·    A Trove of Cubist Art Will Go to the Met
     ·    Common Core Practice | Drones, Stolen Art and Space Exploration


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


