                             2044 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Carpetbagger)

                           February 25, 2014 Tuesday

Starring a (Reluctant) Journalist

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 1125 words



HIGHLIGHT: The documentary &#8220;Dirty Wars&#8221; wasn&#8217;t initially
supposed to feature the reporter who was unearthing the information. But that
was one of many elements that shifted.


[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

In the race for the Oscar for best feature documentary, so much attention has
been paid to "The Act of Killing" and "The Square" - the first about mass
killings in Indonesia, the other about a popular uprising in Egypt - that a
third film about international politics has been overshadowed. But Richard
Rowley's "Dirty Wars" is even more global in its focus, examining clandestine
American military operations in places like Afghanistan, Yemen and Somalia.

"Dirty Wars" accompanies the investigative journalist Jeremy Scahill, author of
"Blackwater," from one conflict zone to another as he follows the trail of a
shadowy American unit called the Joint Special Operations Command, or JSOC. That
search takes him, and Mr. Rowley, to remote and dangerous corners of the war on
terror like Gardez, an Afghan village where the strike force mistakenly kills
members of a family celebrating a wedding, and al-Majalah, a Yemeni town
subjected to a cruise missile attack that kills 40 people, nearly all women or
children.

"We're not politicians or pundits, and we don't have a 10-point program for how
the global war on terror can be reformed," Mr. Rowley, 39, said last week when
asked about the film's objectives. "We're journalists, and we think our role is
to make these invisible wars visible, so that we can have the national debate
about this, about where we're going and who we are as a country, that we should
have had a decade ago."

Born in Michigan, Mr. Rowley studied at Harvard before going to Iraq, where he
often crossed paths with Mr. Scahill, who is also 39 and was a co-writer and
co-producer of "Dirty Wars." In an interview at the New York offices of the
film's distributor, IFC, Mr. Rowley talked about how the nature of their
partnership evolved during the making of the film. Here are edited excerpts:

Q.

Would it be accurate to say that you've made a kind of film noir documentary,
with an investigative reporter rather than a detective as your hero?

A.

Yeah, we wanted the film to unfold as a detective story, and to have all the
narrative propulsiveness of a good fiction film. On both sides of the
documentary-fiction line, people have been crowding towards that line. Fiction
dips into the language of documentary all the time, Paul Greengrass, for
example. But documentaries have a lot to learn from fiction storytelling too.

Q.

In  production notes, you say that the finished film "looks and feels nothing
like the film we set out to shoot." What do you mean by that?

A.

Initially, we thought of Jeremy more as a tour guide to this archipelago. I'd
been filming Jeremy, often against his will and without his knowledge, but it
wasn't until the last year, in post-production as we started to edit, that we
began to develop a narrative that talked about his interior evolution. We needed
to find an emotional arc that carved through all the chaos and violence.

Q.

And how did Jeremy feel about becoming a protagonist in the film?

A.

Oh man, he was incredibly resistant. As a journalist, you don't want to become
the story. It took a very long time to convince him that it was necessary. He
still cringes when he watches the film. But I told him that an American audience
needs to feel a moment of human connection with farmers in rural Afghanistan and
with Bedouins in Yemen living under the sound of drones, and that he is the
vehicle through which the audience can feel that.

Q.

And was Jeremy always envisioned as the narrator?

A.

No. We were originally trying to create it so there was no narration. I filmed
things like editorial meetings at The Nation, where he is pitching stories, so
the entire way the content was delivered was through them sitting around the
table, the pushback from the editors. But I think in a way reality television
has ruined that format for the American viewer. You've seen that scene in a
dozen different reality shows. It just didn't work.

Q.

We've been talking mostly about how the form of the film evolved. Did the
subject matter also change?

A.

When we first started, we didn't know this was going to be a large project at
all. I thought, "Let's make a video, this might turn into a magazine piece."
Then we thought it would just be a film about Afghanistan. I'd been embedded and
unembedded on the ground there for a while, and we were seeing that a covert war
was eclipsing the conventional war on the ground.

Q.

What made you shift your focus?

A.

Well, the raid in Gardez. Once we found out it was a JSOC mission, that opened
it up. This elite force that's supposed to operate only against strategic
targets internationally is kicking down the door against farmers who are
suspected of being mid-level Taliban commanders? What the hell is going on? So
we followed it around the world.  You know, on Sept. 11, JSOC numbered 1,000 or
1,200 guys. It's all classified, but the number may be 35,000 now. So a lot of
guys in these units feel like they are being used for a purpose they were never
created for.

Q.

I would imagine that given its subject matter, "Dirty Wars" must have seemed an
unlikely Oscar contender even to you.

A.

When we started, we thought we would be self-distributing this film, that we'd
rent out movie theaters and drive around the country in a mini-van, selling DVDs
out of the trunk, that we'd be showing the film in union halls and high schools.
Then we found ourselves at Sundance, selling the film at 5 in the morning, just
absolutely shocked that IFC promised to put the film in 50 theaters. So that was
amazing.

After we first found out that we had got into Sundance, the sheik in Yemen who
took us to investigate al-Majalah, he read it in his paper, and he called us up
to ask, "Does this mean Mr. Robert Redford is going to know about al-Majalah?"
It meant something to him to know that American audiences were going to see and
hear his story. As a journalist, I live in fear that I make all these promises
to people that I'm going to do what I can to make sure that people hear about
this. All of these steps along the way - Sundance, making the shortlist, a
nomination - meant that we were able to keep that promise.

Q.

So is an Oscar nomination enough?

A.

A nomination is more than we ever imagined would happen. But enough for what?
Enough to bring justice to the people who were killed? No, of course not. And
winning isn't either. But a nomination is so amazingly gratifying, both as a
filmmaker and someone who cares deeply about these places and these stories and
this war. We don't need to look any farther than that.


     ·    Political Conflict and Art Dominate Documentary Field
     ·    Video: The Ranch Where 'Star Wars' Exploded
     ·    The Academy and Diversity, by the Numbers
     ·    Clothes and Character: 'Her'
     ·    An Awards-Season Pall


LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


