                             2033 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                           January 29, 2014 Wednesday

Classical Playlist: Zuill Bailey, Natasha Paremski, Leon Kirchner and More

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 763 words



HIGHLIGHT: Times critics share what they&#8217;ve been listening to lately.


 BRITTEN: Cello Symphony and Cello Sonata
Zuill Bailey, cellist; North Carolina Symphony, Grant Llewellyn, conductor;
Natasha Paremski, pianist
 (Telarc)
Benjamin Britten composed several important works for his younger friend and
colleague the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich. The longest, most substantial score
was the Symphony for Cello and Orchestra (1963), a dark, wrenching and
overpowering piece that Britten once called "the finest thing I've written." An
exciting new recording - a live performance in vivid sound - couples the
brilliant, searching American cellist Zuill Bailey with the fine conductor Grant
Llewellyn and the North Carolina Symphony. The CD includes Mr. Bailey's gripping
account of Britten's 1961 Cello Sonata, with the pianist Natasha Paremski.
(Anthony Tommasini)

RADIGUE: 'Naldjorlak I II III'
Charles Curtis, cellist; Carol Robinson and Bruno Martinez, basset horn players
 (Shiiin)
Éliane Radigue, the French grande dame of the analog synthesizer, made a
decisive turn from electronic to acoustic music with her "Naldjorlak" pieces, a
great trilogy of solo, duo and trio drone works she wrote between 2005 and 2008,
played by their dedicatees on this new set. Yet her goal remained the same: to
parse the vast range of overtones and resonances latent in every humble note -
"a kind of wild and frail, versatile and volatile world of sounds," in Ms.
Radigue's own words. (Steve Smith)

HANDEL: 'Orlando'
Owen Willetts, Karina Gauvin, Allyson McHardy, Amanda Forsythe, Nathan Berg;
Pacific Baroque Orchestra, Alexander Weimann
 (ATMA)
The fact that this recording took place alongside performances at the 2012
Vancouver Early Music Festival may be one source of its theatrical vitality. The
Pacific Baroque Orchestra, which I hadn't been familiar with, plays with
irresistible energy and the singers are alert and eloquent. (Zachary Woolfe)

VERDI: 'Otello'
Giovanni Martinelli, Elisabeth Rethberg, Lawrence Tibbett, Metropolitan Opera
Orchestra and Chorus, conducted by Ettore Panizza
 (Naxos Historical)
After The New York Times published a recent roundup of classic Verdi recordings,
the San Francisco music critic and blogger Lisa Hirsch weighed in via Facebook
about its lack of prewar performances, citing a Metropolitan Opera account
featuring the great Italian tenor Giovanni Martinelli, the splendid soprano
Elisabeth Rethberg, the imposing baritone Lawrence Tibbett and the superb
conductor Ettore Panizza. Actually, a broadcast with precisely those artists is
included in the terrific "Verdi at the Met" box set that I recommended, but it's
from Feb. 24, 1940; the fresher, fierier version of Feb. 12, 1938, that Ms.
Hirsch urges, which I'll happily endorse, is unavailable in the United States
but not especially hard to track down. (Smith)

LEON KIRCHNER: 'Revelations'
Diverse works. Joel Fan, pianist; Diana Hoagland, soprano; and others, including
Leon Kirchner, pianist.
 (Verdant World Records)
"Revelations" is an apt title for this important recording of diverse works -
piano pieces, songs, choral works, most of them little known - by the American
master composer Leon Kirchner, who died at 90 in 2009. Kirchner's music draws
elements from his teacher Schoenberg, his mentor Stravinsky, and other
20th-century modernists, fashioned into his own rigorous, expressive voice. From
Kirchner's early Little Suite for piano (1949) to his last piece, "The
Forbidden" (2006), in its version as the Piano Sonata No. 3, the music is
alluring, pungent and intelligent, especially in these fine performances, most
of them featuring the impressive pianist Joel Fan. (Tommasini)

STREIFF: 'Vokal/Instrumental'
Anne Schmid, contralto; Katharina Suske, oboe d'amore player; Elisabeth Grimm,
violinist; Klavierduo Kordzaia-Blum and others
 (Edition Wandelweiser)
A gentle, owlish logic permeates this instantly appealing collection of brief
song cycles and instrumental pieces written from 1978 to 2011 by Peter Streiff,
a Swiss composer, cellist and pedagogue. You'll hear six violins in grouchy
polyphony; two pianos in mellow microtonal discord; coolly intoned poetic
miniatures; and chimerical soliloquies for archaic horns like the oboe d'amore
and aulos (a double-tubed pipe). (Smith)

SPOTIFY PLAYLIST



Tracks from the recordings discussed this week can be found on Spotify.


     ·    Minnesota Orchestra, Rebuilding After Lockout, Celebrates a Grammy Win
     ·    Thousands Pay Tribute to Abbado in Front of La Scala
     ·    Artistic Director Extends Contract for Mozart Week in Salzburg
     ·    Matsuev Postpones Carnegie Hall Concert
     ·    Vanska to Conduct Minnesota Orchestra Concerts


LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


