                             2036 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (After Deadline)

                            February 4, 2014 Tuesday

Close but Not Quite

SECTION: TIMESTOPICS

LENGTH: 1895 words



HIGHLIGHT: A slightly unusual word choice can enliven a story. But we should
make sure we know what our slightly unusual word actually means. Here are
several recent cases where we reached for a word, only to come up with the wrong
one or to use it incorrectly.


A slightly unusual word choice can enliven a story. But we should make sure we
know what our slightly unusual word actually means.

Here are several recent cases where we reached for a word, only to come up with
the wrong one or to use it incorrectly.

Mr. de Blasio offered a final imprecation to keep the faith as thin gray cirrus
clouds slid across New York, harbingers of an approaching winter storm.

Given how rarely this word is used, it's surprising how often it's misused. An
"imprecation" is a curse, clearly not what we meant here. Perhaps we wanted
"exhortation"?

Shows he deeply admired, like "The Sopranos," "The Wire" and "Deadwood," made
him realize that his hunger for fiction was being fed more fulsomely by
television than by the contemporary novels he was reading.

Another common misstep. In precise usage, "fulsome" does not mean merely "full"
or "abundant" but excessive, even offensively so.

DENVER - For exactly a year, Peyton Manning had lived with the duplicitous
burden of being the N.F.L.'s best quarterback and an underachieving one.

This one is puzzling. "Duplicitous" means deceitful, which doesn't seem to fit
here at all. Presumably we meant something like "double"?

At the cynosure of the celebration this week is Manning, and Broncos fans are
ready to canonize him.

Another Manning-related misstep. The unfamiliar "cynosure" doesn't mean
"center," as our phrasing here seems to suggest. Rather, it refers to the thing
at the center, the focus of attention. So if we were determined to use it, we
should have said Manning was the cynosure of the celebration, not that he was
"at the cynosure."

WASHINGTON - Senator Kay Hagan, a North Carolina Democrat who is up for
re-election, is admonishing Republicans back home as "irresponsible and
cold-hearted" for slashing unemployment benefits.

The primary meaning of "admonish" is to warn or caution someone about a fault or
risk. It can mean "reprove," but it is not used in the sense we tried here,
which calls for something more like "assail."


 When Spell-Check Can't Help

And here are the latest examples of homophone problems. Add them to your
must-check list.

Typically, a person pawning an item will have to leave it with the pawnshop and
make the monthly interest payments to keep the loan current. To get the item
back, the customer must pay the principle and all the interest. Customers
missing any interest payments could forfeit the item.

A distressingly common error. Principal, not principle.

[Online summary] A plan to donate land has met fierce opposition from some
residents loathe to give Washington a toehold in the area.

This was quickly fixed, but not before some readers spotted it and expressed
their chagrin. "Loathe" is a verb meaning hate; the adjective we wanted here is
"loath."

But by the time the base closed, in 1993, he had learned enough to martial
resistance to the Army's plan to demolish everything on it and sell the land.

As a reader suggested, perhaps the Army context confused us. "Martial" is an
adjective meaning related to war;  the verb we wanted is "marshal."


 In a Word

This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help
from colleagues and readers.

So when President François Hollande publicly sought suggestions about who to add
to the roster, it was not surprising that the debate quickly turned to
redressing the gender imbalance.

Make it "whom to add."

Her mother, Mary, talks about the deep organic grief that a parent feels when
they have lost one child and seen another badly injured, a pain felt in bones
and fiber.

The plural "they" doesn't work with the singular antecedent "parent." Make it
"that a parent feels after losing ..." or "that parents feel when they have lost
..."

Beyond the cameras' viewfinders, four crematorium ovens worked furiously,
reducing their inexhaustible supply of human fuel to ashes.

The Times's stylebook wants  "crematory."

Mr. Shahin learned of the complaint, left Egypt before his arrest and on
Wednesday he was in Washington for a conference at Georgetown University.

"Before his arrest" is illogical shorthand; there was no arrest. Perhaps "before
he could be arrested." Also, there is no subject expressed with "left," so we
should also omit "he" before "was" to keep it parallel.

But the winter storm that swept up the East Coast on Tuesday, just after the
long weekend for Martin Luther King's Birthday, seemed to catch many by
surprise, both for its timing and intensity.

Not parallel. Make it "both for its timing and for its intensity," or "for both
its timing and its intensity."

Police said Mr. Reeves sat down calmly, put the gun on his lap and stared ahead.

We should resist this journalese shorthand. Make it "The police said ..."

A Fort Worth hospital that kept a pregnant, brain-dead woman on life support for
two months, followed a judge's order on Sunday and removed her from the
machines, ending her family's legal fight to have her pronounced dead and to
challenge a Texas law that prohibits medical officials from cutting off life
support to a pregnant woman.

No comma is wanted after months. More broadly, the sentence is overstuffed and
cumbersome - which may have prompted the extraneous comma in a misguided effort
to tame the syntax.

But right now roughly half-a-million children are born each year as a result of
unintended pregnancies, often to unmarried women who are not on contraception or
are trying to use contraceptives like condoms or the pill.

No hyphens necessary.

If Mr. Obama ultimately withdrew all American troops from Afghanistan, the
C.I.A.'s drone bases in the country would have to be closed, according to
administration officials, because it could no longer be protected.

A careless oversight. Make it "they" to agree with "bases."

"They will hold it against Hollande," said Mr. Barbier, because, as with other
problems the president has encountered, "He reacts with a certain fatalism and
he never wants to take the initiative first."

The two parts of the quotation and the paraphrase in between all make up a
single sentence. So "he" should not be capitalized, since it does not begin a
new sentence.

The findings are laid out in a 238-page report, scheduled for release by
Thursday and obtained by The New York Times, that represent the first major
public statement by the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, which
Congress made an independent agency in 2007 and only recently became fully
operational.

"That" refers to "report," not to "findings," so make the verb "represents."

The accusations reach all the way to the former chief executive's office, whom
many of the whistle-blowers point to as driving the strategy.

The possessive "chief executive's" can't properly serve as the antecedent of
"whom." One fix: "to the office of the former chief executive, whom many of the
whistle-blowers point to ..." Or just forget about the office and say "to the
former chief executive, whom ..."

Virginia's new Democratic governor, Terry McAuliffe, has tread cautiously so far
in his politically divided state, announcing cabinet appointments with
bipartisan appeal.

We have a lot of trouble with this verb. The past tense of "tread" is "trod"
(unless you're in the water, in which case it's "treaded").

For the first time in 20 years, the venerable dictionary has a new chief editor,
Michael Proffitt, who assumes the responsibility of retaining the vaunted
traditions while ensuring relevance in an era of Googled definitions and text
talk.

A reader pointed out several avoidable clichés in this piece, including these as
well as "tweedy scholar" and "dusty tomes."

Mr. de Blasio sent back a calm, but firm message: Not good enough.

We need either two commas ("a calm, but firm, message"), or, better, none ("a
calm but firm message").

In all, the Yankees have committed $438 million to a quartet of stars in a rapid
attempt to re-establish themselves as one of the most formidable teams in
baseball.

The stylebook cautions against this journalistic mannerism of using "quartet" to
refer simply to a group of four. "Four" works just fine.

That's a pretty strong endorsement of decriminalization; but he went even
farther, saying the legalization experiments in Colorado and Washington should
"go forward because it's important for society not to have a situation in which
a large portion of people have at one time or another broken the law and only a
select few get punished."

Better to reserve "farther" for physical distances; use "further" in other
cases.

Category: Cause Célebré

We continue our dismal record in trying to use French or other foreign
expressions. It's "cause célèbre."

It is surely not the occasion it used to be, when "Idol" strode the television
world like a colossus.

As with French, if we're going to talk Shakespeare, we should get it right. The
phrase from "Julius Caesar" is to "bestride" the world - that is, to stand over
it - not to "stride."

On Tuesday, a jury seated in the federal courthouse in Lower Manhattan heard the
testimony of Dr. Ross, one of two doctors that prosecutors say Mr. Martoma
corrupted to engineer what the government has called the most lucrative insider
trading scheme in American history.

Make it "whom," not "that."

On the CBS program "60 Minutes," Bosch said he had administered Rodriguez with
injections of testosterone, human growth hormone and other performance
enhancers.

"Administered with injections" is not idiomatic. "Administer" is transitive in
this sense. Make it "administer injections," or simply "give injections" or
"inject."

Kim Little had not thought much about the tiny white spot on the side of her
cheek until a physician's assistant at her dermatologist's office warned that it
might be cancerous.

Physician assistant, not physician's assistant, according to the stylebook.

In all, less than 1.5 percent of the country's 1.9 million inmates are Jewish,
according to the Aleph Institute, a social services organization, and many do
not even request kosher meals.

Fewer, not less, since this refers to a number rather than an amount.

Expected to last only 50 years, the bridge's expiration date has passed, and its
condition makes more than a few commuters anxious.

Dangler. The bridge, not its expiration date, was expected to last 50 years.

With New Jersey lawmakers preparing to serve 20 subpoenas into the closing of
lanes leading to the George Washington Bridge, Gov. Chris Christie's
administration on Thursday announced the hiring of its own lawyer to assist in
an internal investigation.

There is an investigation "into" the closing, but you don't serve subpoenas
"into" anything. Rephrase.

As I was hooking up a new phone in my living room, the kind where you plug a
jack into the wall, I wondered why I was holding onto what had largely become a
relic.

The jack is the outlet in the wall; you put the plug into the jack.

The day's events underscored the sudden reversal of fortune for the governor,
who just more than a week ago was widely considered the leading candidate for
the Republican nomination for president in 2016.

"Just over" is idiomatic, not "just more than."

Nearly one in every 10 have made such arrangements.

Even though the overall sense is plural, the subject "one" requires a singular
verb: "Nearly one in every 10 has ..."


     ·    Can You Spell That, Please?
     ·    Billions and Billions
     ·    Danglers Ahead
     ·    Bright Passages
     ·    Getting Guns Right


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


