                             203 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 19, 2014 Tuesday 2:58 AM EST

Payouts after U.S. drone strike top $1 million

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 1135 words


The Yemeni government paid the families of those killed or injured in a U.S.
drone strike last year more than $1 million, according to documents that provide
new details on secret condolence payments seen as evidence that civilians with
no ties to al-Qaeda were among the casualties.

The documents, which are signed by Yemeni court officials and victims'
relatives, record payouts designed to quell anger over a U.S. strike that hit
vehicles in a wedding party and prompted a suspension of the U.S. military's
authority to carry out drone attacks on a dangerous al-Qaeda affiliate.

The records reveal payments that are many times larger than Yemeni officials
acknowledged after the strike. The $1 million-plus figure also exceeds the total
amount distributed by the U.S. military for errant strikes in Afghanistan over
an entire year.

[Documents: Final compensation to Yemeni families of those killed or injured in
drone attack]

The documents also contain other details, including the identities of those
killed or wounded in the Dec. 12 operation by the U.S. military's Joint Special
Operations Command (JSOC). Among them were a father and son with identification
cards listing them as associates of a Yemeni organization working to curb
Islamist militancy.

The father survived the strike, but his 29-year-old son was killed.

The records were provided to The Washington Post by Reprieve, a London-based
human rights organization that has worked in Yemen to document civilian
casualties of the U.S. drone campaign.

Kat Craig, a legal director for the group, said the records undermine U.S.
claims "that the victims of this drone attack were anything other than
civilians" and said the size of the payouts suggest that the Yemeni government -
among the poorest in the Middle East - is being reimbursed by the United States.

The records indicate that families of those killed were each given Yemeni
currency worth approximately $60,000, with smaller amounts paid to those who
sustained injuries or whose vehicles were damaged or destroyed. "In Yemen, that
is a life-changing amount of money," Craig said. "I can't believe those types of
figures would be initiated by the Yemeni government."

U.S. officials declined to comment on the Dec. 12 strike or any U.S. role in the
payments but acknowledged offering money to victims and their families when
civilians are injured or killed.

"Although we will not comment on specific cases, were non-combatants killed or
injured in a U.S. strike, condolence or other ex gratia payments, such as
solatia, may be available," Caitlin Hayden, spokeswoman for the National
Security Council at the White House, said in an e-mailed statement. She also
said the U.S. government "takes seriously all credible reports of non-combatant
deaths and injuries" and seeks "to ensure that we are taking the most effective
steps to minimize such risk to non-combatants."

Other U.S. officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity denied any U.S.
involvement in the payments.

Yemeni officials also declined to discuss the Dec. 12 strike or the payments,
but a Yemeni government official who viewed the Reprieve documents said they
appeared to be authentic.

The records make no mention of the United States or its use of armed drones to
carry out strikes against al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, as the group's
Yemen-based affiliate is known.

Nevertheless, the documents serve as the only public record associated with the
highly classified U.S. drone campaign in Yemen and offer new details of a strike
that remains the focus of debate within the United States.

U.S. military officials have defended the attack and indicated that a subsequent
investigation determined that al-Qaeda-linked operatives - and no civilians -
were killed.

But others in the Obama administration hold different views of the attack, which
contributed to concerns among senior lawmakers that the U.S. military is not
ready to assume exclusive control of the drone campaign.

U.S. officials have said that both the CIA and the National Counterterrorism
Center, which was directed by the White House to review the operation, concluded
that civilians were probably injured or killed.

The U.S. military has since abided by a Yemen-imposed suspension of JSOC's
authority to conduct strikes in the country. U.S. officials indicated that the
restriction is being reconsidered, but for now only the CIA has authority to
launch lethal strikes in Yemen.

Airstrikes on Saturday that reportedly killed five militants in Yemen's Shabwa
province were widely described as U.S. drone strikes in media accounts but were
carried out by Yemeni aircraft, officials said.

The documents obtained by Reprieve are essentially receipts collected by the
government for the cash it handed out.

Recipients acknowledge collecting their share of payments approved by Yemeni
President Abed Rabbo Mansur Hadi. They were also required to waive any rights to
make future financial claims.

"The case is closed" on the Dec. 12 strike in the central province of Bayda, the
documents declare in handwritten Arabic script, as well as "any consequences
arising from it." The records bear signatures of a district judge and are dated
from May of this year.

The pages spell out a range of payments. Families of the 12 killed in the attack
were entitled to 12.7 million riyals apiece, or about $60,000. Fifteen who were
wounded could collect about $20,000, with sums earmarked for damage to vehicles
and other property.

Overall, the documents account for payouts totaling $809,000 to victims and
their families and refer to separate but related payments exceeding $265,000.
The sums go far beyond the disbursements of $110,000 in cash and 101 rifles
acknowledged by Yemeni officials last year.

Gregory Johnsen, a Yemen expert who recently published a detailed investigation
of the strike and payments to victims, said it was extremely unlikely that
cash-starved Yemen would make such large payments on its own.

Even if Yemen was not directly reimbursed by the United States, it collects
hundreds of millions of dollars in U.S. aid. In December, the Pentagon indicated
that it planned to spend $64 million in fiscal 2014 for "counterterrorism
security assistance."

The U.S. military has in recent years made hundreds of "solatia" payments to
compensate victims for errant strikes in war zones, but the payments rarely
exceed $5,000 per recipient. A 2013 report by ProPublica cited information from
the Pentagon indicating that U.S. forces made 219 payments totaling $891,000 in
2012 in Afghanistan.

The documents also put into question whether the Dec. 12 strike met new criteria
imposed by President Obama last year. In a May 2013 speech, Obama said strikes
were allowed only in cases when there was "near certainty that no civilians will
be killed or injured."

greg.miller@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


