                             2002 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                          November 20, 2013 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: 577 Million Vacation Days

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 655 words



HIGHLIGHT: The owner of a restaurant chain is sentenced to prison for tax
evasion. How a small-business exemption could undermine an online sales tax. Are
we in a tech bubble?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    Chief information officers say tech hiring is looking grim for 2014.
     ·    Construction employers added 11,000 jobs in October.
     ·    Think we're in a tech bubble? T. Trent Gegax says today's alleged
          bubble is nothing like 1999's.
     ·    In case you missed Mr. Lincoln's address in Gettysburg, here's his
          PowerPoint.


Retail


     ·    Wells Fargo predicts that Santa will be sticking to a budget this
          year, forecasting that shoppers will increase their spending by 3.7
          percent, which would be the slowest growth rate since 2009.
     ·    Like major retailers, small-business owners are preparing for the
          holiday rush even earlier this year, according to a new survey, with
          more than a third beginning promotions on or before Thanksgiving Day.
     ·    How a small-business exemption could undermine an online sales tax.


Employees


     ·    A new Expedia survey finds Americans left an average of four vacation
          days on the table in the last year, twice as many as the previous
          year. That's 577,212,000 vacation days not taken.
     ·    Here's why Boeing is "going to war" with its employees.
     ·    In Western Europe, the average jobless rate is twice as high in
          countries with a minimum wage as in those with no minimum, but a
          Michigan baker says a higher minimum wage means more money for
          everyone.
     ·    Square designed its new offices to work like a city.


Start-Up


     ·    The accelerator trend is finally slowing down.


Management


     ·    Instead of checking your email, you could spend five minutes doing
          something productive.


Social Media


     ·    Twitter removes the option that lets anyone direct-message anyone.
     ·    Facebook expands its definition of small-business pages and says it
          now has 25 million of them.
     ·    This video shows how people react when they learn how much of their
          personal information can be found on social media.
     ·    Selfie beats bitcoins, lab meat, twerking and a tiny mammal for word
          of the year.


Finance


     ·    A start-up offering an online marketing platform for small businesses
          raises $10 million.
     ·    Here are the 12 questions you are too embarrassed to ask about
          Bitcoin.
     ·    A company that offers working capital to online merchants on Etsy,
          eBay and Amazon brings its lending service to mobile.


Around the World


     ·    Small businesses battle over-regulation (in Europe).
     ·    Here's why Finland is a great place to run a start-up.
     ·    This Brazilian mobile company's user base grew 1,567 percent in five
          years.
     ·    A blind hairdresser in Britain has no trouble attracting customers.


Around the Country


     ·    Mayors gather to hear experts and share insights on how to advance
          entrepreneurship in their cities, and you can watch.


Health Care


     ·    HealthCare.gov is now working for 90 percent of the people who gave
          the site another shot.
     ·    Marc A. Thiessen is warning of an "Obamacare" time bomb: "But let's
          say, by some miracle, Obama's plan does work, and many in the
          individual market now losing their plans get to keep them for a year.
          That just means they will start getting cancellation letters 90 days
          before the end of the year. In October 2014. One month before the
          midterm elections."
     ·    The deputy chief information officer of the Centers for Medicare &
          Medicaid Services said yesterday that more than 30 percent of the IT
          systems needed to support the federal exchange remain to be built.


Taxes


     ·    The co-owner of a popular restaurant chain known for cheap hamburgers,
          thick milkshakes, and 1950s decor, was sentenced to 15 months in
          prison for his role in a tax-evasion scheme that went on for more than
          20 years.


Technology


     ·    A self-healing electrode coating could lead to longer-lasting
          batteries.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: A $10 Minimum Wage?
     ·    Today in Small Business: Amazon's Trojan Rabbit
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Business Lessons of Walter White
     ·    Today in Small Business: The 'Crabfries' Lawsuit


LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


