                             2059 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday

New York Today: Weathering It

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 626 words



HIGHLIGHT: What you need to know for Wednesday: High winds whip the city, the
mayor supports a taxi surcharge, and a shoe store robber returns to the scene of
the crime.


 Good Wednesday morning to you. There's a little snow out there.

And a lot of wind.

We used to write about other things.

Then winter came along.

Since Thanksgiving, we have been compelled to lead with the weather on roughly
40 days.

You might remember "'Life Threatening Windchill,'""Snowstorm,""Big Snowstorm,"
and "Snowstorm No. 14."

Then there was "Deep Freeze,""Frozen Commute,""It's Freezing (Déjà Vu)."

It has a biblical ring to it, 40 days, and that's where we hope to stop.

It's spring, after all.

But alas, once more, we must warn you:

We were expecting to wake to more snow today, but instead we got a wind
advisory.

Winds will blow till late today, with gusts of up to 50 miles an hour.

The mercury may creep up to 35 degrees, but don't be fooled.

It will feel much, much colder because of the wind.

"Like it's in the teens all day," said David Stark, a meteorologist at the
National Weather Service.

And Thursday looks passive aggressive: sunny but actually pretty brutal, in the
20s.

You know the type.

Here's what else you need to know.

COMMUTE

Subways: Check latest status.

Rails: Check L.I.R.R., Metro-North or N.J. Transit status.

Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking is  in effect  all week.

COMING UP TODAY

City Council members and environmental advocates rally behind a proposed bill to
reduce plastic bag use. City Hall Steps. 11 a.m.

Latino groups announce a nationwide campaign to "hold Obama accountable for
record high deportations" outside the Department of Homeland Security offices in
Lower Manhattan. 11 a.m.

Former city Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly receives the Anti-Defamation
League's "Americanism Award" at the League's headquarters in Murray Hill. 11:30
a.m.

Learn about two new laws, Paid Sick Days and the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act,
from  experts at the Community Service Society near Union Square. 10 a.m. [Free,
R.S.V.P.]

The author Makenzie Funk talks about her book, "Windfall: The Booming Business
of Global Warming," at the Institute for Public Knowledge in Cooper Square. 6
p.m. [Free]

Academics discuss "Drones and the Obama Administration," at Columbia. 6:15 p.m.
[Free]

Phew. Now for some fun: A lecture on the few surviving wooden houses of
Greenwich Village. 6:30 p.m. [Free, R.S.V.P.] ...

... A burlesque tribute to "Star Trek" at the Slipper Room on the Lower East
Side. 7 p.m. [$10] ...

...And "Running Late with Scott Rogowsky: Brooklyn's Live Late Night Comedy Talk
Show," featuring the hip-hop artist Pharoah Monch and Jessica Williams from "The
Daily Show," at Littlefield in Brooklyn. 7:30. [$8 and up]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

IN THE NEWS

Mayor Bill De Blasio proposed a 30 cent taxi surcharge to fund accessible cabs.
[]

Two CNN producers were arrested for trespassing at One World Trade Center;
unlike a group of parachutists and a teenager, who eluded security after they
entered the building. [New York Times]

Mayor De Blasio clashed with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo again - this time over
homelessness. [New York Times]

A New Jersey man released from prison returned to the scene of his crime - a
shoe store. [Daily News]

A trove of maritime memorabilia, including items from The Titanic, was allegedly
stolen from the aging founder of the Seaport Museum. [NY Post]

Joseph Burgess contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning.  You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


