                             2022 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                            December 20, 2013 Friday

Chinese Navy to Aid U.S. Ship Destroying Syrian Chemical Weapons

BYLINE: JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 558 words



HIGHLIGHT: Amid continuing territorial tensions in the South China Sea, analysts
are hailing China&#8217;s decision to aid an American ship tasked with
destroying chemical weapons from Syria as a gesture of cooperation.


The same day that Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel of the United States blasted the
actions of a Chinese ship in the South China Sea as "irresponsible," China
announced that it would deploy a military ship to work with an American vessel
involved in the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons.

The willingness of China to work with the United States Navy was not intended as
amends for the near collision on Dec. 5 between the American guided-missile
cruiser, the Cowpens, and a Chinese ship that suddenly cut across its bow.

But the declaration by China's Foreign Ministry on Thursday that one of its navy
ships would protect the American ship, the Cape Ray, which is being fitted with
mobile laboratories for destroying the chemical weapons at sea, was widely seen
as a desire by China to cooperate with the United States Navy in an important
international operation.

Both navies are watching each other with mounting rivalry, and wariness. The
Chinese Navy is showing more confidence in certain areas, particularly after
launching more than a dozen new modern frigates with strong air defense
capabilities.

But that does not preclude a desire by China to learn from the United States
Navy, the world's most powerful, said Lyle J. Goldstein, a professor at the
China Maritime Studies Institute at the United States Naval War College in Rhode
Island.

"This is a very positive and welcome signal, especially coming on the heels of
the latest naval incident in the South China Sea," Mr. Goldstein said of the
offer that the People's Liberation Army Navy work with the Americans.
"Undoubtedly the PLA Navy is eager to work with the U.S. Navy in actual
operations,"

The Foreign Ministry did not specify what kind of ship China would send to the
operation being overseen by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the intergovernmental organization based in The Hague that verifies
compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. That group has said the
American vessel, the Cape Ray, will receive the chemical weapons from Syria at
an unnamed port in Italy from Danish and Norwegian ships.

It was most likely that one of the new dozen or so Chinese frigates known as the
Jiangkai-II would be dispatched for the operation, Mr. Goldstein said. "The PLA
Navy has been building these frigates at a rapid clip for several years now," he
said.

They have been used for anti-piracy duty in the Gulf of Aden, and one was
deployed off the coast of Libya in early 2011 to provide protection for ships
evacuating Chinese citizens, he said. The frigates are equipped with strong
air-defense capabilities. They also have anti-ship missiles, as well as
anti-submarine capabilities, including a helicopter.

There may be another benefit to China for participating in the destruction of
Syria's chemical weapons:

Analysts have noted for some time the disparity between China's growing energy
interests in the Middle East and its modest diplomacy in the region. "This
initiative may represent an attempt by Beijing to start to rectify this
perceived imbalance," Mr. Goldstein said.


     ·    Chinese Defense Ministry Issues Statement Playing Down Near Collision
          at Sea
     ·    Chinese Account Says U.S. Ship Was Warned Away From Aircraft Carrier
     ·    Stumbling Block for Turkey's Missile Deal With China
     ·    U.S. B-52 Flight Prompts Indignant Reaction in China
     ·    New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video


LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


