                             2034 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            January 31, 2014 Friday

Daily Report: GoPro, Known for Extreme Videos, Aims to be a Media Company

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 240 words



HIGHLIGHT: GoPro, the video camera maker known for its users&#8217;
adrenaline-soaked exploits, has its sights set on expanding its brand to media.



Inside the headquarters of GoPro, the video camera maker, there is a racing car,
a collection of motorcycles and drones outfitted with the company's products.
All of them, Nick Wingfield reports, are reminders of the niche that GoPro has
carved out as the camera of choice for recording skiing, surfing and other
experiences too gnarly for dainty smartphones.

For its next act, GoPro wants to also be known as a media company.

It is not a terribly far stretch. In the last decade, GoPro has built a large
and passionate following on YouTube and other Internet sites with its
adrenaline-soaked and professionally made videos of surfers riding through
barrels of waves and skiers parachuting off snow-covered cliffs. Customers have
independently uploaded millions of their own videos, too. And many happily label
the clips with the term GoPro, which has become a sort of shorthand for action
shots.

"I think GoPro is producing some of the best short-form content out there
today," said Nicholas Woodman, the company's founder and chief executive, who
owns and has piloted the racing car and motorcycles now parked in the building
here. "There's a phenomenal opportunity for us to leverage GoPro as a media
brand." Read more »


     ·    A Small, Versatile Way to Record Your Life
     ·    Disruptions: A Tiny Camera for the Stratosphere
     ·    Mobile Phones Eliminate Single-Serving Devices
     ·    Daily Report: Webcams Become Small, Cheap and All-Seeing
     ·    When the Future Isn't a Keyboard


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


