                             2069 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                              April 4, 2014 Friday

Should the United States Care That It's Not No. 1?

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 564 words



HIGHLIGHT: Do you think measures like the Social Progress Index have any
validity? Do they say something accurate about quality of life in the United
States and other nations?


[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

The United States has the most powerful military and the biggest economy in the
world.  Our movies and music are consumed across the globe. But at least
according to one measure, the Social Progress Index, we come in 16th.

Should the United States care that it's not No. 1 in social progress - based on
measures like health, ecosystem sustainability, basic education and personal
safety?


In this Opinion piece at the top of the Times most-emailed list, the columnist
Nicholas Kristof writes:

We in the United States grow up celebrating ourselves as the world's most
powerful nation, the world's richest nation, the world's freest and most blessed
nation.

Sure, technically Norwegians may be wealthier per capita, and the Japanese may
live longer, but the world watches the N.B.A., melts at Katy Perry, uses iPhones
to post on Facebook, trembles at our aircraft carriers, and blames the C.I.A.
for everything. We're No. 1!

In some ways we indisputably are, but a major new ranking of livability in 132
countries puts the United States in a sobering 16th place. We underperform
because our economic and military strengths don't translate into well-being for
the average citizen.

In the Social Progress Index, the United States excels in access to advanced
education but ranks 70th in health, 69th in ecosystem sustainability, 39th in
basic education, 34th in access to water and sanitation and 31st in personal
safety. Even in access to cellphones and the Internet, the United States ranks a
disappointing 23rd, partly because one American in five lacks Internet access.

"It's astonishing that for a country that has Silicon Valley, lack of access to
information is a red flag," notes Michael Green, executive director of the
Social Progress Imperative, which oversees the index. The United States has done
better at investing in drones than in children, and cuts in social services
could fray the social fabric further.

This Social Progress Index ranks New Zealand No. 1, followed by Switzerland,
Iceland and the Netherlands. All are somewhat poorer than America per capita,
yet they appear to do a better job of meeting the needs of their people.

Students: Read the entire article, then tell us ...

- Should the United States care that it's not No. 1 in overall social progress -
based on measures like health, basic education and personal safety?

- Do you think measures like the Social Progress Index have any validity? Do
they say something accurate about quality of life in the United States and other
nations? Or, are they not as useful as more traditional measures like gross
domestic product

- Do you think it's fair to compare a country as large and diverse as the United
States with much smaller countries like New Zealand and Switzerland?

- One of the things that the Social Progress Index emphasizes is access. So
while the United States has some of the best schools and hospitals in the world,
for example, not every American has access to these institutions.  How important
is access?

Students 13 and older are invited to comment below. Please use only your first
name. For privacy policy reasons, we will not publish student comments that
include a last name.


     ·    Is America a Great Country?
     ·    Learning About U.S. Immigration With The New York Times
     ·    Are You Optimistic About the Future of Your Country?
     ·    It's a Beautiful Idea: Considering America's Role in the World


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


