                             2061 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 28, 2014 Friday

Google Flu Trends: The Limits of Big Data

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 972 words



HIGHLIGHT: Two recent research papers, examining Google Flu Trends, offer a
critique of big-data analysis.


Google Flu Trends, once a poster child for the power of big-data analysis, seems
to be under attack.

This month, in a Science magazine article, four quantitatively adept social
scientists reported that Google's flu-tracking service not only wildly
overestimated the number of flu cases in the United States in the 2012-13 flu
season - a well-known miss - but has also consistently overshot in the last few
years. Google Flu Trends' estimate for the 2011-12 flu season was more than 50
percent higher than the cases reported by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. And, they wrote, for a period of more than two years ending in
September 2013, the Google estimates were high in 100 out of 108 weeks.

The article, "The Parable of Google Flu: Traps in Big Data Analysis," declared
that Google was guilty of "big data hubris," which the authors defined as the
implicit assumption that big data sets trump traditional data collection and
analysis. And they were skeptical of Google Flu Trends' algorithmic smarts. "The
comparative value of the algorithm as a stand-alone flu monitor is
questionable," they wrote.

A follow-up analysis by the four authors tracked Google Flu Trends' performance
in the just-concluded 2013-14 flu season, after Google updated its algorithm
last October. There was some improvement, but the service still overshot by
about 30 percent, the authors wrote, in their paper, posted online.

The authors' analysis found that simply using the recent trend of C.D.C. reports
from doctors on influenza-like illness, which lag by two weeks, would have been
a more accurate predictor than Google Flu Trends.

The authors might appear to be unlikely critics of a tool like Google Flu
Trends. "We're fans of big data and the use of data science," said Alessandro
Vespignani, a professor at Northeastern University. David Lazer is a professor
at Northeastern, and Ryan Kennedy, an assistant professor at the University of
Houston, has a yearlong research fellowship in computational social science at
Northeastern. They have affiliate links with Harvard University's Institute for
Quantitative Social Science, whose director, Gary King, is the fourth author.

Their technical criticism of Google Flu Trends is that it is not using a broader
array of data analysis tools. Indeed, their analysis shows that combining Google
Flu Trends with C.D.C. data, and applying a few tweaking techniques, works best.
"The mash-up is the way to go," Mr. Lazer said.

Matt Mohebbi, co-inventor of Google Flu Trends, agrees. Much of the current
criticism, in his view, misses the point that the service was always intended as
a "complementary signal" rather than a stand-alone forecasting tool.

"I think we were consistent in the way we communicated that from the outset,"
Mr. Mohebbi said. He left Google in 2013 and is a co-founder ofIodine, a
start-up that will use data science for a consumer health service, to provide
personalized advice on medications.

Yet respected authors and academics often pointed to Google Flu Trends as proof
of the triumph of the big data approach. Tracking 45 flu-related search terms
over billions of searches, monitoring trends and making correlations would win
out. Google could tap the "collective intelligence" of society in real time,
free of the human bias and hypotheses of traditional methods.

The authors of the recent articles were partly motivated by the desire to
puncture that notion. "Google Flu Trends became this paradigm that you just look
at all this data, make correlations, and we don't need anything else," Mr.
Vespignani said.

Google Flu Trends was introduced in the fall of 2008, having started long before
as a Google 20 percent project begun by Mr. Mohebbi and Jeremy Ginsberg. In an
article in Nature in 2009, the two were among the co-authors who explained
Google Flu Trends. "This system," they wrote, "is not designed to be a
replacement for traditional surveillance networks or supplant the need for
laboratory-based diagnoses and surveillance."

What it could do, they wrote, is give an early-warning signal of flu outbreaks
one to two weeks ahead of the C.D.C. surveillance reports. In the 2009 Nature
paper, they showed that it had given that advance indication in the 2007-08 flu
season - and that it would again during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak.

"It gives you that near real-time signal," Mr. Mohebbi said, "and it has proven
that it does add value."

"We're only at the beginning of what's possible with this big-data-style
analysis," he added. "And big data and small data are both very important."

In a statement, a representative for Google Flu Trends, which now monitors 29
countries, said the service was reviewed every year, with improvements in mind.
"We welcome feedback on how we can refine Flu Trends to help estimate flu levels
and complement existing surveillance systems."

The two recent papers by the computational social scientists are part analysis
and part commentary. Mr. King said one of the issues raised is the data reversal
that has occurred in science. "It used to be that academics has way more data
than companies," he said. "But that has flipped now."

In the paper, the authors wrote of the need for researchers to be able
nonetheless to study the "evolution of sociotechnical systems" - and the work of
data-driven algorithms of private companies with far-reaching influence. That
includes a field like public health and the proprietary software engine beneath
Google Flu Trends.

"The algorithms underlying Google, Twitter and Facebook," they wrote, "help
determine what we find out about our health, politics and friends."


     ·    The Tech Bubble's Silver Lining: Cheap Services for Everyone
     ·    Government Data Requests Fall at Yahoo But Rise at Google
     ·    Google's Bigger, Cheaper Cloud
     ·    Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan
     ·    Google Continues With Its Project Ara Modular Smartphone Effort


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


