                             2065 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: What to Pay Yourself

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 446 words



HIGHLIGHT: What you are doing wrong on Facebook. Crowdfunding&#8217;s next
frontier. And what happens to your company&#8217;s online accounts when the one
person with access dies?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The trade gap is widening.

Recent data seem to show disturbing trends in small-business hiring.

The Department of Energy reports refineries are running at almost full capacity.

Factory orders rebounded 1.6 percent in February.

Management

A $25 million man shares some lessons about patience.

Here is some advice on what you should be paying yourself.

And here are eight tips for improving your company culture.

Start Up

 Lyft, a competitor to the car service Uber, raises $250 million.

This start-up's website functions as a Yelp for baby products.

Finance

Someone else's debt could ruin your credit rating.

Crowdfunding's next frontier could be real estate.

Retail

Here are 17 reasons Wegmans may be America's best grocery store.

Employees

The push for a higher minimum wage is moving to the states.

Online

WhatsApp says it processed a record 64 billion messages in a single day
recently.

Ever wonder what happens to your company's online accounts when the one person
with access dies?

Social Media

A digital marketer explains what you're doing wrong on Facebook.

The monthly cost of an Instagram ad campaign can approach $1 million.

An infographic shows how men and women use social media and smartphones
differently.

LinkedIn is looking for smart marketers to use its platform in innovative ways.

Marketing

That "selfie" that Big Papi took with President Obama? He got paid. A lot.

Around the Country

These are the best (and worst) metro areas for small businesses.

Atlanta tops the list of cities with urban sprawl.

The retired operator of a New York deli writes a book about the business.

A San Antonio store owner sells Fiesta wreaths to build neighborhood fences.

A local TV station goes undercover to investigate a "nude cleaning service."

Around the World

Lufthansa is grounded by a pilot strike.

Russia leads a shopping mall resurgence across Europe

Washington

A Supreme Court decision will allow wealthy donors more freedom to influence
elections.

Technology

Microsoft introduces Cortana, lets developers write apps for PCs, tablets, and
phones and previews its new touch-based Office apps for Windows devices.

Amazonannounces FireTV.

A shipping firm is the first to use drones to navigate artic ice.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    The Founder of Reputation.com Answers Reader Questions
     ·    How Can Jimmy Beans Wool Get Its Growth Back on Track?
     ·    Today in Small Business: It's Never Too Late to Start Up
     ·    No More Ms. Nice Guy


LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


