                             2008 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday

Disruptions: Calling From the Clouds

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 946 words



HIGHLIGHT: It may be difficult for passengers on flights to get what many want
&#8212; access to cellular data &#8212; without getting what many don&#8217;t
want &#8212; the occasional Chatty Cathy in 21B.


You know there is trouble when Tony Robbins, the tirelessly upbeat Mr.
Motivation, is sulking.

But there he was taking to Twitter, lamenting the prospect of yet another
torment in the hell of modern air travel: people talking on cellphones. The
Federal Communications Commission is considering letting passengers use their
phones while flying, and Mr. Robbins - and a lot of other people - are not
happy.

"Do we really need this!?" Mr. Robbins, the Oprah of motivational speaking,
wrote in response to the news.

Others were more blunt. My inbox was flooded with angry messages. "I already
hate my fellow passengers - this would only make it worse," one reader wrote. A
petition was created on the White House website to rally the quiet-cabin camp.

The reaction was the opposite of the mostly celebratory, Twitter-tape parade
that marched through social media last month when the Federal Aviation
Administration finally relented and let passengers read on their devices, surf
the web and check emails during takeoff and landing. For many, the takeaway
seems to be this: Let the guy squeezed next to me read quietly on a Kindle? No
problem. Let him drone away in my ear? No way.

So why is the F.C.C. proposing something many people don't seem to want? The
agency is, in fact, trying to give us what we want: access to data while flying.
One byproduct, however, is that people would, or could, also be able to make
calls. But it may be difficult for people to get what many want - access to
cellular data on flights - without getting what many don't want - the occasional
Chatty Cathy in 21B.

It isn't a done deal. The F.C.C. has not issued a formal ruling, and commission
officials declined to comment for this article. But an earlier statement from
the F.C.C.'s chairman, Tom Wheeler, echoed the concerns that people like Mr.
Robbins are voicing.

"We understand that many passengers would prefer that voice calls not be made on
airplanes. I feel that way myself," Mr. Wheeler said. "Ultimately, if the F.C.C.
adopts the proposal in the coming months, it will be airlines' decisions, in
consultation with their customers, as to whether to permit voice calls while
airborne."

The F.C.C. provided me with documents and filings that help explain how this
issue has evolved. The rules about using cellphones on planes date to the early
'90s, when phones were the size of milk cartons. Those devices, coupled with the
weak electrical insulation in aircrafts, created crackly interference for
pilots, so they were quickly banned. In 2007, the F.C.C. opened an internal
review about whether to lift the rules, but safety concerns were still an issue,
and the proposal was shelved.

Now, as the F.A.A.'s revision of its rules on using devices during takeoff and
landing illustrate, today's gadgets and planes are made for each other. In many
respects, the F.C.C. is looking out for consumers, trying to give people the
opportunity to connect to data on a cellphone rather than pay for costly - and
often laboriously slow - Wi-Fi available on airplanes.

As is often the case with technology, the United States is trailing other parts
of the world on this issue. The European Union began enabling airlines to permit
cellphone and data use in 2008. As will be the case in the United States if the
rules change, the European Union left it to airlines to choose which components
of a cell service to make active during flights.

In Europe, Virgin Atlantic allows unlimited data connections, but it lets only
six people talk on a cellphone at once. Some Lufthansa flights allow data
connections through a cellphone, but no phone calls. Emirates lets an unlimited
number of passengers talk on their phones - though few apparently do. How is it
working so far? A study by the F.A.A. in 2012 found no reports "of air rage or
flight attendant interference related to passengers using cellphones on
aircraft" in other countries.

The change here, if it comes, will not happen overnight. There's a long process
to go through first.

"Once the F.C.C. issues its opinion, it would be up to the F.A.A., the airlines,
or both, to decide whether to roll out services," said Angela Giancarlo, a
lawyer at Mayer Brown and a former F.C.C. official. Then, as in Europe, the
airlines would be able to decide whether to allow data services, voice services,
neither or both. Most important, pilots and stewards would have a "kill switch,"
so if someone is talking too much, his or her phone could be shut off from the
cockpit.

"There is no quiet car at 30,000 feet," Senator Edward J. Markey, a
Massachusetts Democrat and member of the Senate Commerce, Science and
Transportation Committee, wrote in an email. "Staying connected and entertained
by checking email and playing a game on your phone is one thing, but loud,
intrusive phone calls would strain the social compact we all enter into when we
board a plane."

So what happens next? On Dec. 12, the F.C.C. proposal will be presented to its
commissioners. If approved, it will then be put online for a public comment.
That's when everyone - airlines and passengers alike - can voice their opinions.

But, travelers, think carefully. Say no to cellphone use, and you lose that data
connection on your iPad and smartphone at 30,000 feet. And that is what many of
you been asking for all along. You might have to sit next to Chatty Cathy. But
at least you will be able to tweet about it.

Email: bilton@nytimes.com


     ·    The F.C.C. Puts Onus on Airlines for In-Flight Calls
     ·    Answers to Readers' Questions About Electronics on Planes
     ·    T-Mobile to Pay $308 Million for More Spectrum
     ·    It's Called 'Airplane Mode' for a Reason
     ·    Disruptions: How the F.A.A., Finally, Caught Up to an Always-On
          Society


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


