                             2055 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            March 20, 2014 Thursday

Facebook's Hack, a Language of Tech Competition

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 564 words



HIGHLIGHT: The world&#8217;s biggest social network introduced on Thursday a new
open-source software language that is focused on helping to build interactive
web pages. Besides winning geek credibility, it&#8217;s the latest version of a
decades-old effort in tech to win over as many developers as possible.


Over decades of advanced technology, there has been one constant: It's always
about the developers. Facebook showed it again on Thursday, with the
announcement that it has created a new software language, called Hack.

Hack is designed to enable software developers to program interactive web pages
faster and more effectively by avoiding system-crashing errors. Facebook is
releasing it as an open-source language, not just to encourage widespread use
but to quickly spot errors in Hack itself, and to build upon the language to
give it more strength and features.

With the new language, Facebook gets points in that precious tech commodity,
"thought leadership."

In addition to making the world a better place with another software language,
Facebook has a corporate interest in releasing Hack. Developers who work in one
company's framework tend to go along with the other goals of that company, even
if its framework is open source. Many interactive websites already link to
Facebook for things like customer sign-ups. With Hack, it seems likely that even
more of them will.

It's a move straight out of the Microsoft tech leadership playbook.

Microsoft became the dominant software company for several decades in part by
building a widely adopted operating system and software applications like
Office. Just as important, however, was winning over the independent developers
who built products for the Windows world.

When many more products run on Windows than any other operating system, Windows
is more attractive. It became something of a mantra to Steve Ballmer, the
company's former chief executive, leading to more than a couple of great
parodies.

Google did much the same thing, in a different context. Google saw opportunities
in the web to encourage developers, since building out the web made its core
search product more effective, and it could offer products for the web that
reinforced the use of Google.

In that sense, writing blog posts on Blogger (purchased by Google in 2003) was a
form of development for Google. So was annotating Google Maps, or building
software that used the maps. Even using AdSense, the ad-generating system for
web pages outside Google, was in a sense like using a development tool.

Facebook's outreach to developers, initially in things like games connected to
the social network, is increasingly open source, in areas like Hack and the Open
Compute Project, an effort to make computer data center equipment through
collective work.

Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's chief executive, has been clear about the reasons
for this: He's come to the business later than Google or Microsoft, so opening
projects to many developers is a strategic effort to catch up.

None of this is meant to knock Hack, or Facebook. There are already hundreds of
programming languages, so one more certainly can't hurt. It's just useful to
remember that the "disruptive" giants of tech also have unbreakable business
traditions.

This particular tradition is actually somewhat nice: It has made a lot of small
businesses rich, and has provided lots of employment for developers inside
corporations.


     ·    Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan
     ·    As Facebook Turns 10, Zuckerberg Wants to Change How Tech Industry
          Works
     ·    Mark Zuckerberg Starts Spending His Billion-Dollar Charitable Fund
     ·    Daily Report: Facebook Leads Effort to Widen the Net
     ·    Facebook's Zuckerberg Complains to Obama Over Government Spying


LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


