                             201 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 28, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

Pakistani political party names CIA station chief

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 566 words


A Pakistani political party revealed on Wednesday what it said was the name of
the CIA's highest-ranking officer in the country in protest of a CIA drone
strike last week that killed as many as six people and prompted allegations that
the agency had attacked a religious school.

The disclosure follows two previous instances in which the identity of a CIA
station chief in Islamabad has been exposed, underscoring the constant friction
that has come to characterize the two countries' counterterrorism partnership.

The purported name of the current station chief was included in a letter urging
Pakistani police in the district where the latest drone strike occurred to
pursue charges against CIA officers in the country as well as the agency's
director, John Brennan.

The letter accuses the agency of "committing murder and waging war against
Pakistan," and of carrying out a drone attack in the town of Tal that "killed
and injured a large number of those present including children."

The letter was signed by a senior official of the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, the
leading political party in the nation's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. As part of
its opposition to U.S. drone strikes, the party also is involved in an effort to
block NATO supply routes through Khyber to U.S. and allied forces in
Afghanistan.

The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party is led by cricket star Imran Khan, who has
been an especially vocal critic of drone strikes.

A CIA spokesman declined to comment on the letter or address whether the name
the party cited was accurate. The Washington Post generally does not publish the
names of clandestine CIA officers, who use false or "cover" identities in part
to protect themselves and their families.

U.S. officials acknowledged last week that a U.S. drone strike had targeted
militants associated with the so-called Haqqani network, which has launched
dozens of attacks on U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

The strike was one of only a handful over the past decade that have taken place
outside Pakistan's tribal belt, a largely self-governed region along the border
with Afghanistan. U.S. officials insisted that the missile attack last week
struck a militant compound, not a nearby madrassa, and that no civilians were
harmed.

The pace of the CIA drone campaign in Pakistan has slowed considerably this
year, but the intermittent strikes continue to inflame anti-American sentiment
across the country. Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif renewed his push for
an end to drone strikes during a visit to Washington last month.

The names of two previous CIA station chiefs in Islamabad were exposed during a
six-month stretch three years ago. In one case, the officer became a target of
death threats after his cover was blown, forcing the agency to rush him out of
the country.

As the top CIA representative in Pakistan's capital, the station chief has
significant sway over drone strikes and serves as the main point of contact with
Pakistan's spy service, the Inter-Services Intelligence agency.

Senior Pakistani officials have secretly approved the CIA's drone program for
years, and the ISI at times has been closely involved in identifying targets.
But CIA officials also have accused elements of the ISI of seeking to undermine
that partnership and of secretly providing the names of CIA officers to
opposition groups.

greg.miller@washpost.com

Tim Craig in Kabul contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


