                             2117 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              July 25, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: What It's Really Like to Own a McDonald's

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 409 words



HIGHLIGHT: Why are fewer small businesses buying cyber liability insurance?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Durable orders rose in June.

Crisis-mired General Motors would be in much worse shape without sales of big
S.U.V.s.

The International Monetary Fund said on Thursday that the world economy is
expanding less than it had forecast - and Tyler Durden calls it the comedy of
quarterly errors.

Management

Fewer small businesses have been buying cyber liability insurance since the
breach at Target.

Should businesses get accredited by the Council of Better Business Bureaus?

This company is making millions by giving you five fewer chips per bag.

Franchises

Here's what it's really like to own a McDonald's franchise.

The NAACP partners with Dunkin' Donuts in a new initiative to increase the
number of African-American owned franchises.

Burger King's 33-year-old chief executive has helped engineer a total
restructuring of the burger chain in just 13 months on the job.

Retail

Dick's Sporting Goods chainhas laid off 478 teaching pros as sales of golf gear
dwindles.

Employees

A new study finds that women and minorities in leadership positions get poor
performance reports if they promote diversity within the company.

Expense report data shows that Delta, Marriott, National and Starbucks are the
top travel brands for business travelers.

Here is what big data could mean for the future of recruiting.

Cash Flow

Here are nine ways to get paid faster.

Mobile payment provider Square is integrating with a company so that it can
better automate tasks such as sending out reminders.

Opportunities

Here's why the do-it-yourself smart home market will reach $7.8 billion by 2019.

Start-Up

A start-up wants to change the way restaurants schedule work.

Around the World

This is what Big Macs cost around the world.

These are the world's coolest bookstores.

Ideas

A device to help you sleep better raises almost $500,000 in two days on
Kickstarter.

Here is how Firestone is solving a tricky natural-resource issue.

Social Media

Facebook is now valued more highly than AT&T and Coke.

Technology

Microsoft's engineers make a sexy video.

HP invests $50 million in a leading distributor of Hadoop open-source software
for storing, processing, and analyzing data.

President Obama plans to issue privacy rules on drone use in the United States.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


