                             213 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 12, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amazon Asks Permission From F.A.A. To Test Drone

BYLINE: By DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; BITS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 285 words


In some ways, this was not the best week for Amazon. The Federal Trade
Commission sued it for improperly billing customers for games used by their
children. And it continues to be enmeshed in a nasty public relations battle
with the publisher Hachette.

But Amazon still has the drones. In a filing with the Federal Aviation
Administration that got widespread attention Friday, Amazon asked for permission
to test its drone delivery system outdoors, a practice that is banned for safety
reasons.

Never mind for the moment the fact that the F.A.A. said a few weeks ago that
there would be no commercial uses of drones in a memo that did not mention
Amazon but pointedly excluded even the free shipping of items by drone. That's a
lobbying battle for another day.

Delivery by drone was first mentioned by Amazon last year on ''60 Minutes,'' and
quickly became a viral sensation despite, or because of, the fact that it was
unlikely to happen anytime soon. If nothing else, it was a vivid demonstration
of Amazon's gift for showmanship.

In the filing to Michael P. Huerta, the F.A.A. administrator, Amazon said that
it should get an exemption from the rules because of the ''enormous consumer
benefits'' of what it is calling Prime Air: getting stuff to people quickly.

Amazon said that if it did not get what it wanted, it would have to move the
drone team to another country.

''Of course, Amazon would prefer to keep the focus, jobs and investment of this
important research and development initiative in the United States,'' the letter
said.

Amazon stock shot up Friday faster than a you know what, jumping more than 5
percent. It was either the power of the drone or analysts' reports predicting a
good second quarter.

URL: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/07/11/amazon-seeks-permission-to-test-a-
drone-delivery-system/

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


