                             2118 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             August 1, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: Are Employees 'Champions'?

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 497 words



HIGHLIGHT: President Obama signs a &#8220;fair pay&#8221; order. How a former
waitress at Denny&#8217;s amassed an empire of Denny&#8217;s locations. A
high-tech way to smuggle marijuana.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Job gains continued at a "sturdy pace" in July.

Employees

Here's why Taco Bell shouldn't call its employees champions.

President Obama signs a "fair pay" order.

This is how small employers can prepare for increases in the minimum wage.

Adding plants to your office can increase productivity.

The executives of a supermarket chain tell their employees who have stayed off
the job to demand the return of their fired chief executive that they must
return to work by Monday.

Management

World Wrestling Entertainment cuts 7 percent of its work force.

Chrysler's sales in the United States were up 20 percent in July, its best
performance for the month in nine years.

Marketing

Southwest ends its 26-year marketing partnership with SeaWorld.

The team at Freakonomics discusses the importance of a company name.

Entrepreneurship

An entrepreneur talks about her secret weapon: peer support.

Restaurants

Here's how a former Denny's waitress amassed an empire of more than 75 Denny's
locations.

The Restaurant Performance Index declined in June.

Customer Service

A customer service expert breaks down the pros and cons of Hilton's new app that
allows guests to use smartphones instead of room keys.

Social Media

LinkedIn introduces a standalone sales navigator to help users with "social
selling."

Cash Flow

A payment processor helps launch a new currency.

The fees that banks charge debit-card users who overdraw their accounts often
cost more than the items being bought.

Finance

Here are seven things an ex-trader-turned-comedian doesn't miss about Wall
Street.

Around the Country

An Oklahoma small-business owner pays it forward by helping out a flower shop.

The owner of a bar in Providence, R.I., that's known for cheap beer is angry
after the city shuts his business temporarily.

A baseball player is traded in the middle of an inning.

The Vermont Economic Development Authority is helping a ski resort increase its
snow-making capacity and a manufacturer buy new equipment.

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio's administration is under fire for signing
off on a building plan that allows a luxury high-rise to have a separate
entrance for low-income residents.

Around the World

Peaches are being sold as "sexy butts" in China.

Here's an analysis of a new bill intended to support small businesses in the
United Kingdom.

The pace of manufacturing in Europe is sitting at a seven-month low.

Although factory output in the United Kingdom slowed in July, the country is in
one of its strongest growth periods in 22 years.

Opportunities

Tesla is set to produce more than 35,000 electric vehicles this year and 100,000
by 2015.

Technology

A drone crashes while smuggling marijuana into a South Carolina prison.

This is how 3-D printing will change our lives.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


