                             2100 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (The Caucus)

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday

What's News in Washington: Situation in Iraq Worsening

BYLINE: ALAN RAPPEPORT

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 624 words



HIGHLIGHT: With the situation in Iraq getting more tense by the day, President
Obama appears closer to a decision about how to respond.


Good Wednesday morning from Washington.

With the situation in Iraq getting more tense by the day, President Obama
appears closer to a decision about how to respond.

At 3 p.m. the president is expected to share his thinking with leaders of the
House and Senate at a meeting in the Oval Office. Expected to attend are: the
Senate majority leader, Harry Reid of Nevada; the minority leader, Mitch
McConnell of Kentucky; the House speaker, John A. Boehner of Ohio; and the House
minority leader, Nancy Pelosi of California.

The president is considering airstrikes against Sunni militants using drones or
fighter jets, The Times's Mark Landler and Eric Schmitt, report. However, the
effort would be more akin to counterterrorism operations in Yemen then a full
aerial assault.

Be sure to visit the At War blog for reactions to the latest turmoil in Iraq
from members of the military who have served there.

Wednesday is a busy day in Congress as well. Here's what you need to know:


     ·    The possibility of greater involvement in Iraq means increased
          military spending at a time when the Department of Defense's budget is
          already stretched. At 10 a.m. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and Gen.
          Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will make
          the case for their 2015 budget request before the Senate Committee on
          Appropriations.



     ·    The exchange of five Taliban prisoners for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl has
          raised questions about America's policy against negotiating with
          terrorists. At 2 p.m. the House Committee on Foreign Affairs will
          question experts about what the swap means for national security and
          fighting terrorism. The hearing could get emotional, as the father of
          a deceased soldier who reportedly died looking for Sergeant Bergdahl
          is a witness.



     ·    It's a big day for Federal Reserve watchers. At 2 p.m. the Fed will
          release its policy statement on interest rates and offer an update on
          plans to taper its bond-buying program. Following that announcement,
          Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Fed, will hold a news conference
          and share her views on the economy.



     ·    Meanwhile, General Motors continues to come under fire. At 10 a.m.
          Mary T. Barra, its chief executive, will face scrutiny from a House
          panel about the company delaying the recall of millions of cars with
          faulty switches. She is expected to get tough questions over G.M.'s
          internal investigation into the recall, and her prepared remarks can
          be found here.



     ·    Ms. Barra will not be the only one facing the heat on Wednesday. In
          temperatures approaching 100 degrees, the first pitch of the annual
          Congressional Women's Softball Game will be thrown at 7 p.m. at the
          Watkins Recreation Center. Members of Congress will face off against
          the Washington press corps for charity.


Here's what we're reading:


     ·    Senator Thad Cochran, who faces a primary runoff against Chris
          McDaniel in Mississippi next Tuesday, has been wildly successful at
          bringing federal dollars to his state. Now, as he fights for his
          political life, that strength is being used against him. (New York
          Times)
     ·    Oklahoma is also holding a Republican Senate primary on Tuesday. After
          faltering in earlier polls, Representative James Lankford looks to be
          gaining momentum against T.W. Shannon, a former state Speaker. (Roll
          Call)
     ·    It's a three-way race to be next House Majority Whip. The contenders
          are expected to make their final pitches in the Capitol basement ahead
          of Thursday's leadership elections. (Washington Post)
     ·    Hillary Rodham Clinton's book tour is in full swing. But, at times, it
          has sounded like a candidate tour. (CNN)
     ·    To beat the Washington heat, and not overburden the power grid, the
          Senate is dimming its lights this week. Cove, architectural and
          fountain lighting will be shut down from noon until tomorrow morning.
          (USA Today)


LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


