                             2111 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             July 17, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: an App for Google AdWords Express

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 507 words



HIGHLIGHT: The story behind that Comcast customer-service call. Why it&#8217;s
getting even harder to run a restaurant. Do we need a corporate income tax?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Producer prices ticked higher in June but the Fed says price pressures are
"generally contained."

Factory output rose for the fifth straight month.

Corporate America's earnings season gets off to a bad start.

Microsoft will cut up to 18,000 jobs.

Matthew Iglesias asks why no one is talking about the good news about the
deficit.

Marketing

YouTube star Michelle Phan tells her branding secrets.

Google introduces an  app for AdWords Express aimed at small businesses.

Cash Flow

The "broke entrepreneur" explains how to survive without cash.

Google now shows Bitcoin price conversions.

An equity crowdfunding merger creates a one-stop shop for investors looking for
start-ups.

Here are eight movies that show how money works.

Customer Service

Here's why that Comcast customer-service person wouldn't let the customer cancel
service.

Entrepreneurship

An entrepreneur explains what he's learned as an Internet drug dealer.

Here's why you tend to underestimate risk.

Finance

Small businesses are finding bank loans easier to come by.

An app for helping the homeless raises $850,000.

Opportunities

Networks of locally grown foods are now selling to bigger businesses.

Venture capital firms are finding opportunities in women's health.

Amazon plans to join the "Netflix for books" gold rush with Kindle Unlimited.

Social Media

Here's what can happen if you manage to be funny in a tweet.

These entrepreneurs relied exclusively on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to
build their small businesses.

Employees

Occupational fraud costs organizations 5 percent of their annual revenue.

Management

Here is how the beer maker Sam Adams is thriving "as a pony among Clydesdales."

Taxes

Megan McCardle says there's no need for a corporate income tax.

And here's why small-business taxes don't matter but Apple's does.

Around the Country

After a baseball player suffers a career-ending injury, his wife gets him back
into the game through their mom-and-pop lumber business.

Who exactly is keeping big tobacco alive? The young and poor.

Millennials are buying homes later.

The drone business is booming at a metro Atlanta hobby company.

The owner of a Memphis bakery, known for her baked goods, gets some unwanted
attention after posing for a picture with the mayor.

Around the World

Google plans an ad blitz in India.

Unemployment drops to 6.5 percent in the United Kingdom.

Retail

Here's why it's getting harder to run a restaurant.

Visa introduces a digital payment service.

Technology

Your company can now buy Google Earth pictures.

Fake apps that look like official ones but are designed to steal user data are
increasingly targeting Android phone users, according to a study.

Apple has teamed up with IBM to bring IBM's enterprise software to Apple's
lineup of iOS devices.

How the cloud and big data are changing small businesses.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


