                             214 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 25, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Says It Downed Israeli Drone

BYLINE: By THOMAS ERDBRINK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 325 words


TEHRAN -- Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps said Sunday that it had shot
down an Israeli drone as it was heading toward the Iranian nuclear enrichment
site in Natanz, local news media reported.

''A spy drone of the Zionist regime was intercepted by a surface-to-air
missile,'' the state Islamic Republic News Agency said, quoting a statement by
the public relations department of the Revolutionary Guards. ''The vigilant
reaction of our defense system downed this drone before it could reach the skies
over Natanz.''

No evidence was provided, and Israeli officials declined to comment on the
report.

The report followed an announcement by President Hassan Rouhani in which he
unveiled Iran's new, locally produced missiles and drones. In his speech on
Sunday, Mr. Rouhani emphasized that the new weaponry was for defensive purposes
only.

''Some think we are making these to throw on the enemy's head,'' Mr. Rouhani
said, referring to the additions to Iran's arsenal, in an excerpt from his
speech quoted by the state news agency. ''No. Of course, if one day it is
necessary, we may do it, but the reason for making them is to prevent war.''

In recent weeks, Iranian officials have said they will never give up the
country's extensive missile programs. Such statements are apparently aimed at
the demands believed to have been made by world powers seeking a compromise with
Iran over its nuclear program. Iranian officials often point out that they have
never started a war and are surrounded by enemies; the report about Iran's claim
that it had downed an Israeli drone fits their narrative of a nation besieged by
outside forces.

Although Iran often engages in propaganda for domestic purposes, foreign drones
do fly over Iranian airspace. In 2011, the Revolutionary Guards said that they
had hacked an American-operated RQ-170 and forced it to land in the desert.
However, American officials said the drone had crashed after a technical
malfunction.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/25/world/middleeast/iran-says-it-shot-down-an-isr
aeli-drone.html

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


