                             219 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                          November 20, 2013 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

Drones cross line in hunting, should be banned

BYLINE: Scott Willoughby

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 535 words


LAMAR

You're likely to have better luck hunting for drones in Colorado than hunting
with them.

That's the message that emerged from the latest meeting of the state's Parks and
Wildlife Commission last week as Colorado took the lead with adoption of the
nation's first ban on hunting with drones.

The topic of using drones to hunt big game was first brought to my attention by
the crew of traditionalists at Backcountry Hunters and Anglers in May. I
subsequently discussed it with Rick Cables, former director of Colorado Parks
and Wildlife. While the notion of hunting "for" drones, as proposed by the tiny
town of Deer Trail, drew more attention initially, CPW clearly recognizes the
potential threat of allowing the idea of hunting "with" drones going
unchallenged.

"Clearly the standard we have to adhere to is fair chase," Cables said.

And by initiating the ban of "unmanned aerial vehicles" (UAV) for hunting and
scouting as part of the two step process of setting general regulations for
2014, it's evident that the agency and commission that oversees it are committed
to that standard.

Most states, including Colorado, have laws limiting the use of manned aircraft
for spotting wildlife for example, it's illegal to hunt within 48 hours of
scouting via aircraft in Colorado. But as technology advances, the question of
whether unmanned drones fell under the same definitions and regulations needed
to be addressed. How, for example, does drone use differ from game trail
cameras? (Answer: For starters, you have to walk into the woods to mount a trail
cam.)

"I don't think there's any question among sportsmen that drones cross the line,"
said Tim Brass, Southern Rockies coordinator for BHA.

The draft regulation eliminates any doubt from the statutory perspective and is
expected to be approved as part of an updated package of hunting regulations
that commissioners will vote on in January to be put into effect at the
beginning of Colorado's big game hunting season in August 2014.

In other news, the commission approved the 2014 fishing regulations that will
take effect in April, as well as the 2014 turkey hunting regulations.

The new fishing regulations add tiger trout (brown and brook trout) and cutbow
hybrids (cutthroat and rainbow trout) to the list of game fish in the state and
apply daily bag and possession limits for those species. The regulations also
restrict fishing methods and harvest on designated cutthroat trout conservation
waters in the state.

New changes encourage harvest of brown trout on the Dolores River by removing
bag and possession limits below the Bradfield Bridge. Limits were also removed
for yellow perch at Spinney Mountain Reservoir and for walleye in Stagecoach
Reservoir.

Turkey hunting changes approved include regulations opening private land hunting
in GMUs 91 and 92 to over the counter in the spring; adding youth only spring
turkey licenses in GMUs 91, 92, 96, 101 and 102; and add private land only
spring bearded turkey licenses in GMU 444.

Strategic spending cuts were also approved in order to help the agency trim its
budget by $9.9 million beginning in fiscal year 2014, which starts in July.

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/willoughbydp

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


