                             210 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A New Facebook Lab Is Intent on Delivering Internet Access by Drone

BYLINE: By VINDU GOEL; Quentin Hardy contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 770 words


SAN FRANCISCO -- Watch out, Google. Facebook is gunning for the title of World's
Coolest Place to Work. And its arsenal includes unmanned drones, lasers,
satellites and virtual reality headsets.

Mark Zuckerberg, co-founder and chief executive of Facebook, announced on
Thursday that the company was creating a new lab of up to 50 aeronautics experts
and space scientists to figure out how to beam Internet access down from
solar-powered drones and other ''connectivity aircraft.''

To start the effort, Facebook is buying Ascenta, a small British company whose
founders helped to create early versions of an unmanned solar-powered drone, the
Zephyr, which flew for two weeks in July 2010 and broke a world record for time
aloft.

''We want to think about new ways of connectivity that dramatically reduce the
cost,'' said Yael Maguire, engineering director for the new Facebook
Connectivity Lab. ''We want to explore whether there are ways from the sky to
deliver the Internet access.''

It's the second head-spinning announcement from Facebook this week and the third
this year. On Tuesday, the company said it would spend at least $2 billion to
buy Oculus VR, a Southern California start-up that is developing virtual reality
headsets for playing games and other uses. Last month, it said it would buy
WhatsApp, a messaging app that offers free texting around the world, for as much
as $19 billion.

The lab is part of Mr. Zuckerberg's ambitious Internet.org project to bring the
Internet to the two-thirds of the world's population without Internet access.
With partners like Qualcomm and Nokia, Facebook is working on technology to
compress Internet data, cut the cost of mobile phones and extend connections to
people who can't afford them or live in places that are too difficult to reach.

That last part of the problem -- reaching the 10 percent of the world's
population that are in areas difficult to reach via traditional Internet
solutions -- is the initial focus of the connectivity lab, said Mr. Maguire.

Currently, satellites can deliver Internet to sparsely populated areas with
spotty Internet connections, but the cost is very high, said Mr. Maguire.

Facebook wants to explore whether access could be delivered more cheaply through
both new types of satellites and unmanned aircraft.

The company envisions drones that could stay aloft for months, even years, at a
time at an altitude of more than 12 miles from the surface of the earth -- far
above other planes and the ever-changing weather.

[Video: A promotional video for the initiative Watch on YouTube.]

And to make the network more efficient, Mr. Maguire said, the planes would
transmit data to each other using lasers before finally sending it back down to
the earth.

''You need to create an Internet in the sky,'' he said.

Mr. Maguire acknowledged that the whole thing sounds a bit pie in the sky. ''We
want to pursue a lot of directions -- some risky that might not work,'' he said.

But the end goal of connecting the world to the Internet is important to
Facebook and the company is determined to get there, he said.

Matthew Eastwood, an analyst with IDC, a technology research firm, said Facebook
was trying to serve a population that no telecommunications provider had ever
made money from. ''You have to give them credit for thinking the way the telcos
don't.''

Facebook's recent initiatives immediately bring to mind the ''moon shots''
pursued by its much bigger Silicon Valley rival, Google.

Google has its own head-mounted computing project, called Glass. It's trying to
bring the Internet to the middle of nowhere through a network of high-flying
balloons. The company has also developed self-driving cars, aggressively
acquired robotics companies and dabbled in an array of science projects that
wouldn't seem to relate to its core, ad-driven business.

With Facebook, ''the more I think about it -- drones and virtual reality and the
excessive amount of money they're paying for WhatsApp -- they're making these
decisions in lieu of having a solid business practice in place,'' said Brian
Blau, an analyst at the research firm Gartner. ''Sometimes I get the feeling
that Facebook is really just trying to keep up with the Joneses.''

Or perhaps the Googles.

Mr. Maguire, star of a recruiting video posted on Internet.org, played down the
idea. He said he was not even trying to poach anyone from Google as he looked to
add about 40 more rocket scientists, plane designers and laser communications
wizards to his team.

''You're not going to find that expertise in the traditional Internet-based
communities,'' he said. ''We think the talent comes from elsewhere.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/28/technology/a-new-facebook-lab-is-intent-on-del
ivering-internet-access-by-drone.html

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A rendering of a solar-powered drone from Ascenta, the British
company acquired by Facebook. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FACEBOOK)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


