                             2136 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (News)

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday

Obama to Deliver Speech in ISIS Strategy at 9 p.m. ET

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

LENGTH: 276 words



HIGHLIGHT: Live coverage of President Obama&#8217;s speech explaining his
strategy for confronting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the Sunni militant
group.


President Obama will use a prime-time address on Wednesday evening to explain to
Americans his strategy for confronting the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the
Sunni militant group. Times journalists will provide analysis during the speech.

2:49 P.M. | What Obama Faces in a Campaign Against ISIS

Here's a look at some of the questions that may be addressed in President
Obama's speech.

Q.  How is the action President Obama will propose this evening to counter ISIS
different from the counterterrorism campaign against Al Qaeda?

A.  Mr. Obama is expected to describe a much broader undertaking that would go
well beyond targeted drone strikes against suspected terrorist leaders, as he
has done against Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan.
This will be a multiphase, multifaceted campaign that involves airstrikes and
ground forces against ISIS, drawing from a broad coalition of partners,
including NATO allies and Arab neighbors of Syria.

Q.  Does the president plan to seek congressional authorization for military
action, and if not, why not?

A. Mr. Obama has told congressional leaders that he has the authority to order
an expanded military campaign, but that he would welcome some "buy-in" from
Congress. Lawmakers are divided about voting on military action, especially
before the midterm elections, with some Democrats complaining of a rush to war.
Senate Democratic leaders are preparing legislation to expressly authorize the
American military to train foreign troops, and while no money would be attached
to the measure, aides said a request for around $500 million might come later
this fall.

Read more.

- Mark Landler

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


