                             2188 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 30, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Husband's contempt for stay-at-home moms shows a closed mind

BYLINE: Carolyn Hax

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 550 words


Adapted from a recent online discussion .

Dear Carolyn:

My husband and I both work and are excited about starting a family soon. My
husband loves his career and it is probably the biggest element of his identity.
I like my job but would really like to be able to stay home for a few years with
children.

We have a few friends who have moved to a single income, with Mom home with
Baby, and my husband has admitted he does not have much respect for it. He sees
these female friends as "one-dimensional." He also seems to think the
stay-at-home parent does not contribute equally to the household. As he pointed
out when we recently visited another couple over the weekend, "[Husband] is just
as involved with the kids as [wife] is, so why does [wife] get to call parenting
her career while [husband] has to go to an office five days a week?"

So, what do I do? I have no intention of leaving my husband, but I am feeling
helpless about the prospect of convincing him that this is a good idea.

Confused in CA

"[Husband] is just as involved"? I find his view flat-out offensive. I have no
horse in this race, either - my husband was a stay-at-home dad for 31  /  2
years, and we also used some paid care at the time, and we've both worked full
time since our youngest was 2, so I'm not well-positioned not to get defensive
about any choice.

Kids at home with parents have some advantages. Kids at high-quality day care
have some advantages. Not all at-home parents are the same, nor are all day
cares, nor are all kids. You find the combination that works for your home,
budget, personalities, talents, careers and your kids' natures - and then, if
there are two parents involved, you  back each other  in your choices.

And you keep an open mind to any changing needs, since families are dynamic, not
fixed.

And ideally you develop the sense not to judge other parents, unless they're
plainly harmful.

[Husband] is not less of a parent than [wife], but less involved? Absolutely -
at least 40 hours a week less. If these were partners in a business venture,
he'd have no trouble declaring the evenings-and-weekends partner "less
involved."

But there's no ax to grind in that example, is there? This isn't just about your
husband's faulty logic; it's about his contempt. Why doesn't his
career-mindedness make  him  "one-dimensional"? At-home parents arguably have to
summon a wider range of knowledge, skills and creativity, daily.

Again - it depends on the people. There are drop-dead boring at-home parents and
drop-dead boring office drones. Whatever. Duh.

So, why is he so sure he's right?

I find it particularly galling that he drew conclusions about this family after
a  weekend  visit. How smug.

I realize you want my advice and not my opinion of your husband, but one drives
the other. So: Call him out on every bit of closed mindedness he just displayed.
There's no way it hasn't affected other parts of your marriage.

Or, read him my answer, declare me a biased, judgmental jerk and start a
conversation of substance about the many facets of child rearing - and about
finding room in this topic for what  you  value in life.

Write to Carolyn Hax

, Style, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071, or tellme@washpost.com Get
her column delivered to your inbox each morning at http://bit.ly/haxpost.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


