                             2189 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 4, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

'Homeland' sheds its past, but not all of its problems

BYLINE: Hank Stuever

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 779 words


'Homeland' season 4: Refreshed, but still weary        'Homeland' season 4:
Refreshed, but still weary

TV REVIEW | Carrie Mathison gets a new post with the CIA, but she can't get away
from her biggest problems.

"Homeland" fans already know that the series is in for a necessary reboot when
it returns Sunday night with back-to-back new episodes for its fourth season on
Showtime. The old show and its old problems are not entirely wiped away - CIA
agent Carrie Mathison's life is destined to be a collection of loose and quite
frazzled ends - but for the most part, "Homeland" feels more like the show it
used to be: edgy, dour and violent in a way that can claim some quasi-relevance
to international headlines.

True, Damian Lewis's Sgt. Nicholas Brody is gone (if you're not caught up to
that point or don't wish to know much about the premise for the first few
episodes of the new season, then you should stop reading here), leaving Claire
Danes as the television equivalent of a widowed star; in other words, the show
now rests entirely on her.

Nicknamed "the drone queen" at her new supervisory CIA post in Kabul, Carrie
seems somewhat even-keeled. A central theme in "Homeland" has been her struggle
with mental illness, which she keeps at bay with proper meds and generous pours
from the Chardonnay bottle in her fridge.

Acting on bad intelligence from a usually reliable source, Carrie's team
believes it has taken out a terrorist leader responsible for attacks along the
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In fact, the team has bombed a wedding reception.
The ensuing outcry leads to another disaster, uploaded for all to see on YouTube
- an ambush on an SUV carrying Carrie, Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend) and another
agent.

Carrie is duly called home to Washington to account for the missteps. For the
better part of an hour, "Homeland" is full of people telling one another, with
the deepest antipathy they can muster, to [bleep] off. ("No, really, Carrie -
[bleep] you,"  Quinn sputters at one point.)

Still, the first three episodes feel like a step in the right direction. Brody's
end also meant the end (for now?) of story lines involving Brody's depressing
family, although, as Yoda used to say:  There is another.  Viewers will recall
that Carrie was pregnant with Brody's baby, and here she is, little
ginger-headed Franny, fobbed off on Carrie's long-suffering sister (Amy
Hargreaves).

"Homeland" comes under quite a bit of criticism (some of it valid) from just
about anyone with a working familiarity of Muslim cultures, but I'm surprised it
doesn't get dinged more often for explaining away Carrie's worst traits as
symptoms of her mental illness.

The more she acts like a male antihero (shirking parenthood for work), the
colder we are made to feel toward her, and the more we lean on this idea that
she's not a "normal" woman. She's become TV's quintessential crazy
ex-girlfriend, rather than the complex character she once was. In one scene she
tosses Franny's baby carrier into the front seat, unsecured (the nation's
parenting bloggers just passed out), for a midday drive past the Northern
Virginia house where Brody and his family once lived.

"You think I'm a bad mom," Carrie tells her baby, gazing at the red-brick
rambler. "I am. But he would have been even worse."

Such moments of introspection are generally not "Homeland's" forte - even though
Friend, as Agent Quinn, delivers a terrifically wounded and edgy performance as
his character suffers doubts about his profession and a dab of post-traumatic
stress. Friend is doing more here than just acting as a Brody fill-in;
"Homeland" could just as well be rebuilt around his character rather than
Carrie's.

Still and all, "Homeland" is better off when it shifts its narrative back to the
season's main story arc, in which "Life of Pi's" Suraj Sharma plays Ayaan, a
young medical student related to the terrorist targeted in the CIA bombing. (And
yes, Mandy Patinkin is back as Saul Berenson, who is now a security contractor.)

The show feels new again, but that doesn't mean it feels fully refreshed. Nor is
it immune to painting itself into the same sort of corners it got stuck in
before. "Homeland" also trafficks in some real-life context that is difficult to
set aside at this particular moment in world affairs. These Islamic State
beheading-video announcements - another of which occurred as I was filing this
review - have production values that are in line with the storytelling
techniques of "Homeland." It's as if terrorists in Syria have been pirating
cable to make sure they get the scenes just right.

hank.stuever@washpost.com

Homeland

(2 hours; double episode) returns Sunday at 9 p.m. on Showtime.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


