                             2175 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 30, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

Nigerians wary of U.S. rescue mission

BYLINE: Pamela Constable;Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: ABUJA, NIGERIA


Nigerians wary of American 'so-called friends' Nigeria distrusts U.S. efforts to
help fight terror, while the Americans are frustrated by Nigerian military
abuses

ABUJA, Nigeria - When Secretary of State John F. Kerry announced early this
month that the Obama administration was rushing a team of experts to help
Nigerian officials rescue 276 abducted schoolgirls, the hope in Washington was
that Nigerians would react with gratitude and energetic cooperation.

Instead, the U.S. assistance mission here - cloaked in secrecy and producing
only vague hints of progress after six weeks of joint efforts to find and free
the girls kidnapped by Boko Haram militants - has produced a more ambivalent and
critical response.

One reason is the strong patriotic pride among citizens of this independent,
oil-rich nation with a large professional security force that President Goodluck
Jonathan said Thursday he had ordered to carry out a "full-scale operation"
against the militants. While there is appreciation for the U.S. help, there is
also resentment of what some Nigerian commentators call "neocolonial" meddling.

"Part of it is national pride, perhaps one should say national vanity," said
John Campbell, a former U.S. ambassador to Nigeria and senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations.

Particular umbrage has been directed at comments by two U.S. officials who have
nothing directly to do with the current crisis. One is Sen. John McCain
(R-Ariz.), whose sarcastic remark about Nigeria having a "practically
nonexistent government" hit a deep nerve.

"Let no Nigerian be fooled by these so-called friends who have ulterior
motives," read a two-page ad in last Sunday's newspapers, signed by Muhammadu
Mamman. Excoriating McCain as an ignorant "war-monger" with no knowledge of
Nigeria's proud past, he asserted that "only the Nigerian gallant forces can
bring the girls back."

The second target is former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is
criticized here both for having failed to designate Boko Haram as a foreign
terrorist organization and for making unflattering comments characterizing
Nigerian leaders as corrupt and indifferent to people's suffering.

Nigerian opposition leaders make the same criticisms. They say that despite the
establishment of democracy in 1999 after years of military rule, a mix of
official corruption and negligence has abetted the rise of Islamist extremism in
the impoverished Muslim north.

"What we really need from America is help building a democratic system that
produces legitimate and responsible leaders," said Festus Keyamo, a human rights
activist and lawyer. "Otherwise we are going to keep growing a mass of idle and
angry youth that are waiting to wreak havoc."

In an interview with The Washington Post on Thursday, an adviser to Jonathan
said the international attention surrounding the girls' abduction has drawn
"misdirected" and unfair scrutiny of a government he said is doing all it can to
bring the girls home.

"There appears to be a dearth of information out there about what the government
of Nigeria is doing," said Mike Omeri, a longtime political adviser to Jonathan.

Omeri led a delegation of Nigerian officials to Washington this week to make the
case that the Jonathan government is responding appropriately.

"When this crisis started, the government of Nigeria, the people of Nigeria, had
no chance to explain," Omeri said. "We were taken to the cleaners as having done
nothing and being nothing."

President Obama, speaking at graduation ceremonies Wednesday at the U.S.
Military Academy, declared that "no American security operation" can eradicate
terrorists like Boko Haram and that the problem requires U.S. efforts to improve
education and human rights in countries such as Nigeria.

Another sticking point in U.S.-Nigeria relations is the recurrent reports of
abuses by Nigeria's security forces, including the deaths of hundreds of Boko
Haram detainees. Congress has banned all direct military aid to foreign forces
with abusive records.

Campbell suggested that "very, very few units" of the Nigerian army could pass
that test today. One reason for the Nigerians' defensive reaction to U.S. help
in locating the girls "is that U.S. assistance always requires degrees of
accountability, which the Nigerians don't like," he said.

Despite public pressure on the government to find the missing schoolgirls, there
is little serious criticism of the army in Nigeria, where military rule is a
recent memory and troops have been deployed across Africa as U.N. peacekeepers.
In the past week, a series of highly organized rallies has been held here to
express confidence in the military.

Until recently, experts said, U.S. officials also tended to focus on Nigeria's
democratic progress and overlook its military abuses. By the same token,
Washington did not put Boko Haram on its list of terrorist groups until last
year, allowing Nigerian critics to decry its sudden policy change as a matter of
self-interest.

The absence of concrete information about the U.S. anti-terror role here has
fueled warnings about an American "occupation." Photos of U.S. drones
participating in the aerial search for the missing girls and their captors have
added to speculation about foreign spying.

American officials in Abuja have rejected all requests for comment on U.S.
activities here. Nigerian officials, while hinting at unspecified "progress" in
the joint efforts to track Boko Haram, have also refused to discuss any details
of those activities.

"What is the guarantee that ensures that Nigeria has not mortgaged her
sovereignty to the Americans in an attempt to fight Boko Haram?" demanded
commentator Idang Alibi. "Do the Americans have a blank check, or are there some
safeguards to protect Mother Nigeria?"

Such skepticism about U.S. involvement contrasts notably with the Nigeria's
strong appeal for cooperation from its neighbors to combat the spread of
terrorism. At a meeting in Paris in early May, Jonathan begged for their help,
saying Boko Haram had become "an al-Qaeda of West Africa."

The response was overwhelmingly positive, with the presidents of next-door Chad
and Cameroon committing themselves to an all-out "war on Boko Haram." It remains
to be seen whether such statements will lead to concrete actions, but Nigerians
seem convinced that regional cooperation is both more urgent and welcome then
Western help in combatting terrorism.

"If we as a region don't come together to meet this challenge," said Ike
Ekweremadu, a Nigerian senator and official of the Economic Commission of West
African States, in a TV interview Monday, Islamist militancy "will spread like a
cancer and consume all of us."

pam.constable@washpost.com

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

DeYoung reported from Washington. Anne Gearan in Washington contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


