                             2135 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                           September 6, 2014 Saturday

How Big Companies and Their Tech Suppliers Are Changing Together

BYLINE: QUENTIN HARDY

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 769 words



HIGHLIGHT: Moves this week by companies like Google and Box illustrate how much
the cloud and mobility are reshaping the workplace, as well as the tech
companies themselves.


Mobile devices and cloud computing are changing the work and the structure of
corporations. That, in turn, is changing how tech companies behave.

A few examples from the last week, from the cosmetic to the substantial,
illustrate the shift. On Tuesday, Google renamed its now-substantial business in
online creation and collaboration software Google for Work. The challenger to
Microsoft's Office suite of software was previously called Google Enterprise.
Google apparently wanted to signify something more dynamic and less redolent of
traditional brick-and-mortar-style business.

On Wednesday, Box, a seven-year-old cloud computing company for business that
hopes to have an initial public offering of stock soon, effectively remade what
it is trying to provide to business customers.

Box is generally known as an online storage and file-sharing system. But Aaron
Levie, co-founder and chief executive, announced a series of new initiatives,
including ways of annotating online material and reminders about when to
renegotiate stored contracts.

Box also announced the creation of divisions with features tailored to specific
industries, like retail, health care and media. Equally important, the company
talked about employing a lot of machine learning, a fancy name for computer
analysis of content, in future products, so that people might work better with
their data and one another.

This might mean automatically associating the location where a construction
worker takes a smartphone video with a cloud-based file of blueprints and
contracts. It might mean looking through a lot of design documents to figure out
which workers are particularly effective.

Box, despite what most people still think, is not really an online file storage
company but rather a service that helps people interact with the digital
information they keep online. Box will still make money from selling online
access on a per-employee basis, but it hopes to be known for something more
dynamic.

"Nobody cares about files," said Mr. Levie. "They care about what files
contain." Figuring out how to build software for working with that content, he
said, "is a road map of years and years of tech development." In one
demonstration, Box uses a big gesture-based screen to examine things like who at
different companies in a film production is working on what parts of a script.

Certainly, Mr. Levie has a convenient argument for his onetime storage company
to make at a time when bigger cloud companies like Google and Amazon Web
Services are crushing online storage prices. That doesn't mean it's wrong.

Mr. Levie said Box had been moving toward to adding value to stored content for
the last two years, partly because company leadership figured out that prices
were collapsing, but more from watching what customers were doing with the
content they stored.

"You visit a hospital, a construction company, a movie studio, and you see they
all care about metadata and security," he said. "But one industry is using
drones. One is thinking about globalization. One has regulations to cope with.
You have to be relevant in lots of new ways."

Finding new ways to be relevant is true for corporate information technology
departments as much as tech suppliers. First, the advent of consumer I.T.
ushered all sorts of phones and tablets into the workplace. Then we got a big
business in corporate apps.

In the latest development, ZenPayroll, which offers cloud-based payroll
software, this week announced an alliance with other specialty providers that
could enable small businesses to mix and match a number of corporate functions,
like human resources and accounting, with different cloud software systems.

Now, I.T. departments may start looking and acting more like suppliers of
consumer goods.

Larry Biagini, chief technology officer of General Electric, which has over
300,000 people worldwide, said, "We are now assuming that 80 to 90 percent of
our people will be about to do their job off of our corporate network."  One of
G.E.'s fastest-growing areas is sub-Saharan Africa, he said, where the company
does not operate a single corporate network.

With so much action coming outside his domain, he said, "we have to move from
being a controls-based environment to being a risk-based environment, a subtle
but really important difference."

In a week that also saw the release of many, many nude photos of celebrities,
and possiblyone more corporate security breach, it's clear that online life of
all sorts is a long way from perfection.

That doesn't mean we aren't running fast at it and letting it change us in all
kinds of ways.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


