                             2161 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           January 22, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Pakistan targets militants with airstrikes

BYLINE: Haq Nawaz Khan;Tim Craig

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN


Pakistan bombs militant areas to retaliate for attacks

At least 40 were killed in airstrikes in North Waziristan, the heaviest bombing
of tribal areas in years.

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -   Pakistan's military launched airstrikes in its restive
tribal areas on Tuesday, killing 40 suspected militants, in an attempt to combat
terrorist attacks that are escalating across the country.

Tribal elders, speaking on the condition of anonymity because they feared
reprisal from militants, said the strikes appeared more accurate than previous
such efforts.

The local elders said that the home of Adnan Rashid, a senior Taliban commander,
was hit and  his family members were injured, but that he escaped unhurt.
Another strike, on al-Noor Mosque in the village of Essorhi, killed 15 people -
all reportedly militants, according to the elders.

"So this time the army gunships and jet fighters are accurately targeting the
militants," one elder from the town of Mir Ali said in a phone interview.

The strikes, among the heaviest bombardments of the tribal areas in several
years, were conducted in the aftermath of a suicide bombing Sunday that killed
20 Pakistani soldiers. On Monday, 13 people were killed in a blast at a market
near army headquarters in Rawalpindi. And Tuesday, three people administering
polio vaccinations were fatally shot in Karachi, and at least 20 Shiite pilgrims
were killed when an explosion tore through their bus in the country's southwest.

The military airstrikes began late Monday over a troubled area of North
Waziristan, a hotbed for Pakistani and foreign militants near the Afghan border.
According to local officials and the Reuters news service, it was the first time
the military had carried out airstrikes in North Waziristan since a cease-fire
deal with local Taliban leaders in 2007.

Military officials said those killed in the strikes included militants suspected
of carrying out a bombing in September that killed 85 people at a  church in the
northwestern city of Peshawar.

Although some of the elders interviewed said that many of those killed were
Taliban militants, area residents said there also were numerous civilian
casualties. They said they and their families were fleeing the area because they
feared for their safety.

"Can you hear the noise of the gunships? They are just over our heads," Haji
Jamaluddin, a resident, told Reuters by phone. "Everyone in the village is
running around with children and women, looking for a safe place to hide."

The strikes, which followed smaller military operations in tribal areas in
recent weeks, could be a sign that Pakistan's new army chief, Gen. Raheel
Sharif, plans to take a harder line against militants. Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif appointed him in late November to head the country's nuclear-armed,
550,000-member military. The two men share a last name but are not related.

The prime minister has been pushing to hold peace talks with the Pakistani
Taliban, which has waged a decade-long insurgency that has claimed thousands of
lives. But those talks have yet to materialize. In the meantime, former military
officials say, the country's top generals - faced with rising violence - have
been pushing for more decisive action.

On Sunday, a suicide bomber struck next to a convoy of paramilitary soldiers at
a security checkpoint in North Waziristan. The blast killed 20 soldiers and
injured more than 30. The Taliban claimed responsibility, saying the attack was
in retaliation for a U.S. drone strike in November that killed Taliban chief
Hakimullah Mehsud.

The group also asserted responsibility for Monday's blast in Rawalpindi. That
attack, carried out by a suicide bomber on a bicycle, killed seven army
personnel, two civilian army employees, three students and a shopkeeper.

"We feel that the government is neither serious, sincere nor powerful [enough]
for peace talks," Shahidullah Shahid, a Taliban spokesman, said in a statement.
"If the government shows sincerity and seriousness, even now, we are ready to
have peace negotiations."

On Tuesday, at least 20 Shiite pilgrims riding in a bus were killed in a blast
in the southwestern province of Baluchistan. The bus either struck a roadside
bomb or was hit by a car packed with explosives, local officials said. The
passengers were returning home to the provincial capital, Quetta, after
attending a religious festival in southern Iran.

There was no assertion of responsibility, but sectarian tensions are on the rise
across Pakistan. Prime Minister  Sharif issued a one-sentence statement
condemning the attack.

Local police were escorting the buses through the sparsely populated area, in
response to recent threats against Shiites there. Several police officers were
injured, said Asad Gilani, Baluchistan's home secretary.

There was no claim of responsibility for the attack on the polio workers. While
a team of nurses and volunteers were attempting to vaccinate children on the
outskirts of Karachi, gunmen on motorcycles opened fire. Two female polio
workers and one police officer providing security were killed. One child was
injured, reported Express News, a private Pakistani TV channel.

As a result of the attack, polio workers in the southern province of Sindh have
at least temporarily suspended the vaccination campaign.

Last year, 83 new polio cases were reported in Pakistan, and the World Health
Organization said Friday that Peshawar is the world's "largest reservoir" of the
virus.

But health officials who attempt to vaccinate children are increasingly coming
under attack from Islamic militants.

Prime Minister Sharif did not directly comment on the military airstrikes
Tuesday. While visiting injured soldiers in the hospital in Rawalpindi, Sharif
said their deceased comrades had "rendered great sacrifices in the war against
terrorism, and the nation is proud of them."

tim.craig@washpost.com

Shaiq Hussain contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


