                             2193 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                             Achenblog::Achenblog::

                     December 24, 2013 Tuesday 4:06 PM EST

Merry Holidays!

BYLINE: Joel Achenbach

LENGTH: 343 words


I'm getting ready for Christmas in my traditional fashion, by panicking as I sit
in my cubicle at the office.

My list of things to do is mostly unchecked.

Remove ashes from fireplace so Santa won't get covered in ash? Undone. Leave out
food for his 7 dwarves? Undone. Hang the stockings from the shower curtain rod?
Undone. Brine the squirrel? Undone. Scramble the eggnog? Undone. Carve the
pumpkin into a scary face and leave it on the porch with a candle inside next to
a bowl of candy for the kids if they come by this year? Undone. Check the
dumpster behind Safeway in case there's some perfectly good produce that could
be re-gifted as it were? Undone.

So I'm behind, as always, but will try to rally and do some last-minute
shopping, which for me is more like last-minute buying -- a drone strike with
the credit card, often within 30 seconds of entering a store. I've got a trained
eye. "Sale" always gets my attention. Quick on the draw as the wallet comes out.
(You know they'll return it and get something else, but remember, it's the
thought that counts!)

Mental note: Bring out figgy pudding. [And make sure it's sufficiently figgy.]

When I was a kid we really did go out in the woods and cut down a little green
Charlie Brown-like Christmas tree. Usually a little pine. It would have about 3
branches. So maybe those trees weren't thick, lush Balsam Firs like the ones
that get trucked down from Maine or Newfoundland, and perhaps we didn't have an
overwhelming number of lights, but still it was a very sincere and festive
display and not nearly as grim and Dickensian as it seems in this present
description. We had some lean years, and when my Mom was single she wondered how
she'd buy any presents at all, but the happy memories predominate and there is
no greater gift in the world than being able to wake up just about every day
feeling optimistic.

But now I see myself on the verge of sliding down the rabbit hole of nostalgia
and sentimentality, and guess what -- there's last-minute buying to do!

Merry Christmas and happy holidays to everyone!

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


