                             2169 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 29, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Stopping terrorism is his new focus

BYLINE: Sari Horwitz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 981 words


Almost every morning at 9, the nation's senior law enforcement officials meet in
a top-secret room at FBI headquarters for a briefing on terrorist threats.
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. attends, as does FBI Director James B.
Comey. And so does a guy named John P. Carlin.

Carlin is not exactly a household name in Washington or beyond. But the new
assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's National
Security Division is privy to the nation's most classified secrets about
government surveillance, counterterrorism operations, targeted drone killings,
cyberhacking and counterespionage.

A soft-spoken 40-year-old dubbed "the Boy Scout" by one Justice official, Carlin
fits the mold of a national security mandarin: He doesn't want to talk publicly
about anything, including himself.

Carlin's focus on national security was shaped by the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks. A Harvard Law School graduate, Carlin was set to start work as a
prosecutor in the U.S. Attorney's Office in Washington when the planes hit the
World Trade Center towers.

"I'm from New York and my family is from New York," Carlin said in an interview.
"My father was in a subway underneath the towers headed to a meeting, and my
brother-in-law worked across the street and watched people jump out of the
building. My wife was in the city at the time. We were all checking the phones
to make sure everyone was safe. For us, they were. For too many people, they
were not. "

The National Security Division was born in the aftermath of the terrorist
attacks, created in 2006 as one of the government's post-9/11 reforms. The idea
behind the NSD, the first new litigating division of the Justice Department in
50 years, was to create a single unit for terrorism, espionage, intelligence and
criminal lawyers to work with U.S. attorney's offices and the FBI to help
prevent terrorist attacks.

Carlin, who oversees 220 lawyers, has four phones on his desk in the Sensitive
Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF), where no reporters are allowed. All
but one are for top-secret-level conversations with other agencies.

The NSD was at the forefront of the controversy over U.S. government
surveillance in light of the leaks by former National Security Agency contractor
Edward Snowden. Carlin's attorneys conduct legal oversight of FBI national
security investigations and go before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Court to ask for authority to collect communications.

Lawyers at the National Security Division also work behind the scenes on the
prosecutions of terrorists. Before any U.S. attorney brings a terrorism case, it
must be approved by Carlin's division.

Some national security lawyers privately expressed concern about Carlin's rise
through the ranks to this key post, citing a lack of experience as a national
security prosecutor. But Kenneth L. Wainstein, the first assistant attorney
general for national security, said that "he's got all the qualities you want.
John has always been a top-notch prosecutor, has deep experience in cyber
matters and spent several years at the FBI and Justice Department doing national
security work."

Carlin and his attorneys helped with the recent terrorism prosecution of
Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, the son-in-law of Osama bin Laden. But after the guilty
verdict came in, Carlin was not on stage for the news conference with Holder and
Preet Bharara, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York.

"He's not a press guy," Bharara said. "He doesn't like to call attention to
himself. John's a guy who just tries to do his job." Carlin takes his job, but
not himself, seriously, he added.

"John will always see the irony and absurdity in a situation, which is much
appreciated," Bharara said. "He has a sense of humor, and it's a bit dry and a
bit sarcastic."

Carlin was reportedly not Holder's first choice for the job. But Holder's former
national security aide, Amy Jeffers, was passed over by the White House, where
Carlin's advocates included Kathryn Ruemmler, White House counsel, and Lisa
Monaco, assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism.

Ruemmler, Monaco and Carlin were colleagues in the District of Columbia's U.S.
Attorney's Office. Carlin prosecuted violent crime, fraud and public corruption
and developed an expertise in cybercrime. After Monaco left the U.S. Attorney's
Office to become chief of staff for FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III, she
recruited Carlin in 2007, because the Bureau needed expertise on the emerging
cyberthreat.

"John is whip-smart," Monaco said. "He just has incredible judgment when you're
dealing with very intense and important and complicated operational matters."
She said he walked to work in the dark every day from his home in the District,
arriving for a 7 a.m. briefing with the FBI director. He also walked home late
at night in the dark.

Monaco next became head of the National Security Division at Justice, and says
she "stole" Carlin from Mueller to be her chief of staff and then deputy
specializing in cyberespionage and cyberterrorism.

The son of a New York lawyer and a poet who teaches literature and creative
writing, Carlin met his wife, Sarah Newman, an art historian, when he was an
undergraduate at Williams College. He wrote his college thesis on Shakespeare as
a political philosopher. His favorite plays are the Henry tetralogy, but he
bemoans the fact that he has no time to see "Henry IV" at the Shakespeare
Theatre Company.

The "light of his life," one friend said, is Carlin's nearly 4-year-old
daughter. He turns to the children's story "The Three Pigs" to explain why he
works so late.

"She was worried about the bad wolf," Carlin said. "I said I make sure there are
no wolves."

horwitzs@washpost.com

Carol D. Leonnig and Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


