                             2181 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 28, 2014 Monday
                                 Every Edition

Silver Line a new tool to recruit employees

BYLINE: Sarah Halzack

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 672 words


On the best days, it took an hour and 20 minutes for District resident Molly
Weisse-Bernstein to commute to her job in McLean with government contractor LMI.

"There's waiting time, there's the handoff between the Metro and the bus, and
the bus is fighting the same traffic as everyone else," Weisse-Bernstein said.

She only started with LMI eight weeks ago, and she has tolerated the rough
commute because she knew it was only temporary. The Silver Line, which offers a
direct ride from McPherson Square to her company's new headquarters near the
Tysons Corner stop, should cut her commute to about 45 minutes.

Was the transit option a key factor in her decision to take the job?

"One-hundred percent, yes," Weisse-Bernstein said.

Local recruiters and businesses are betting that there are many more workers
like Weisse-Bernstein who might be newly receptive to working in neighborhoods
along the Silver Line. And so the opening of the transit option adds a new
dimension to the local war for talent: Companies in McLean and Reston believe
they have a new recruiting tool for getting far-flung workers to consider their
jobs.

Cvent, a Reston-based events software company, is set to move on Aug. 1 into a
new headquarters building right outside the Greensboro station. To emphasize to
prospective workers how close their digs are to the Metro, the company plans to
launch a small drone  about 200 feet overhead to capture aerial photos that
include their office and trains rolling into the above-ground station.

Eric Eden, Cvent's vice president of marketing, said he expects this will make a
particular difference when it comes to the company's ability to hire
millennials.

"A lot of the folks who [just] graduated from college, they want to live in
Arlington or D.C. The lifestyle there for people right out of college is great,"
Eden said. "To them, it seems like Tysons Corner is way far away. A lot of them
don't want to have a car."

Amy Gulati, a business partner at Reston recruiting firm Helios HR, said she too
expects the Silver Line to be an especially helpful feature as her clients aim
to hire younger workers.

"The lack of public transportation was always a problem in recruiting a
particular part of the labor force," Gulati said.

LMI, a mid-size company, has been touting its Silver Line access in job postings
in hope that it will help it better compete for talent with larger contracting
firms who are already Metro accessible. Randy Carr, LMI's senior manager for
human resources, says he also expects Metro will help current workers be more
productive. They anticipate they'll be able to host more meetings with clients
who previously would've struggled to get to McLean from downtown. That means
less time in the car for their own workers, who might not have to drive to
client sites as often.

"When you're thinking of organizations that primarily work with the public
sector and the federal government, the ability for us to have our clients out
here in a more easy way is huge for us," Carr said.

The Silver Line may not just impact talent recruitment strategies; it could also
be a catalyst for companies to adopt new workplace benefits. Reston Limo is
pitching employers on a service that would allow them to provide WiFi-enabled
shuttle service to their workers to and from the Metro. To spread the word, the
company has bedecked one of its vans with ads for the service and has been
driving it all over the area.

"We're just inundated right now with people that want quotes," said Kristina
Bouweiri, Reston Limo's chief executive.

As Reston Limo developed its strategy, executives went out to the West Coast to
meet with the vendor that provides the famed "Google bus," a commuter shuttle
provided by the tech giant that takes workers directly from San Francisco to its
Mountain View, Calif., headquarters.

The company has purchased some 40 vehicles in the past two months, in
anticipation of demand for this service, and it suspects it still might not have
enough to fulfill the demand.

sarah.halzack@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


