                             2126 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            August 21, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Economics Lessons From 'The Simpsons'

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 561 words



HIGHLIGHT: Five small businesses that are excelling on social media. How to use
video to make your company stand out. Could an executive order on immigration
help start-ups?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Oil prices are advancing on signs of strong demand in the United States.

A minority group of Federal Reserve officials is becoming increasingly vocal
about its inflation fears.

These two charts show how the world's economy is thriving.

Here are the economics lessons to be learned from "The Simpsons" marathon.

Social Media

And here are five small businesses that are excelling on social media.

Marketing

This is how to use video to make your company stand out.

And these are the best practices for text-message marketing.

Half of all shoppers don't want their smartphones tracked, according to a
survey.

Online

Here are the four basics to make money on the Internet.

When you die in Delaware, your digital assets become part of your estate.

Management

Here are the vital practices for running a successful HVAC contracting business.

Employees

New Jersey has enacted a law that prohibits companies with 15 or more employees
from making any inquiries into the criminal background of job applicants until
the completion of the "initial employment application process."

A video shows what the ice bucket challenge looks like when 1,000 tech employees
take part (and what happens when a former president takes part).

America has more open trucking jobs than available drivers.

A Schwab survey finds that workers value their 401(k) retirement accounts but
are more likely to get help changing their oil than managing their investments.

Finance

Biz2Credit says the recession led to a "credit desert" in the Southeast - and
the rise of alternative lenders.

Loan-approval rates for women-owned businesses are at least 15 percent lower
than for those owned by men, according to a study.

But women are outperforming men in the increasingly lucrative world of online
crowdfunding.

Start-Up

Wells Fargo has created a start-up accelerator.

This is how an executive order on immigration could help start-ups

Around the Country

A university in Michigan is guaranteeing employment for its accounting students.

Cities are making spiders grow bigger and multiply faster.

This alligator, caught in Alabama, is the largest ever caught.

Around the World

Growth in China's vast factory sector slows to a three-month low.

France attributes its economic problems to austerity.

In Britain, being your own boss often means being tired and poorly paid.

Several large manufacturers have announced they will diversify their operations
away from China.

In one ranking of the world's most livable cities, they all have one thing in
common (they are not in the United States).

Taxes

The Internal Revenue Service is struggling to figure out the medical-device tax,
according to a United States Treasury report.

Here's the lowdown on the home office deduction.

Ideas

A company raises $40 million to help farmers use big data to maximize farm
productivity.

Technology

Hewlett-Packard posts a surprise revenue gain.

Google brings its Chrome browser to Cuba as trade restrictions "evolve."

Amazon might start testing its delivery drones in India.

A new app will let you send almost anything to your phone.

Verizon plans to introduce a mobile app store.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


