                             2127 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Opinionator)

                            August 21, 2014 Thursday

Innovation Within Reach

BYLINE: SARIKA BANSAL

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1633 words



HIGHLIGHT: The concept of &#8220;frugal innovation&#8221; presents the challenge
of designing products specifically to meet the needs of the world&#8217;s
poorest people.


In a world with microchip implants, car-to-car communication, and talk of drone
delivery services, it can seem as if innovation is becoming increasingly
high-tech. But what about the world's poorest, for whom such gadgets are out of
reach? What types of innovation would be most beneficial for them?

These questions are the driving force behind efforts in "frugal innovation" -
designing products specifically to meet the needs of the world's poorest people.
The concept challenges innovators to do more with less. In general, the creators
of frugal innovations strive for them to be affordable, sustainable, lightweight
and rugged. Wherever possible, they should be made locally with renewable
materials. Perhaps most important, they should be developed with the end user in
mind, taking into consideration things like power outages in her village, the
distance she must walk to seek medical assistance and religious customs she
considers sacred.

The idea of frugal innovation isn't new. The colloquial Hindi term "jugaad" has
long been used in India to refer to creative and low-tech fixes, often developed
with meager resources. Within academic literature, the economist E. F.
Schumacher articulated the need in 1974 for "intermediate technologies" that
were small-scale, decentralized and energy-efficient.

Several Fixes columns have explored individual frugal innovations: an eye
hospital based in southern India that found a way to conduct low-cost surgeries;
a doctor in the city of Jaipur who invented a low-cost prosthetic limb for
people who would have otherwise remained limbless and dependent on others; a
hospital in Bogota that used research on the incubator-like benefits of
skin-to-skin contact between mothers and premature infants to foster healthy
development without costly incubation units.

Of course, not every frugal innovation is successful. For every cost-effective
eye surgery, there are dozens of flailing socially conscious enterprises. So
what does it take for an inexpensive, seemingly rudimentary innovation to take
hold and potentially improve the lives of millions of people? What do successful
frugal innovations have in common?

For one, there is tremendous value in customizing a product to fit cultural
norms. Even in the simplest of products, the smallest details can make a notable
difference in their acceptability.

Clean birth kits are a classic example of a frugal innovation. Approximately 800
women die every day from preventable causes related to pregnancy and childbirth
- including unclean conditions at birth. Countless women deliver babies on dirt
floors, guided by birth attendants who use unsterile tools and unwashed hands.

Birth kits offer several basic items needed for a hygienic birth environment.
Contents typically include a plastic sheet, to prevent a woman from giving birth
directly on the ground; a string or plastic clamp to tie the umbilical cord; a
blade or other sharp object to cut the cord; soap; and more. Kits are fairly
inexpensive, lightweight and can be manufactured locally. And the contents are
easily understood - at least in theory.

"There is a tendency for kits to be made in high-income countries with good
intentions, to be distributed as a charitable exercise," said Vanora Hundley, a
midwifery researcher at Bournemouth University in Britain who has extensively
researched birth kits. In her experience, good intentions have not always
translated to effective products.

In one instance, Hundley recalled, an information packet depicted a woman giving
birth lying down. But since a midwife in southern Africa was accustomed to women
standing while in labor, she discarded the entire birth kit - throwing out the
proverbial baby with the bathwater.

Some organizations have taken a more thoughtful approach to designing birth
kits. The nonprofit PATH has supported development of birth kits in Nepal. One
custom there is to cut umbilical cords on coins, as a symbol of prosperity for
the new child. Unfortunately, coins are often covered with bacteria and fungi.
Out of respect for the tradition, Nepalese designers modified the kits to
include a hygienic plastic rupee.

Another common trait among successful frugal innovations is coupling a tangible
product with training and mentorship. Take, for instance, the checklist.
Checklists have been used in a variety of health-care settings around the world,
from the swankiest of private hospitals to the most rustic of rural health
centers.

On their face, checklists are one of the most frugal innovations imaginable, in
that they can consist of a single piece of paper with a few guidelines. However,
getting health-care workers to adopt checklists can be an uphill battle. The
lists "can make priorities clearer and prompt people to function better as a
team," Atul Gawande, a surgeon and author of "The Checklist Manifesto," has
written. "By themselves, however, checklists cannot make anyone follow them."

In 2008, the World Health Organization introduced a 29-point safe childbirth
checklist. It has shown some promising results so far - especially when
implemented with comprehensive training support.

In a recent pilot study, researchers supplemented the checklist with an
intensive workshop, initial supervision of the procedures and engagement with
local leaders. They found that the checklist "markedly improved delivery of
essential safety practices by health workers."

Beyond cultural sensitivity and training, many successful frugal innovations
directly engage communities during the design process. Amy Smith, founder of
M.I.T.'s D-Lab, which creates technologies for the poor, challenges frugal
innovators to think creatively about this. Instead of designing products for the
world's poor, and having them be the passive recipients of innovation, she
advocates turning them into active creators of technology. She calls this
approach "creative capacity building."

"It requires a huge shift in the way we think of international development,"
Smith said at a lecture at Wellesley College. "It means that we need to think of
poor people not as vulnerable, but as capable. We have to think of it not as a
billion mouths to feed, but two billion hands to engage."

The push toward frugal innovation has been renewed in the last decade. In a
sense, it is a response to one of the classic failures in international
development work: the quintessential fancy machine brought to a remote village,
only to sit unused for years for a reason that is obvious in retrospect.

Last year I visited a social enterprise in Tanzania's Iringa region that had
developed a machine to dry food. Smallholder farmers in that region typically
lose 40 percent of the tomatoes they produce, due to inadequate storage options
and market linkages. In response, the company wanted to build a market for dry
foods. They created a food-drying machine that was quite large - approximately
twice the length of a twin-size bed - expensive and required imported parts.

Locals recognized the value of drying produce, but did not buy into the value of
the machine. The company sold only eight machines in five months of operations,
because farmers realized they could dry produce with another, cheaper
technology: the blazing Tanzanian sun.

In this context, the call for frugal innovation is refreshing. It prevents, in
theory, the invention of a complex technology when a simple one could do the job
nearly as well.But is there similarly such a thing as making innovation too
frugal? Is there a risk of fetishizing frugal but imperfect solutions to complex
problems?

There are certainly times when an innovation is so frugal that its quality
deteriorates past an acceptable bar. Even the phrase's Hindi forebear, jugaad,
originally referred to makeshift vehicles constructed so shoddily that the
Indian government is now trying to ban them, citing safety concerns.

In some cases, frugal innovation may have grave consequences. In the global
health world, the World Health Organization received tremendous scrutiny a
decade ago when it recommended that H.I.V./AIDS patients in Africa use cheap
generic copies of medicines, even in cases where the drugs' safety and efficacy
profiles were unknown. "Substandard and counterfeit medicines may be
contributing to dangerous drug-resistant strains of H.I.V.," warned Carol
Adelman in The New York Times. Given how difficult and costly it is to treat
drug-resistant H.I.V., Adelman recommended the W.H.O. "reorient itself to
science-based medicine," even if it implied a less frugal choice.

Even if a classically frugal innovation is inappropriate for a particular
situation, the broader lessons of overengineering and underengagement with the
end user are still applicable.

There will always remain a need for technology in development work. People
around the world have benefited from mobile phones, basic medical equipment and
renewable energy sources, to name a few examples.

However, technology alone will never solve the complex problems faced by the
world's poorest people.  As Smith told her students, "The hard work is first
taking an idea and making it work. And then the hard work is making it into a
product. And then the hard work is making it into something that people will
buy. And then the hard work is scaling it up. And even if you have a technology
that makes a big difference, if it doesn't work in the context of people's
broader lives, it's not going to make a huge difference."

Join Fixes on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/nytimesfixes. To
receive e-mail alerts for Fixes columns, sign up at here.

David Bornstein is off.

Sarika Bansal is a journalist who writes about social innovation and global
health. She is also the Director of Partnerships of the Solutions Journalism
Network. Follow her on Twitter at @sarika008.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


