                             2187 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 26, 2014 Friday
                                Regional Edition

Iraqi premier: Militants targeting subways in U.S., France

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Iraqi leader says terrorists targeting U.S., French subways

The prime minister says militants plan transit attacks, but U.S. officials say
they know nothing of such a plan.

NEW YORK - Iraq has "credible" intelligence that Islamic State militants plan
terrorist attacks on subway systems in the United States and France, Iraqi Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi said Thursday, but U.S. intelligence and other
officials said they are not aware of any such plot.

"Today, while I'm here, I'm receiving accurate reports from Baghdad that there
was arrests of a few elements, and there are networks planning from inside Iraq
to have attacks," Abadi said. "They plan to have attacks in the metros of Paris
and the U.S."

Iraqi intelligence agencies informed Abadi on Thursday about what he described
as an active plot by foreigners, including French and American citizens, who are
fighting as part of the Islamic State group. Abadi made the remarks during an
interview on the sidelines of the annual United Nations General Assembly.

Abadi said he had requested further information. The intelligence assessment was
being shared with U.S. and French officials, he said.

Abadi said he did not know whether the planned attacks were imminent.

Deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes said the United States has "not
confirmed any specific threats against the United States" by the Islamic State
group. "So we want to review information from the Iraqis and seek to corroborate
that."

"We would certainly take seriously any information they're learning as they have
ISIL operatives detained or as they reclaim territory that ISIL may have
controlled," he said, using one of the acronyms by which the Islamic State is
known. "We will follow leads based on the information we're provided."

U.S. intelligence and law enforcement officials, speaking on the condition of
anonymity to discuss threat assessments, said they do not have information about
plans for such terror attacks.

President Obama led a U.N. Security Council session Wednesday focused on the
particular threat posed by radicalized Americans and others who travel to Iraq
or Syria to fight and could easily return to their home countries to carry out
attacks. The council approved new rules intended to stop those suspected of
traveling to join militants in battle or attempting to return home from conflict
zones.

Much of the U.S.-led military and diplomatic strategy to counter the militants
in Iraq rests on Abadi, who took office just weeks ago. A Shiite, he has pledged
to share power and resources with Sunnis and Kurds and strengthen the country's
internal defense forces while sending the Iraqi army to fight the militants.

Abadi told a small group of reporters Thursday that he is committed to
decentralizing power from Baghdad, but he took a hard line against Kurdish
demands for what he called an unfair share of national oil revenue.

He indicated that he would like to renegotiate an oil agreement with the
government of the semiautonomous Kurdish region.

Abadi also said that while U.S.-led airstrikes against Islamic State targets in
Iraq are crucial to defeating the militants, he will not cede full authority to
the United States.

"I have raised the issue of the sovereignty of Iraq" in discussion with U.S. and
other leaders, Abadi said. "We don't want to happen in Iraq what happened in
Yemen and Pakistan."

The United States has long-running drone operations against terrorism targets in
both of those countries. The U.S. operations are highly unpopular, especially
among Pakistanis, and are seen by many as an infringement of national
sovereignty.

Targeting of terrorists should be coordinated with Iraq, Abadi said, and the air
campaign should be "short and decisive."

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Greg Miller and Adam Goldman in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


