                             2132 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                           September 2, 2014 Tuesday

Summer Reading Winner, Week 10 | A High School Journalist on the Execution of
James Foley

BYLINE: THE LEARNING NETWORK

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 718 words



HIGHLIGHT: 5,680 entries ago, we began our Summer Reading Contest. Today,
reluctantly, we announce our final winner &#8212; congratulations Ted Zhu!
&#8212; and our usual long list of runners-up and honorable mentions.


-

Three months and 5,680 entries ago, we began our Summer Reading Contest.This
week, reluctantly, we announce our final winner - congratulations Ted Zhu! -
along with the usual long list of runners-up and honorable mentions.

In a summer that featured agonizing headlines from around the globe - whether
from Israel, Iraq, Ukraine, West Africa, Ferguson, Mo., or the United States
border - we were heartened, and often humbled, to read the passionate,
thoughtful responses of our teenage audience. Our favorite student posts, like
the one we honor below, made both personal connections to the news and went
beyond that to discuss broader questions an article raised.

Thank you, as always, to the many teachers who assigned this contest. We loved
seeing those same school-identifiers (PRHSlions2014, bengal, MCHS2014, MADHS and
so many more) over and over. We hope you'll properly congratulate your school's
winners when classes resume, since making it to one of our top slots this summer
was quite a feat.

Winner: A High School Journalist on the Execution of James Foley

ByDB_TZ

As a high school journalist, my biggest fears to date have ranged from
stuttering while conducting interviews to missing a deadline that could delay
the publication of our newspaper. These may sound trivial, but trust me, it's a
pretty real nightmare that my fellow journalists understand.

Yet nothing to date could have remotely helped me identify with this: the horror
of watching the beheading of a journalist covering a war zone.

At the start of journalism class every school year, we are taught the principles
of journalism. It has always led me to envision journalists as the marauding
crusaders for free speech that illuminate the truth for the general public. As
journalists, we stand for the right to knowledge, and it is our duty, at all
costs (within legal, ethical and moral bounds, of course), to obtain that
knowledge and disseminate it.

I am touched by Mr. Foley's bravery on his quest to bring to light the realities
of war and give voice to the people of war-torn countries that suffer, yet often
have no way to speak out. However, his gruesome execution is an all too real,
brutal and barbaric reminder for journalists of the consequences of the pursuit
of truth.

We are fortunate that there are people with the heart of James Foley, trekking
into the murky waves of danger for the sake of the world at large. But while
it's brave and noble to do so, journalists shouldn't have to face such massive
and one-sided dangers. International law protecting them in war zones should be
respected and followed, on account of how vital and essential their work is for
the world at large.

I realize that may be too quixotic. For as long as journalists do their job
correctly and impartially in such controversial areas of the world, it's likely
that sooner or later they will draw the ire of somebody out there. However, is
sacrifice of life the ultimate price journalists must pay for the sake of truth?
I hope, for the sake of Jim Foley and all journalists out there, the answer is
no.

Runners-Up


     ·    Tisha on Ferguson
     ·    Carter Brace on an illustration by Grant Snider
     ·    Akhila on "Hit the Reset Button in Your Brain"
     ·    Madison D. on kidney transplant brokers


Honorable Mentions


     ·    Vanessa BHSAP2014 on architecture and hospital rooms
     ·    LincolnLHS2014 on teacher tenure
     ·    Elizabeth BHSAP2014 on test-based teacher ratings
     ·    Karisa on Internet trolls
     ·    Jian on "Hit the Reset Button in Your Brain"
     ·    Mikayla G. APDCCCHS on "Teaching is Not a Business Response"
     ·    D'JuanCROSBYHS2014 on Ferguson
     ·    RavenWHSPAP14 on "Is a Hard Life Inherited?"
     ·    MuluhDMS2014 on Japan's military
     ·    ConnorSARANAC14 on archeologists and drones
     ·    Arcelia_AP_B14 on a look inside the brain of a creative artist
     ·    HHKCarter on Ebola
     ·    Rachel_GHS_2016 on the death of Robin Williams


Please note: If you are a winner, runner-up or honorable mention this week and
would like to have your last name published, please follow these directions.

This Summer's Reading Contest Judges

From the Penguin Young Readers Group:

Ally CondieAndrea CremerLisa GraffK.A. HarringtonKatherine HoweAlex LondonRuta
SeptysAndrew SmithMeg Wolitzer

From The Times and The Learning Network:

Amanda Christy BrownShannon DoyneKristin EschGeorgia FaustMichael
GoncharKatherine SchultenDaniel SlotnikLeah Umansky

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


