                             2162 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 8, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Rockets and retaliation shake a truce in Gaza

BYLINE: William Booth in MUGHAZI;Gaza Strip

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 1243 words

DATELINE: IN MUGHAZI, GAZA STRIP


With each rocket fired, Israel-Gaza truce wobbles         Amid truce, Hamas
struggles to rein in rockets

A cease-fire that has held since the last major conflict between Israel and
Hamas is looking shakier each day.

It was a legitimate target, the masked militant said later, an irresistible
target. An Israeli was repairing a section of the fence that surrounds the Gaza
Strip. A decision was made: Shoot him.

The sniper attack in late December, ordered by a faction of Palestinian
militants in Gaza, triggered an immediate retaliatory air and tank assault by
Israel that killed not a terrorist but a toddler, and wounded three others.

The two deaths, which were news for just a few hours in Israel and Gaza, are
part of a deadly exchange of messages - between armed groups in Gaza that want
to demonstrate that their resistance to Israel continues and the Israel Defense
Forces, which insist that every assault from Gaza must be answered.

Officially, a 14-month-old cease-fire between the Islamist militant group Hamas,
which controls the Gaza Strip, and its enemy, Israel, is holding. Unofficially,
it is a truce that grows more tense by the day as Hamas struggles to rein in
armed factions that are not completely under its control. This kind of
escalation has led to two wars in the past five years, and there is a palpable
sense today that another could be on the horizon.

Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon warned recently: "If Hamas doesn't know
how to impose its authority on terrorist organizations operating from its
territory," it will "pay a heavy price."

Rocket fire from Gaza toward Israel is increasing; there were 28 launched in
January, according to the Israeli military. So are Israeli strikes and armed
incursions into the coastal enclave. Israel carried out at least two targeted
killings against Gaza militants last month, killing two people and wounding one.

Hamas is facing isolation and economic hardship, and its leaders say they need
to maintain the truce. Egypt's new military-led government has shut down many
smuggling tunnels from that country into Gaza, which provide tax revenue for
Hamas. Whereas Hamas has the responsibility to run the schools, pay municipal
salaries and keep the electricity on, smaller armed factions have one overriding
goal: to fight Israel.

'We don't care who he is'

The Nasser Salah al-Deen Brigade, whose sniper shot the Israeli fence worker,
answers to the Popular Resistance Committees, which the United States considers
a terrorist organization. The group opposes negotiation and any security
cooperation with Israel, and it is one of a half-dozen armed factions in Gaza
capable of launching rockets.

According to Abu Saed, a masked spokesman for the brigade who spoke at a house
outside Gaza City on the condition that his full name not be used, the sniper
rushed into position after the Israeli worker was spotted. Then he fired.

The victim was Saleh Shukri Abu Latyef, 22, a Muslim and Bedouin from the
Israeli town of Rahat. He worked for a private contracting firm hired by the
Israeli military, and it was his first time working at the Gaza fence, a
relative said. He died two hours after he started.

"It is not easy to lose such a young person. He was the flower of his family,"
said his cousin, Ribhi Abu Latyef.

"We are a peaceful family, and we don't blame anyone," he said. "We believe in
two states for two peoples, a country where Palestinians can govern themselves
and a country where Israelis are not being attacked."

Asked whether they felt any remorse for killing a fellow Muslim, the spokesman
for the brigade said, "We don't care who he is. He was working with the Israeli
army."

Armed escalation

Everyone in Gaza knew there would be a reprisal.

Armed factions in Gaza say the skies above their heads are buzzing with more
Israeli F-16s, Apache helicopters and drones than usual.

"Something big is coming," said a spokesman for the military wing of the group
Islamic Jihad, who goes by the nom de guerre Abu Ahmed. "But we don't know
what."

Israel and Hamas are wary of where the current escalation is taking them. The
two sides fought an eight-day war in late 2012 that saw missiles fired from Gaza
reach the outskirts of Tel Aviv and a punishing aerial campaign by Israel. The
fighting killed 174 Palestinians, more than half of them noncombatants, and six
Israelis, four of them civilians, according to a review of the conflict by the
United Nations.

Since the cease-fire, 52 rockets fired from Gaza have landed in Israel,
according to the Israeli Foreign Ministry. No injuries have been reported.

Israeli defense officials acknowledge that Hamas is not the source of the rocket
fire. But because Hamas has governed Gaza since 2006, Israel holds it
accountable.

Retaliatory fire kills girl

On the afternoon that the Gaza sniper killed the Israeli contractor, Israeli
aircraft, tanks and infantry retaliated.

"Direct hits were confirmed," the military announced. The target list included
"a terror infrastructure site" near the fence in central Gaza.

That site was the house where Hala Abu Sbaikha, 2, lived. She was playing in the
yard when she was struck in the neck by a piece of shrapnel from a tank
artillery shell, her relatives said.

Her aunt, Bothina Abu Sbaikha, was wounded. She said that her niece died in a
taxi en route to the hospital.

An uncle knelt down on a recent day and blew leaf litter away to show a dried
pool of blood soaked into the earth. Asked whether militants had used the house
as a terrorist site, Sbaikha insisted no.

"This was our home," she said. "Nothing else."

'Hard' task for Hamas

According to the Al Mezan Center for Human Rights in Gaza City, 19 Gaza
residents, including two children, have been killed by Israeli strikes since the
cease-fire, and more than 170 have been wounded. The number includes militants,
protesters who got too close to the fence, and innocent bystanders - the latter
of whom Hamas calls martyrs and the Israelis describe as human shields.

As Hamas finds itself in the unlikely role of enforcing the cease-fire, it is
struggling to keep the more aggressive factions from launching attacks, though
Hamas is careful not to condemn them publicly.

"The Israelis know Hamas is expending a huge effort to maintain the cease-fire.
We have hundreds of our police watching and trying to prevent rocket fire," said
Basem Naim, a foreign affairs adviser to Ismail Haniyeh, the Hamas prime
minister.

Hamas security forces have detained and interrogated members of rival groups in
efforts to stop rocket fire, according to spokesmen for those factions. Last
month, Hamas called a meeting of leaders of the strip's five main armed factions
and reinforced that the truce needed to be kept, according to Gaza-based
political scientist Mkhaimar Abusada.

Mahmoud al-Zahar, a founder of Hamas, said the Israelis "understand that Hamas
has control of the situation, and that the alternative to Hamas would be chaos -
with fanatics coming in from the outside, creating a new Sinai, a new Syria, in
Gaza."

"This is hard for Hamas. . . . This effort costs them, costs them time,
credibility, their reputation for resistance," said Omar Shaban, an economist at
a Gaza think tank.

"But Hamas is helped by the fact that launching rockets is not very popular
among the people in Gaza," he said. "We are not stupid. We know firing rockets
is not working."

william.booth@washpost.com

Hazem Balousha in Gaza and Ruth Eglash in Jerusalem contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


