                             2103 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                              June 30, 2014 Monday

Morning Agenda: A Shift on Foreclosed Homes

BYLINE: SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2117 words



HIGHLIGHT: Bulk investors in foreclosed homes are looking to sell. | Morgan
Stanley&#8217;s chief has focused on safer ways of making money. | A settlement
is expected with BNP Paribas over sanctions violations. | Prosecutors seek a
stiff sentence for Mathew Martoma for insider trading.


A year ago, buying foreclosed homes to rent out was the sure-thing trade for
investment firms backed by money from private equity companies, hedge funds and
pension systems, Matthew Goldstein writes in DealBook. But now, with the supply
of cheap foreclosed homes dwindling, some early investors are looking to cash
out a bit by flipping homes to competitors.

One such company, the Waypoint Real Estate Group, is said to be quietly shopping
as many as 2,000 houses in California that it acquired in the last few years in
several private investment funds. Waypoint is following other early investors
like the Och-Ziff Capital Management Group and Oaktree Capital Management, which
have sold homes bought near the start of the financial crisis. Other big players
in the market for foreclosed homes have slowed their pace of acquisitions. Now,
institutional buyers like the Blackstone Group are focusing more on fixing the
properties they already own, renting them out and using the properties as
collateral to back bonds that can be sold to investors.

"The single-family home market, after a wave of acquisitions by companies backed
by Wall Street money, is changing as institutional buyers now focus more on
expanding their operations to manage tens of thousands of homes across the
United States," Mr. Goldstein writes. "Industry participants say that the rapid
buying of foreclosed homes has ended and that they expect other early
institutional buyers to sell homes to lock in profits. They say they also expect
the business to consolidate into the hands of a few large companies."

MORGAN STANLEY CHIEF GOES AGAINST TYPE  |  Morgan Stanley is a very different
place than it was when it nearly went under in 2008, largely because of James P.
Gorman, the bank's chief executive since 2010, Nelson D. Schwartz writes in The
New York Times. "Instead of perennially playing Avis to Goldman Sachs' Hertz in
the lucrative but dangerous business of bond trading, Mr. Gorman has focused on
safer ways of making money," he writes. Now, the bank's stockbrokers, who manage
money for individual clients, contribute almost as much to the bottom line as
the bankers and traders.

The bank has also recovered from its clumsy management of Facebook's initial
public offering in 2012 [#x2012] the company's stock price has since surged
[#x2012] to become the most sought-after underwriter of technology I.P.O.s. "The
firm is on a positive trajectory after a lot of hard knocks," Mr. Gorman said in
an interview this month. By making what Mr. Gorman called "hard decisions," he
and Morgan Stanley are "becoming the face of what may be Wall Street's future:
highly profitable, to be sure, but with fewer of the grand ambitions or
larger-than-life personalities that have always characterized the place," Mr.
Schwartz writes.

BNP SET TO PLEAD GUILTY  |  United States authorities are expected to announce a
settlement with BNP Paribas on Monday in which the French bank will plead guilty
to criminal charges and pay an $8.9 billion penalty, ending a widespread
investigation into the bank for transferring billions of dollars on behalf of
Sudan and other countries blacklisted by the United States. The board of the
bank is said to have met over the weekend to give final approval to the deal,
The Financial Times reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the
situation.

BNP is also said to have negotiated a concession with the United States
authorities, who plan to impose a suspension for at least six months on the
bank's ability to process dollar denominations, a function known as dollar
clearing that is essential to doing business with international clients. The
authorities are said to have agreed to delay the start of the suspension period
for about six months, giving the bank until January 2015 to make alternative
arrangements for its clients to maintain access to United States dollar
financing.

Jean-Laurent Bonnafe, the chief executive of BNP, sent an internal message to
employees warning them that the bank was facing stiff penalties after the United
States investigation, Reuters writes. "I want to say it clearly here: we will
receive a heavy penalty," Mr. Bonnafe wrote. He added, "However, the
difficulties that we are currently experiencing must not affect our plans for
the future."

ON THE AGENDA  |  The pending home sales index is out at 10 a.m. John C.
Williams, president of the San Francisco Fed, gives a speech at 1:10 p.m. at a
banking conference in Sun Valley, Idaho. David M. Rubenstein, the co-founder of
the Carlyle Group, is on CNBC at 4:30 p.m.

World Cup watch: France vs. Nigeria at noon. Germany vs. Algeria at 4 p.m.

HARSH SENTENCE SOUGHT FOR FORMER SAC TRADER  |  Federal prosecutors are
recommending that Mathew Martoma, a former portfolio manager who worked for the
billionaire investor Steven A. Cohen, be sentenced next month to at least eight
years in prison for insider trading, if not significantly more, Matthew
Goldstein writes in DealBook. A sentence of that length would be at the upper
end of prison sentences for hedge fund traders convicted of insider trading in
recent years, but by no means the stiffest handed down during the long-running
investigation.

Prosecutors for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, did not
call for an exact sentence in a court filing on Friday but said the severity of
Mr. Martoma's crime warranted a sentence above the eight years recommended by
the federal court's probation department. In February, a federal jury in
Manhattan convicted Mr. Martoma, a married father of three young children, of
helping the hedge fund generate profits and avoid losses totaling $275 million
in 2008. Based on the charges on which he was convicted, Mr. Martoma could, in
theory, be sentenced to as many as 20 years in prison.

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Carlos Slim Buys Out AT&T's Stake in América Móvil  |  The sale comes as AT&T
prepares to acquire the satellite operator DirecTV. DealBook »

Philips to Combine Lighting Units Into Stand-Alone Company  |  The Dutch
electronics giant Philips said it was exploring "strategic options" to raise
capital for the soon-to-be combined LED and automotive lighting businesses,
which together posted sales of 1.4 billion euros, or about $1.9 billion, in
2013. DealBook »

Allergan, Maker of Botox, Acquiesces to Special Shareholder Meeting  |  An
agreement with Pershing Square Capital Management makes it clear that the
calling of a special meeting will not activate Allergan's poison pill. DealBook
»

With Alstom Deal, General Electric Gains Bigger Foothold as Utility Supplier  |
By adding Alstom's steam turbine factory in Belfort, France, and a gas turbine
plant in Baden, Switzerland, G.E. will have the skill and scale to expand as
electric utilities worldwide embrace gas-fueled power plants. DealBook »

TUI of Germany Reaches Agreement to Acquire British TUI Travel  |  The deal, if
consummated, would create the world's largest integrated leisure travel
business, worth about $7.7 billion. DealBook »

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Former Nokia C.E.O. to Join Perella Weinberg as Advisory Partner  |  Jorma
Ollila, a longtime leader of the Finnish mobile phone maker Nokia and the
current chairman of Royal Dutch Shell, will provide counsel to Perella Weinberg
and its clients, particularly those in Europe. DealBook »

R.B.S. to Spend $1.7 Billion on Mobile Banking Growth  |  The Royal Bank of
Scotland said it planned to add nearly 100 automated teller machines and
transform its branches to centers for financial advice and education. It will
also upgrade its mobile platforms. DealBook »

Barclays Investors Express Investment Bank Fears  |  The drop in the share price
of Barclays after it was accused of favoring high-frequency traders over other
investors in its dark pool reflects more general fears of investment banking,
Dominic Elliott writes for Reuters Breakingviews. DealBook »

Sleep as a Competitive Advantage  |  Too many of us live by the myth that one
less hour of sleep gives us one more hour of productivity, Tony Schwartz writes
in the Life@Work column. In reality, lost sleep not only leaves us more
fatigued, but also takes a toll on our cognitive capacity. DealBook »

PRIVATE EQUITY »

AT&T Names Silver Lake Co-Founder to Its Board  |  Glenn Hutchins of Silver
Lake, which has made a number of prominent investments in technology, will
become a director of AT&T. DealBook »

Head of Dollar General to Retire  |  The announcement by Richard W. Dreiling,
the chairman and chief executive of the discount retailer Dollar General, comes
as a smaller competitor, Family Dollar, is under pressure from the activist
investor Carl C. Icahn. DealBook »

HEDGE FUNDS »

Ergen Sidelined in Battle With Falcone Over LightSquared  |  The bitter battle
between the billionaires Charles W. Ergen and Philip A. Falcone over
LightSquared, the bankrupt wireless broadband company, appears to be nearing an
end. The twist is Mr. Ergen is no longer involved. DealBook »

Federal Judge Says Argentina's $539 Million Attempt at Payment Is 'Illegal'  |
The deposit is the latest twist in a legal battle between the country and a
group of holdout bondholders, who refused to agree to restructure their bonds
after Argentina defaulted more than a decade ago. DealBook »

Soros Dabbles in Shareholder Activism  |  George Soros's first foray into
activism gives underperforming companies a reason to be nervous, Christopher
Swann writes for Reuters Breakingviews. DealBook »

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

China's State-Run News Agency Files for I.P.O.  |  China's state-run Xinhua News
Agency is seeking to raise about $240 million in an initial public offering of
its digital arm, Reuters writes. The company plans to list in Shanghai. REUTERS

Shares of Michaels Are Flat on Debut  |  Michaels Companies, the arts and crafts
retailer formerly known as Michaels Stores, raised about $472 million in its
initial public offering. DealBook »

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Modern Tools for Mom-and-Pops  |  While start-ups like Uber are frequently seen
as the enemy of traditional independent merchants, some new tech companies see
big opportunity in serving local stores, The New York Times reports. NEW YORK
TIMES

Goodbye, for Now, San Francisco  |  Two reporters for The New York Times, Nick
Bilton and Mike Isaac, both covered technology in San Francisco and moved away
from the city this month. They reflect on their time living in a land of
driverless cars, drones and a phenomenon known as "The Running of the Nerds."
NEW YORK TIMES BITS

After a Fast Start, a Fading Path Looks to Reinvent Itself, Again  |  Dave
Morin's start-up firm, Path, which first offered a photo-sharing app, now hopes
ephemeral messaging will help it rise again, the Bits blog writes. NEW YORK
TIMES BITS

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Stung by Supreme Court, Aereo Suspends Service  |  The start-up, which provides
streaming over-the-air television, said it was not shutting down, only pausing
to map out its next moves, The New York Times reports. NEW YORK TIMES

After Supreme Court Ruling, Aereo's Rivals in TV Streaming Seize Opening  |  A
victory for traditional American broadcasters in a copyright case does little to
protect them from an Internet-powered onslaught, The New York Times writes. NEW
YORK TIMES

Are Markets Efficient? Even the Supreme Court Is Weighing In  |  In a case that
delved into a much-debated academic theory, a ruling erects a new hurdle for
investors to clear in some class-action lawsuits, Jeff Sommer writes in the
Strategies column. NEW YORK TIMES

Fed's Balance Sheet Punctuated by a Big Question Mark  |  The central bank's
balance sheet has ballooned to nearly $4.3 trillion in assets, and how the Fed
decides to handle it will have significant consequences, William D. Cohan writes
in the Street Scene column. DealBook »

In Home Loans, Subprime Fades as a Dirty Word  |  Facing a tight credit market,
home buyers are turning to a safer version of the subprime mortgage, a culprit
of the 2008 housing crash, The New York Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Central Bank Group, Worried About Bubbles, Rebukes Markets  |  In its annual
report, the Bank for International Settlements expressed concern about investors
driving up asset prices with little regard for the risks, The New York Times
reports. NEW YORK TIMES

The C.E.O. Is My Friend. So Back Off.  |  A study's surprising finding: If
company directors have disclosed that they are friends with the chief executive,
they are even more likely to try to give him a bonus, Gretchen Morgenson writes
in the Fair Game column. NEW YORK TIMES

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


