                             2159 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 30, 2013 Monday
                                 Every Edition

A warning from the aerospace industry about cuts

BYLINE: Thomas Heath

SECTION: Pg. A03

LENGTH: 871 words


Thomas Heath is still away, but we did manage to find some tidbits to pass on:

Even though sequestration has not yet taken as damaging a toll as some warned,
the chief of the Aerospace Industries Association is hardly ready to breathe a
sigh of relief yet.

Marion Blakey said companies benefitted from the delayed start of the automatic
spending cuts after Congress pushed them to March instead of January. And
agencies will have less flexibility in the coming year to use one-time funds to
cover ongoing costs.

"This industry and its skilled workforce are a perishable asset," Blakey said
during an annual year-end luncheon in the District that convenes the reporters
who cover aerospace and defense companies with the spokesmen and women that
represent them. "The excessive pursuit of fiscal austerity ... is going to come
back to haunt us."

In its year-end report, the AIA said U.S. aerospace and defense industry sales
are projected to hit $220.1 billion in 2013, down slightly from $222 billion
last year. The total workforce is estimated at 618,200, down from 631,400 in
2012.

She credited the industry with moving to blunt the effect of spending cuts by,
for instance, looking to exports and considering new applications for
technology, such as unmanned systems. (Blakey credited Jeffrey P. Bezos, the
founder of Amazon.com and owner of The Washington Post and Capital Business,
with drawing attention to the potential positive uses of drones with his
recently announced plans to use unmanned aircraft to deliver packages).

Still, she warned that the toll of government spending cuts is inevitable. "At
some point, you only obtain less from less," Blakey said.

- Marjorie Censer

Pro bono

Sandy Thomas and Scott Bolden, the two top dogs at law firm ReedSmith - Thomas
is global managing partner and Bolden is D.C. managing partner - took a break
from lawyering this month to help raise money for victims of Typhoon Haiyan.

The law firm hosted a reception and silent auction at its K Street office,
raising more than $50,000 to support the Arlington-based nonprofit International
Relief & Development, which is working with other relief organizations to
mobilize teams to clean up and repair schools and remove debris from roads and
homes in areas affected by the storm.

Also in attendance were Charge d'Affaires Arlene Magnoof the Embassy of the
Philippines, President of the U.S. Philippines SocietyJohn F. Maisto and U.S.
Agency for International Development Senior Adviser Manpreet Anand.

- Catherine Ho

A CEO comes in for a landing

AgustaWestland North America, the U.S. unit of European helicopter maker
AgustaWestland, said earlier this month that it has named a new chief executive.

Robert LaBelle, previously president of a Texas-based AgustaWestland unit, will
take over for R. Scott Rettig, who has been promoted to chairman of the board of
AgustaWestland Philadelphia Corp., the company's primary commercial
manufacturing unit in the United States.

Earlier this year, AgustaWestland North America relocated its headquarters from
Reston to Crystal City to be closer to the Pentagon.

- M.C.

Global banking

Navy Federal Credit Union - the world's largest credit union - expanded to
another part of the globe this month with the opening of its first branch in
Africa. The new location, at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti, serves several hundred
active duty U.S. military personnel and Defense Department contractors. The
branch's two employees live with the troops in containerized living units and
dine with them in the mess halls.

The Vienna-based credit union, which has more than 230 branches, is the only
U.S.-based financial institution to have a presence in Djibouti.

- Abha Bhattarai

An opining

Pinstripes is hoping for a strike when it opens in The Shops of Georgetown in
January. The Chicago-area company, which offers bowling, bocce and a
wine-centric bistro under one roof, is opening a 34,000-square-foot complex in
Washington. The venue, which will have 14 bowling lanes and six bocce courts,
will be the company's fifth.

- A.B.

No de-icing needed

It's common to serve cake at a celebration. It's far less common to serve cake
in the shape of a satellite.

But that's exactly how Intelsat and Space Systems/Loral decided to honor their
latest collaboration. They commissioned a cake replicating Intelsat 34, the two
companies' 50th satellite collaboration. The real satellite is set for launch in
2014.

Executives from both companies convened at Intelsat's District office to
celebrate their milestone - and unveil the one-of-a-kind cake.

- M.C.

Factoid of the week

48The number of companies, trade groups and other organizations from Maryland,
Virginia and the District that will exhibit at the Consumer Electronics Show in
Las Vegas next week. That number is down from 51 exhibitors last year and 59 in
2012, according to the show's directory. The nation's largest trade show, CES
has expanded its list of attendees over the years to include app developers,
automakers, health practitioners, online educators and gadget manufacturers,
among others. The local entities slated to attend include Audi of America,
Rosetta Stone, iBiquity Digital, Telcare, the U.S. Postal Service and the
Federal Communications Commission.

- Steven Overly

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


