                             2150 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                            October 14, 2014 Tuesday

Will Apple Pay Make Us Broke?

BYLINE: ANNA NORTH

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 798 words



HIGHLIGHT: New payment technologies from Apple and Amazon could make buying
stuff very easy &#8212;&#160;and that has some people concerned.


For those with enough money to take advantage of them, new payment technologies
like Apple Pay, Baidu Eye and Amazon's Firefly could offer unprecedented
convenience. But some observers worry that the ability to buy stuff out in the
physical world almost as easily as you can currently buy e-books on Amazon might
leave consumers bankrupt and unfulfilled.

At Slate, Ariel Bogle wonders whether the "frictionless consumption" offered by
these technologies will encourage overspending. She quotes the business
professor Eric Johnson, who says, "The more you disconnect spending from
physical spending, also known as 'decoupling,' the more you're likely to spend."
He notes that Apple Pay, like credit cards, may have such a decoupling effect.

Ms. Bogle cites research suggesting that making consumption quick and easy could
damage our happiness as well as our financial solvency, because we actually
enjoy purchases more when we wait for them. And, she suggests, mobile-pay
technology could have a more broad-based effect on our perception: "When your
phone encourages you to make up shopping lists of items you encounter daily, it
may be difficult not to begin to see the world as made of readily consumable
items." She quotes the psychologist Scott Huettel: "Let's say you hear a song
playing and have the app. That converts a situation that isn't a decision and
makes it a consumption decision. ... Effectively, an app like this takes
something you're just experiencing and makes a value comparison."

In The Wall Street Journal, the behavioral economics professor Dan Ariely
discusses a related hazard. He writes:

"Different ways of paying make us think differently about those opportunity
costs. For example, if we have $20 in cash in our pockets, we will have a hard
time not thinking about opportunity cost. If we consider buying a sandwich, we
realize that we won't have money for coffee; if we get a cab, we realize that we
won't have money for dinner."

And, he argues, "electronic payment mechanisms can easily lead us to think less
about opportunity cost and spend more recklessly."

Others are less convinced. Nicole Dieker of The Billfold draws the connection
between fears about instant buying and older worries about the
cognitiveconsequences of easy access to information. And she questions the
notion that noncash payment is always emotionally easier:

"I feel more pain when I pay with a credit card. I feel pain because I know this
is something I can't actually afford, and using the credit card is my only
option. (I also feel guilt and shame because my life is in a place where I can't
afford something that I need.)"

And she notes that whether impulse buying is easy or hard may not be
particularly important to people just trying to get by:

"The idea that you can wave your phone over an empty carton of milk and then hit
a button that will get you a new one as soon as possible, possibly to be
delivered by drone, leaves out all of the people who still agonize over whether
they should buy the milk today, or whether they can put it off until tomorrow,
or whether they should try to cut back by switching to oatmeal and hot water."

If mobile-pay apps make buying stuff less rewarding, or turn listening to music
into a financial transaction, these may be problems of privilege. But experts do
suggest some intriguing ways these apps could actually keep us from spending.
Mr. Ariely suggests that "electronic payment could be designed in ways that get
us to more fully understand our opportunity costs and make more reasonable
decisions. Apple Pay and the like could be game-changers, helping us think about
our spending much more rigorously than we ever could with cash."

And Ms. Bogle writes:

"The good news is that we have the chance to build apps and platforms that
encourage smarter spending. If I could see my real-time bank balance next to the
Amazon 1-Click button, I might make a lot fewer late-night, red wine-fueled
purchases, for example."

Mr. Huettel tells her the apps could easily incorporate a waiting period before
purchase, "but of course, that's an anathema to the developer." And Mr. Ariely,
too, notes that "right now, electronic payments seem to be going down the path
of less thinking and more spending." However, he writes, "I hope that at some
point, some of the payment companies will change their approach, adopt the
perspective of their users and offer electronic payment methods that help us
make better financial decisions."

If he and others are right, the technologies that let us pay for stuff has a big
influence on what and how we buy. Will those who control these technologies use
that influence for good or ill? Or, put another way, if they have the
opportunity to turn the entire world into a mall, will they really give it up?

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


