                             2102 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              June 27, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: How Much Cash Can I Take Out?

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 408 words



HIGHLIGHT: The difference between high-performers and workaholics. Keeping
personal and business finances separate. And the shunning of malls.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Economists are slashing their second quarter growth forecasts.

Three not-so-popular economic indicators worth paying attention to.

Both personal income and spending increased in May.

Management

More than 60 percent of the restaurants that have appeared on "Kitchen
Nightmares" are now closed.

These are the most important questions for business owners to ask, including:
How much cash can I take out?

Employees

Seven subtle differences between high performers and workaholics.

The United States men's soccer coach posted a letter asking employers to excuse
employees from work to watch the match with Germany.

Start-Up

This start-up is trying to create, and control, your home's Internet.

MassMutual commits $5 million to invest in small businesses and $1.5 million to
mentor and accelerate start-ups.

Detroit gets more attention, but Pittsburgh may be the Rust Belt's unsung
start-up hub.

Marketing

A marketing secret is revealed: Did you know that green screen ninjas flip those
models' hair during shampoo commercials?

A small-business marketing consultant thinks your business may want to work to
attract the college crowd.

Finance

GoPro's stock rises 30 percent after its initial public offering.

Here are five reasons to keep your personal and business finances separate.

Entrepreneurship

Here are seven reasons it's a good time for women to become entrepreneurs.

And here's how a 20-year-old built a drone empire.

Ideas

The shunning of malls by millennials is speeding up the online shopping
revolution.

Edible wrappers are the solution to the only problem with cupcakes.

Meet the leaders of the maker movement, bright entrepreneurs paving the way for
the age of homespun inventions.

Around the World

IBM and Lenovo Group are grappling with ways to resolve security concerns over
IBM's proposed sale of its server business to the Chinese company.

An Australian cafe owner who fined workers $30 if they put tomato slices on the
wrong layer of a club sandwich is ordered to pay compensation.

Technology

Salesforce.com is teaming up with Philips to develop software tools to better
connect patients with health care.

Brazil's soccer team is using specially designed bottles that track how much a
player is drinking.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


