                             2191 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                      November 11, 2013 Monday 6:22 PM EST

Chris Christie goes small

BYLINE: Chris Cillizza;Aaron Blake

LENGTH: 967 words


In the wake of his sweeping reelection victory Tuesday, New Jersey Gov. Chris
Christie (R) did the Sunday talk show circuit over the weekend.

What was most notable about his appearances -- he was on "Meet the Press," "Face
the Nation" and "This Week"  -- was not anything he said, but rather what he
didn't.

Both the "Face the Nation" and "This Week" interviews began with questions about
Iran and its uranium-enrichment program, and both times Christie begged off
answering.

"I think there are people who are significantly better briefed on this than I am
as the governor of New Jersey," Christie told "This Week" host George
Stephanopoulos. To "Face the Nation" host Norah O'Donnell, Christie echoed that
sentiment:  "I'm a governor of New Jersey and my job is to run the state of New
Jersey, and it's just something, I think, in all seriousness, Norah, folks in my
position spout off opinions off the top of their head just wind up doing more
harm than good."

And Iran and uranium enrichment were not the only topics on which Christie chose
not to elaborate. Asked by "Meet the Press" host David Gregory about chatter
surrounding his political future, Christie responded: "I am focused on is doing
my job in the state of New Jersey. That's what I ran for. That's what I want to
do. " Responding to whether he could be a viable candidate in Iowa or South
Carolina in 2016, Christie said, "I'm playing in New Jersey."

On immigration, he avoided offering any sort of potential national policy
prescription. "I think the national solution has to be -- has to be figured out
by the people who are in charge of our national government," said Christie. "My
job is to fix what's going on in New Jersey."

Christie's focus on going small -- or at least retreating within the borders of
the Garden State to avoid entangling himself in any of the more intractable
national public policy debates -- is an intriguing one that runs counter to what
many of his potential adversaries in 2016 are doing at the moment.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz  inserted himself right into the middle of the debate over
President Obama's health-care law. Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul has made himself an
outspoken voice on the Obama administration's drone policies. And Louisiana Gov.
Bobby Jindal is sounding off on virtually every national issue.

Some of that difference is in job descriptions. Sitting in the Senate, the
palette of issues is national by default. And Jindal has spent the last year as
chairman of the Republican Governors Association -- a position Christie is set
to inherit for 2014.

But Christie's focus on New Jersey issues and not national ones still stands out
due to his absolute insistence not to allow himself to be goaded into broader
policy fights happening in Washington.

There's a three-fold strategy at work there. First, Christie and his team know
that the foundation of any national campaign in 2016 will be built on his resume
in New Jersey. Without his New Jersey accomplishments, there is no national bid,
so by focusing so intently on racking up political and legislative victories in
the state, he is doing himself good nationally as well.

And, unlike many of the other pols -- Democrat and Republican -- thinking about
2016, Christie doesn't need to bolster his name identification. Everyone knows
him.

Second, Christie's brand is built on being an un-politician or, perhaps more
precisely, an un-Washington politician. Given that, there's nothing to be gained
by wading into national issues where anything he proposes can't go anywhere
anyway.

Third, keeping himself within the lines of his home state allows Christie to
deflect virtually any question or issue -- like uranium enrichment in Iran --
that he either doesn't want to answer or doesn't know enough about to answer.

Don't expect Christie to veer from this Garden State Strategy. It has served him
well so far.

Conservative group targets Pryor on Obama's judicial nominees: A conservative
group is going up with a six-figure ad buy criticizing Sen. Mark Pryor (D-Ark.)
for voting for President Obama's judicial nominees.

The new ad, from the Judicial Crisis Network, represents the latest outside
spending in an already contentious 2014 battleground.

The ad hits Obama's move to "pack a key court" -- the D.C. Circuit Court --
"with new liberal judges." Republicans have already blocked one of those
nominees, Patricia Millett.

"When Mark Pryor rubber stamps Obama's liberal judges, it hurts Arkansas," the
narrator says. "Enough is enough: Tell Mark Pryor to go to work for Arkansas,
not Obama."

Fixbits:

Christie says it doesn't matter whether he calls himself a conservative.

Christie still won't say whether he'll serve a full term.

Christie attacks Mitt Romney's campaign.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) says he'll still block Obama's nominees even after
"60 Minutes" retracted its Benghazi report.

New York City fights to keep "stop and frisk."

Leon Panetta says Obama may have to stomach some changes to Obamacare.

Secretary of State John Kerry declines to expound on his assertion that Lee
Harvey Oswald likely didn't act alone.

Must-reads:

"Elizabeth Warren: Hillary Clinton's nightmare" -- Noam Scheiber, New Republic

"White House seeks Republican immigration help" -- Reid J. Epstein and Seung Min
Kim, Politico

"White House relying more on insurance carriers to help fix HealthCare.gov" --
Juliet Eilperin and Amy Goldstein, Washington Post

"Narrow tea party losses are wake-up call for Republicans" -- Paul Kane,
Washington Post

"For Obama, and Democrats, it's crunch time" -- Dan Balz, Washington Post

"Harvard Law outsider became Tea Party hero" -- Matt Viser, Boston Globe

"Bills left in limbo are often just part of the choreography in Congress" -- Ed
O'Keefe and David A. Fahrenthold

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


