                             2197 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                      January 17, 2014 Friday 3:14 AM EST

How Chris Christie can still be the front-runner for the 2016 Republican
nomination

BYLINE: Chris Cillizza;Sean Sullivan

LENGTH: 1462 words


The calendar won't turn to 2016 for another 715 days. But, people like us are
already handicapping what the race might look like -- and even declaring New
Jersey Gov. Chris Christie as the front-runner for the Republican nomination
despite his recent traffic troubles.

Charlie Cook, a preeminent political handicapper and the man who gave me my
first job in Washington, took issue with the idea that Christie -- either pre or
post Bridge-gate -- should be described as the front-runner in the race. Here's
a piece of Charlie's take (the whole thing is worth reading):

Christie, the front-runner? Again - really? Christie indeed sat at the top of
some of the polls that lay out a long laundry list of every imaginable contender
(as well as some who are harder to imagine), but does that make him the
front-runner? I think not.

Think for a moment who makes up the Republican Party, and most specifically the
part of the GOP base that dominates the presidential nomination process. Think
about the people they seriously considered for their party's presidential
nomination last time around. Think Michele Bachmann, Herman Cain, Rick Santorum,
Rick Perry, and Newt Gingrich. Now, quickly, think Christie. Now think Sesame
Street: "One of these things is not like the others; one of these things just
doesn't belong." It's laughable that the party that has previously seriously
considered some fairly inconceivable candidates as worthy of the GOP nomination
would suddenly reverse course and head over to a center-right candidate such as
Christie.

Charlie has a good point. In fact, the undertold story of bridge-gate is how
Christie is being squeezed from the left (Democrats who loathe/fear him) and the
right (conservatives who still blame him for President Obama's reelection
victory in 2012).  While Christie's rise to national prominence was fueled by
tea party support, that energy was built on Christie's tone, not his policies.
(Christie is rightly placed on the ideological spectrum to the right of Rudy
Giuliani but to the left of Ted Cruz.)  The Obama incident -- Christie greeted
the president warmly during a visit to New Jersey in the wake of Hurricane Sandy
and praised his work to help the state's residents -- triggered a lessening of
tea party/conservative enthusiasm toward Christie that has lingered even as the
governor was ringing up a historic election victory last November.

"Prior to this bridge stuff, Christie had about a 10 percent chance at the
nomination," said one GOP consultant aligned with another candidate eyeing the
2016 race. "No more than that. It's just a fact. Primary voters do not like him.
And I'm talking about much higher levels of 'do not like' than Mitt [Romney]
ever faced."

That said, let me play a bit of the devil's advocate here. Charlie is absolutely
right that Bachmann, Cain, Santorum, Perry, Newt and even (gag) Donald Trump had
their moments in the sun during the 2012 GOP race -- thanks to a desire from
some conservatives to be with someone (anyone) other than Romney. But, none of
those people won the nomination or, really, came all that close. (Santorum was
the runner-up to Romney, but was there ever a point where you thought the former
Pennsylvania senator would wind up as the GOP standard-bearer?) Ditto 2008 when
conservative energy was most definitely not behind John McCain and yet he wound
up as the party's nominee. In fact, with the exception of Ronald Reagan in 1980
and, to some extent, George W. Bush in 2000, the conservatives' top choice has
rarely won the nomination in recent years.

Context, of course, matters. The 2012 Republican field was notoriously weak --
particularly once Texas Gov. Rick Perry, hailed as the conservative savior,
proved something well short of that. There were plenty of conservatives in the
field -- see the list above -- but none of them were able to cross the threshold
of credibility that would allow them to coalesce a large portion of the GOP base
behind them.

That field frailty almost certainly won't be the case in 2016. Among the
candidates likely to cast themselves as credible conservatives: Scott Walker,
Bobby Jindal and Marco Rubio. If Jeb Bush decides to run, he cuts to the front
of that credible conservative line. So, in theory, Christie would be exposed as
insufficiently conservative by this group in a way that Romney never was.

But, Christie isn't Romney, either. He doesn't have the flip flops on things
like gay marriage and abortion that made conservatives question the former
Massachusetts governor's commitment to their cause. Christie is a Catholic, not
a Mormon. And he is a markedly better communicator than Romney ever was. And
although the 2016 field is without doubt stronger than the 2012 edition, none of
the "credible conservatives" are without potential weaknesses in the eyes of
conservatives. Take Rubio and Bush, for example, both of whom have voiced
support for immigration reform that puts them far to the left of where Romney
was in 2012 (self deportation!) and where the GOP base is at the moment.

Our case for Christie as front-runner -- or, maybe, more accurately first among
almost-equals -- is built around the idea that there is no perfect/electable
conservative in the race and that Christie has a decent chance of beating out
Jindal, Rubio and Walker in the battle to be the establishment candidate. (There
is a whole other primary -- where Rand Paul is the front-runner -- that will
pick the outsider candidate to battle the establishment pick.) Of that quartet
of credible establishment conservatives, Christie is the one who, at first
glance, could most easily put together the tens (and probably hundreds) of
millions of dollars needed to run real operations in a series of states in short
order.

Christie has been -- and remains -- the pick of the Wall Street/business crowd
(Home Depot founder Ken Langone is hosting an event for him this weekend in
Florida), and has spent his entire governorship building relationships with that
powerful New York money crowd. (Another fight, with an as-yet-to-be-determined
winner, is for the Texas GOP money set.) Money isn't everything in the race.
(Right, President Giuliani?) But, the way that Romney and, ultimately, McCain
won the 2012 and 2008 nominations, respectively, was to bleed dry their
underfunded challengers. Being the fundraising front-runner allows you the
chance to slip and recover -- something candidates with less money simply can't
do.

Christie also would seem to have the most obvious early win of those four
candidates. (As Giuliani's doomed 2008 bid proved, you have to win one of the
first three states -- Iowa, New Hampshire or South Carolina -- to realistically
have a chance at the nomination.) None of the four is a natural fit for the
social conservatives of Iowa, but Christie's fiscal conservatism and brashness
would seem to be a perfect fit for the New Hampshire primary. (Christie,
tonally, reminds us of McCain, who won the New Hampshire primaries in each of
his two presidential bids.)

Using the "money + a likely (possible?) early state win = good" equation,
Christie comes out ahead of the other establishment types he is going to be
competing with. Is it a wide edge? No way. Could questions about his true
conservative credentials or worries about his style (is he brash or a bully?)
doom him? Absolutely. But he won't be running against the perfect GOP candidate.
He'll be running against a bunch of candidates who have their own sets of issues
to overcome. And given that reality, there's no reason to think he isn't in the
top tier or even at the top of that top tier at this moment in time.

Fixbits:

A $1.1 trillion spending bill easily passed the House.

Reps. Jim Moran (D-Va.) and Buck McKeon (R-Calif.) will retire.

Former defense secretary Robert Gates said Obama's decision to set a "red line"
on Syria's use of chemical weapons was a "serious mistake."

The NRCC has blacklisted Jamestown Associates.

A new poll shows very little rise in support of legalizing marijuana.

Former Republican senator Scott Brown's Web site is attracting attention.
Meanwhile, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.) had a productive fundraising period,
pulling in $1.1 million during the final three months of 2013. She has $3.4
million in the bank.

Florida state Rep. Kathleen Peters (R) was not ready to endorse David Jolly (R)
a day after she lost to him in Florida's 13th District primary.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) said she once came face to face with a drone.

Must-reads:

"Obama fighting perception that administration is out of time to make progress
on priorities" -- Zachary A. Goldfarb, Washington Post

"Blue Dog Democrats, whittled down in number, are trying to regroup" -- Paul
Kane, Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


