                             2153 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (First Draft)

                            October 24, 2014 Friday

Today in Politics

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 656 words



HIGHLIGHT: If there was one message officials tried to convey in New York on
Thursday after the discovery that a doctor contracted Ebola, it was this: We are
on top of this.


New York's Line on Ebola: We're on Top of This

Good Friday morning from Washington, where Republicans' chances of controlling
the Senate have slipped to 63 percent. Midterm elections are 11 days away, and
the campaign trail will be crowded, with Hillary Rodham Clinton and Senator
Elizabeth Warren of Massachussetts stumping in Boston and Gov. Chris Christie of
New Jersey getting ready for a weekend trip to Iowa. Meanwhile, Congress is
holding a special session on Ebola, which has made it to New York.

If there was one message government officials tried to convey in New York on
Thursday after the discovery that a doctor had contracted Ebola, it was a simple
one: We are on top of this.

It's a lesson they learned in Dallas, where a fumbling, hesitant response left
the public nervously wondering why government at all levels - federal, state and
local - seemed to be playing catch-up.

But Mayor Bill de Blasio, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and, by phone, Dr. Thomas R.
Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, went
out of their way on Thursday to describe how the recent case in New York City
was being handled. They were unflustered and detailed in their description of
the condition of the patient, Dr. Craig Spencer, and they repeatedly emphasized
how prepared both the city and its healthcare workers were.

Dr. Frieden's participation was notable. Federal officials were heavily
criticized in Dallas for their uneven response, and his leadership and judgment
in particular were questioned.

The setting they selected to break the news to the public was fitting. They held
the news conference at Bellevue Hospital Center - where Dr. Spencer was being
treated and his fiancée was quarantined.

Bellevue, founded in 1736, is the nation's oldest continually operating hospital
and has been a leader in handling infectious diseases. In 1985, during the early
days of the AIDS crisis, one-quarter of the patients in the hospital's
Department of Medicine had the disease.

It may yet turn out that problems are discovered or that lapses in protocol
emerge in New York. But with the Dallas experience on their minds, officials
clearly wanted to offer a confident and transparent description of why they
believed in their ability to confront and contain the disease.

Paul's Star on Display as Big Names Turn Out for Policy Speech

Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky is probably the biggest political curiosity in
America. And for proof, consider the boldface names who turned out to hear him
speak on a dreary Thursday night in Midtown Manhattan.

There were figures of the political right like Peggy Noonan, the Wall Street
Journal columnist and former Reagan speechwriter, and Grover Norquist, the
antitax crusader. James O'Keefe, the conservative filmmaker and provocateur,
looked on from a corner table.

There were titans of business like Jeffrey L. Bewkes, the chief executive of
Time Warner, and Richard Plepler, the chief executive of HBO. (They were both
seated at the head table with Mr. Paul.)

The occasion was Mr. Paul's speech, to the Center for the National Interest, in
which he described his foreign policy doctrine of "Conservative Realism."

In the speech, Mr. Paul went where few other Republicans have been willing to
go, criticizing the American military's drone program because it "may create
more jihadists than we eliminate."

And he was sympathetic to Muslims who feel tainted by association because of the
extremists who carry out terrorist attacks in the name of their religion. "The
world does not have an Islam problem," he said. "The world has a dignity
problem, with millions of men and women across the Middle East being treated as
chattel by their own governments."

Mr. Norquist was pleased. "I think I just heard Ronald Reagan speaking," he said
after the speech.

- Jeremy W. Peters

White House's Canine Heroes Aren't Bred for Petting

Like this? Get First Draft delivered to your inbox

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


