                             2158 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 30, 2013 Monday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Pakistan's Musharraf remains defiant

BYLINE: Pamela Constable

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN


Facing treason charges, Pakistan's former leader is defiant        On eve of
trial, Musharraf asks: 'Where is the treason?'

On eve of trial that could result in the death penalty, Musharraf insists that
he acted as a patriot.

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Former Pakistani president Pervez Musharraf, scheduled to
face charges of high treason this week before a special tribunal, on Sunday
adamantly defended his decision to suspend the constitution in 2007, an act that
has led to the spectacle of a onetime military ruler being brought before
civilian courts in a country long dominated by the army.

In his first interview with foreign journalists since being released from house
arrest in November, Musharraf, 70, said the prosecution "smacked of a vendetta"
by the government. The current prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, is the same
politician Musharraf ousted as prime minister in a 1999 coup; Sharif was tried
for murder and treason and sent into lengthy exile.

Musharraf veered between jocular retorts and emotional pleas in the lengthy
meeting at his country mansion, decorated with ceremonial swords and rifles,
near the Pakistani capital. He refused to say whether he would appear in court
Wednesday as required, but his comments previewed likely defense arguments in an
extraordinary case that has raised fears of new strains in Pakistan's delicate
balance of civilian and military power.

"Where is the treason?" Musharraf demanded, asserting that he had acted with
support from top civilian and military officials when he declared the 2007 state
of emergency and that all his actions in his nine years as president had been
patriotic rather than self-serving. "I have done so much for my country and for
the people of Pakistan. Is this what I deserve?"

Musharraf depicted his short-lived 2007 crackdown as needed to stop an
overambitious judiciary from interfering in his efforts to combat Islamist
terrorism and extremism. But his actions were viewed by many as a dictatorial
tool to cling to power. The resulting wave of protests forced him to resign as
army chief, hold new elections and step down from office in 2008.

For more than four years the former ruler lived in self-imposed exile, but he
returned in March in a bid for a political comeback. Instead, he found himself
facing charges of murder in two political assassinations and a 2007 military
raid on a fundamentalist mosque, as well as treason charges related to the state
of emergency. If convicted of treason, he could face the death penalty or life
in prison.

Although Musharraf insisted he had no fear of facing the courts and no intention
of trying to flee the country, his attorneys have filed several petitions
claiming that the judicial proceeding is biased and unconstitutional, which
Musharraf hinted might keep him from appearing in court. More significantly, the
retired general tried to depict the charges against him as a broader effort to
attack the military as a whole.

"The army has always been the center of gravity in Pakistan," he said. "Whoever
does wrong against the army chief certainly causes disturbance in the military
ranks." But Musharraf did not repeat a previous comment that the prosecution is
a "vicious attempt to undermine the Pakistani military." Instead, he said he
would rather not speculate on how the army views his case.

Some Pakistani analysts have noted that the current army leadership is not
personally committed to Musharraf and should not feel threatened by the charges
against him. Others have warned that if the case drags on through appeals, it
could embroil other former officials and lead to increasing unrest in a powerful
military establishment that has repeatedly intervened in civilian rule.

Talat Masood, a retired general and analyst here, said the attempt to try
Musharraf in civilian courts is an "extraordinary leap" in asserting civilian
control. "In principle, it is justified, because if democracy is to take root,
it will make the possibility of coups more remote," he said. "But the government
must be careful to control the fallout and keep military morale high."

Government critics have suggested that the sudden decision to prosecute
Musharraf is a dramatic show to distract the public from Pakistan's multiple
crises and ailments - from severe power shortages and high unemployment to
conflicts with Washington over drone strikes, which have plagued the Sharif
government since it took office in June.

Musharraf seemed to both rue and relish the woes facing his former nemesis, and
to cling to an illusion of his own popularity. He said his heart "weeps" for
Pakistan and its increasingly dire economic conditions, but he insisted that if
he had been allowed to run for office this year, he would have been able to
steer his country back on course.

For all his efforts to sound jovial and benign, the aging retired general could
not resist slipping into military metaphors. Asked why he had taken the risk to
return to Pakistan, he replied: "I was a commander, and the first lesson you
learn is to kill or be killed. . . . It still runs deep in my blood."

constablep@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


