                             2192 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     December 24, 2013 Tuesday 1:56 PM EST

Eight ways robots stole our jobs in 2013

BYLINE: Lydia DePillis

LENGTH: 846 words


If we talked about nothing else in 2013 -- and, all right, 2012, too -- we
talked              about the question of whether              technology is
going to take all              our jobs. This latest surge of the age-old debate
seems to have abated, for now, with the anti-robot contingent in America
somewhat mollified by the promise that additional automation may be the one
advance that allows for manufacturing jobs to return from overseas and relieves
humans of the most dangerous and unpleasant tasks. Theoretically, the robotic
gospel goes, that talent is then freed up for more fulfilling and productive
work. (Hint: The more "creative" and "social" you are, the more likely you are
to survive.)

Either way, it's worth looking at the different ways automation began rendering
new classes of jobs obsolete this year.

1. The people who mail stuff

Back in 2012, Amazon acquired Kiva Systems, a maker of robots that can be
programmed to pick up online orders in a warehouse and shuttle them to their
departure points. The company now has 1,382 of the machines in three fulfillment
centers, which means it eventually may not even have to hire the tens of
thousands of temp workers it brings on for the busy holiday season. And if you
had any doubts that Amazon could eventually do the same with flying drones,
well, let this be a lesson. (Amazon chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The
Washington Post.)

2. The people who reheat pre-cooked food

The nationwide fast-food strikes brought dire warnings from restaurant
industry-backed researchers that if line cooks cost too much, they could easily
be replaced by robots. That hasn't quite happened yet, but at least one company
is working diligently to make it possible. It's reasonable to believe that
McDonalds -- which is already replacing cashiers with touch screens in Europe --
would jump at the chance.

3. The people who sell clothes

E-commerce has been steadily eating away at brick-and-mortar stores for years
now, but what's been cropping up more recently is a breed of business that sees
taking retail out of the picture as a point of pride. American Giant, for
example: The purveyor of basic, high-quality clothing makes its stuff just
outside San Francisco, which it can do affordably because it sells to
in-the-know urban sophisticates purely online, skipping the American
Apparel-style marketing blitz altogether. That may mean you can get a
high-quality, U.S.-made hoodie for a competitive price. It also means that the
people who might otherwise have sold it to you don't have jobs.

4. The people who stock shelves and return shopping carts

Not all labor-saving innovations are high-tech. The discount supermarket Aldi --
which is owned by the same corporate parent as the more bourgeois Trader Joe's
-- keeps payroll down by requiring a 25-cent deposit for shopping carts so
employees don't have to return them, and stocking shelves with boxes full of
goods rather than placing the individual items in neat rows. Again, great for
shoppers on a budget -- at the cost of employment.

5. People who drive trucks

Autonomous vehicle technology is accelerating, and for now, is focused on
passenger vehicles. But the real labor shortage is in long-haul trucking, and as
my colleague Brian Fung pointed out, that's a job that might be more safely
filled by a remotely-controlled robot that never gets tired or lost. Which just
means that the 5.7 million people who do the job now will have to find a new way
to make a living.

6. People who operate farm equipment

The history of agriculture has been one long tale of automation, to the point
where almost nobody works on farms in America anymore. The exception was
supposed to be people who operated the machines that replaced people who tilled
the soil and harvested the crops by hand. But even they're not safe anymore,
with the advent of tractors that can be piloted around the fields by computer or
even programmed with the right coordinates and set loose, like a gigantic
dirt-treading Roomba.

7. The people who make iProducts

After years of close scrutiny for the working conditions in its factories,
Foxconn -- which makes most of Apple's computers, phones, and tablets -- decided
to swap people out for machines as much as possible. The process hasn't been as
quick or as easy as anticipated, but with wages rising in China, Foxconn has
little choice but to keep cranking out the one-million-strong army of "Foxbots"
it promised back in 2010.

8. The people who do low-level lab work

In North Carolina's Research Triangle Park, a company called LabCorp is hard at
work developing machines to sort and split blood samples, which is just one of
hundreds of thousands of menial laboratory jobs that pay decent money but could
more efficiently be done by robots.

We may be able to add bartenders next year, but at this point, it still seems
that man has an advantage over machines in making a decent Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


