                             2101 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op Talk)

                            June 18, 2014 Wednesday

The ISIS Advance Provokes the West and Arab States

BYLINE: JAKE FLANAGIN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1050 words



HIGHLIGHT: The incursion of militants into Northern Iraq has instigated
arguments on military action and governance in Washington and the Middle East,
JAKE FLANIGAN writes.


As the Islamic State of Syria and Iraq, or ISIS, advances in Iraq, many eyes are
trained on Washington and on the governments of Mesopotamia. Two questions are
being hotly debated: First, will the United States take military action to prop
up a fragile government it left in place after a decade of battle and more than
4,000 casualties? And, at a higher level, what does ISIS's rise say about the
prospects of an effective governance ever being established in the region?

In an Op-Ed for The New York Times, Anne-Marie Slaughter, the president and
chief executive of the New America Foundation, considers the possibility of
American engagement in both Iraq and Syria: The turmoil may "well involve the
use of force on a limited but immediate basis," she writes. "Enough force to
remind all parties that we can, from the air, see and retaliate against not only
Al Qaeda members, whom our drones track for months, but also any individuals
guilty of mass atrocities and crimes against humanity. Enough force to compel
governments and rebels alike to the negotiating table. And enough force to
create a breathing space in which decent leaders can begin to consolidate
power."

Ms. Slaughter "argued repeatedly for the use of force in Syria - to no avail,"
she writes. "We have been pilloried as warmongers and targeted, by none other
than President Obama, as people who do not understand that force is not the
solution to every question." But by not tackling Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad at the start of the Syrian conflict and by still allowing "the Syrian
government to continue perpetrating the worst campaign of crimes against
humanity since Rwanda, support for ISIS will continue."

But the United States cannot act alone to address both ISIS and other conflicts
in the Middle East, writes David Ignatius for The Washington Post: "History
tells us that the only way to restabilize this region is to gather the essential
players around a table and begin framing a new security architecture. The
participants would include Saudi Arabia and Iran, joined by the United States
and the other permanent members of the U.N. Security Council: Russia, China,
Britain and France. Turkey and Egypt should attend, too, since they have big
militaries that could play a stabilizing role."

However, at The Guardian, Simon Jenkins advocates for an entirely hands-off
approach, citing the West's fundamental lack of understanding of the region's
social and political mechanisms: "Iraq's Nouri al-Maliki, until recently blessed
as architect of Anglo-American nation-building, is now blamed for
nation-demolishing. The Sunni 'reawakening councils,' created at vast expense to
help America and Britain get out of Iraq, are now aids to its insurgents and
invaders." Geopolitical hypocrisies aside, the idea of another wave of Western
intervention in Iraq is beyond belief: "Trillions of dollars were spent and tens
of thousands of people died, for no good reason then and no good reason now."

Middle Eastern media have offered perhaps a more grounded look at the conflict.
At The Daily Star (Lebanon), Rami G. Khouri details the implications of the ISIS
conflict for Arab states and governance: ISIS, he argues, is not frightening
because of what it forecasts for the political future of Arabs but "because it
reminds us of the criminal incompetence of ruling Arab regimes during the past
half-century, and as such it clarifies what must be done to bring Arab societies
back to some semblance of normal life."

Ali Ibrahim, the deputy editor in chief for Asharq al-Awsat (Egypt), does not
blame the current Iraqi government alone and looks back to the period following
the invasion in 2003: "A large portion of the responsibility falls on the
shoulders of the Iraqi political elite, many of whom were in the diaspora and
played an important role in giving advice and guidance prior to the war. They
subsequently assumed power and further polarized the country." A decade of war
should have been enough to "learn from experience," he insists. "On the
contrary, we saw the continuance of policies that served to deepen and entrench
division."

Edward Grossman of The Times of Israel is critical of Western statecraft going
even further back - to the 20th century, to "the Middle East as fashioned by the
British and the French out of the dying Ottoman Empire, that is," he explains.
"The masters of the universe at Whitehall and the Quai d'Orsay drew borders
grouping together people with next to nothing in common to become 'Lebanese,'
'Syrians' and 'Iraqis.'" The result is the ethnic tinderbox that is the modern
Middle East, ever rife with conflict and neighborly vendettas and perhaps
ill-suited to the adoption of Western political ideals: "Bush sent the American
military to Baghdad not just to look for WMDs but to liberate the so-called
Iraqis and allow the Sunnis, the Shia, the Kurds, the Turkmens and the Chaldeans
to set up an enlightened, pluralistic democracy. A beacon for a new Middle East.
All people yearn for democracy, right? To claim they're not suited was a form of
bigotry."

Reactions on Twitter have been similarly diverse and widespread:

If ISIS takes Baghdad, the caliphate will reign for at least two or three weeks.

- Jeffrey Goldberg (@JeffreyGoldberg) June 12, 2014

#ISIS as we see it today is the consequence of a war left to fester, unchecked,
in the heart of the Middle East. - Lara Setrakian (@Lara) June 12, 2014

The war in #Iraq was never legal and never ended. Now #Iran is fighting a war
America is unable to fight. #TheIraqWarNeverEnded  - Ahmed Shihab-Eldin (@ASE)
June 16, 2014

Painful to watch the world wonder what to do with Iraq, but not Syria. Poor
Syrians left to their fate. #tragic

- Nervana Mahmoud (@Nervana_1) June 17, 2014

Iranian nation will protect #Iraq's holy shrines & they aren't alone. Iraq's
Sunnis, Shias & Kurds all ready to defeat terrorism #solidarity

- Hassan Rouhani (@HassanRouhani) June 18, 2014

So it settled: massacres and savagery by Sunni extremists attract more outrage
than massacres and savagery by so-called 'secular' autocrats.

- Emile Hokayem (@emile_hokayem) June 17, 2014

Remarkable to think of Special Forces heading back into #Iraq when many have
already done 3, 4, 5, 6 deployments there - plus #Afghanistan.

- Gayle Tzemach Lemmon (@gaylelemmon) June 16, 2014

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


