                             2113 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (The Caucus)

                              July 18, 2014 Friday

What's News in Washington: White House Faces Dual International Crises

BYLINE: ALAN RAPPEPORT

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 541 words



HIGHLIGHT: While President Obama has tried to keep focused on domestic issues
this week, news out of Ukraine and Gaza has overshadowed what&#8217;s happening
closer to home.


Good Friday morning from a sunny and not-too-humid Washington.

While President Obama has tried to keep focused on the economy, infrastructure
and the humanitarian crisis at the Texas border this week, news out of Ukraine
and Gaza is overshadowing what's happening closer to home.

Mr. Obama will huddle with members of his cabinet Friday before embarking on a
weekend at Camp David. He is holding separate meetings throughout the day with
Secretary of State John Kerry, Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary, and Sylvia
Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services .

As the fallout from the downing of a commercial plane in Ukraine continues to
emerge, the tragedy could bolster Mr. Obama's efforts to isolate Russia, The
Times's Peter Baker and Michael D. Shear report. Thus far, the White House has
allowed that the crash was "fueled by Russian support for the separatists."

At an event in Detroit on Thursday, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was more
blunt, declaring that the plane was "blown out of the sky."

Here's what else you need to know:


     ·    It's been a year since Edward J. Snowden started leaking classified
          information about the National Security Agency's surveillance
          practices. At noon, the Advisory Committee to the Congressional
          Internet Caucus will convene experts to assess the damage that has
          been done to the United States since those revelations became public.



     ·    It's a good day for reminiscing about the Clinton years. At 1 p.m. The
          Clinton Library is releasing a sixth batch of archived documents that
          could include insights on everything from Vice President Al Gore's
          2000 presidential campaign to Supreme Court nominations and Osama bin
          Laden.



     ·    Feeling confident? The latest Reuters/University of Michigan consumer
          sentiment index is due to be released at 9:55 a.m. With consumer
          spending accounting for the majority of economic activity, the measure
          will be closely watched by economists.


Here's what we're reading:


     ·    Safely removed from scandals in his home state of New Jersey, Gov.
          Chris Christie basked in his celebrity status during a trip to Iowa.
          While the Republican has not said that he will run for president, he
          made one promise to residents in the key primary state: "I'll be
          back." (New York Times)
     ·    Hillary Rodham Clinton has also had a busy week in the limelight, with
          a high profile appearance on "The Daily Show" and an interview with
          Charlie Rose. But while the Democratic base continues to show their
          support for her, there are signs that progressives' hearts are with
          Senator Elizabeth Warren. (Politico)
     ·    Some prospective presidential candidates are keeping a lower profile
          for now. Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, has been busy
          raising private equity funds for his oil and gas ventures. (Bloomberg
          News)
     ·    Meanwhile, with twin crises overseas, some critics said Mr. Obama was
          wrong to stick to his schedule and attend fund-raisers in New York
          City. The White House defended the scheduling, arguing that the
          president was fully capable of working from the road. (Wall Street
          Journal)
     ·    Use of drones and spying on allies has not been great for America's
          image around the world. But according to a new Pew poll, most places
          outside of the Middle East still view the United States favorably.
          (The Economist)


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


