                             216 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           February 5, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. curbs drone strikes in Pakistan, officials say

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Greg Miller

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1239 words


The Obama administration has sharply curtailed drone strikes in Pakistan after a
request from the government there for restraint as it pursues peace talks with
the Pakistani Taliban, according to U.S. officials.

"That's what they asked for, and we didn't tell them no," one U.S. official
said. The administration indicated that it will still carry out strikes against
senior al-Qaeda targets, if they become available, and move to thwart any
direct, imminent threat to U.S. persons.

Concern about Pakistani political sensitivities provides one explanation for the
absence of strikes since December, the longest pause in the CIA's drone campaign
since a six-week lull in 2011, after an errant U.S. air assault killed 24
Pakistani soldiers at a border post, triggering a diplomatic crisis.

The current pause follows a November strike that killed Pakistani Taliban leader
Hakimullah Mehsud just days before an initial attempt at peace talks was
scheduled to begin. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's government accused the United
States of trying to sabotage the talks, and the Taliban canceled the meeting.

Since then, the Obama administration has worked to improve relations with
Sharif, who took office last June in the first democratic transfer of power in
Pakistani history. Administration officials have praised his efforts to address
serious structural problems in Pakistan and to promote peace in the region.

A senior administration official, in response to queries, denied that any
informal agreement had been reached, saying that "the issue of whether to
negotiate with the Pakistani Taliban is entirely an internal matter for
Pakistan."

The administration is "continuing to aggressively identify and disrupt terrorist
threats in the Afghan war theater and outside areas of active hostilities in
line with our established CT [counterterrorism] objectives and legal and policy
standards. . . . Reports that we have agreed to a different approach in support
of Pakistani peace talks are wrong," said the senior official, one of several
interviewed for this article who spoke on the condition of anonymity about the
sensitive matter.

Relations with Pakistan have warmed even as U.S. tensions have worsened with
Afghan President Hamid Karzai, who has accused the administration of plotting
against him, both with Pakistan and with the Pakistan-based Afghan Taliban, a
separate but allied organization with which he has said he is trying to start
his own peace negotiations.

The new round of Pakistan-Taliban talks, which was due to begin Tuesday, was
postponed by the government after two members of a Taliban-named delegation
declined to participate.

Disclosure of a pause in the drone campaign in Pakistan came as a senior
Republican lawmaker assailed the Obama administration for tightening the
guidelines under which lethal drone strikes are permitted.

Rep. Mike Rogers (Mich.), the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said
Tuesday that policy changes made by President Obama last year to the drone
program "are an utter and complete failure, and they leave Americans' lives at
risk."

Rogers cited the spread of al-Qaeda offshoots in Yemen, Syria and Africa, and
said that "individuals who would have been previously removed from the
battlefield by U.S. counterterrorism operations for attacking or plotting to
attack against U.S. interests remain free because of self-imposed red tape."

The chairman did not mention the CIA program in Pakistan. His comments came
during a House hearing on security threats and referred to new targeting
criteria imposed by Obama last May that are supposed to allow strikes only
against al-Qaeda operatives who pose a continuing and imminent threat to U.S.
persons, and only in cases when there is a "near certainty" of no civilian
casualties.

The nation's intelligence director signaled his disagreement with Rogers later
in the hearing. Asked whether he thinks the country is at greater risk because
of Obama's counterterrorism policies, Director of National Intelligence James R.
Clapper Jr. said, "No, I do not."

"I don't think it has anything to do with the policies of this administration or
any other," Clapper said. "What I think it has more to do with is the
transformation, if you will, of the terrorist threat, its diffusion, its
globalization and its franchising."

While strikes in Pakistan appear to have temporarily halted, they have continued
in Yemen, including recent attacks that have reportedly killed civilians.

White House officials also disputed Rogers's characterization, saying Obama's
constraints on the drone program are meant to allow the continuation of strikes
against terrorist groups, but under rules that are less likely to incite
hostility toward the United States.

"The president has made clear that even as we aggressively pursue terrorist
networks - through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our
foreign partners - America must move off a war footing," said White House
spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden. "We will not be safer if people abroad believe we
strike within their countries without regard for the consequence."

Asked after the hearing what people or countries he was referring to when he
talked about "individuals" who "remain free," Rogers said that "terrorists who
are in the crosshairs and would be removed from the battlefield under the old
policy are still in the crosshairs, but are still actively planning attacks
because of the policy change."

The counterterrorism policies adopted last year were also supposed to lead to
greater transparency - a goal that has been largely unfulfilled. Rep. Adam B.
Schiff (D-Calif.) urged intelligence officials at Tuesday's hearing to release
aggregate data each year on how many people the United States had killed in
counterterrorism operations and how many might be civilians.

Officials showed scant enthusiasm for the proposal. CIA Director John Brennan
said it was a "worthwhile recommendation" that the administration could
consider, but he declined to comment on it further.

Sharif gained an endorsement for peace talks from an all-party conference
shortly after he took office. Since then, he told Parliament last week,
militants have continued killing innocent civilians and Pakistani soldiers.

While "the government is doing what it can to stop drone attacks," which have
bolstered extremism and anti-Americanism, "we can no longer allow the massacre
of innocent civilians" by terrorists, he said. "The situation is not acceptable
anymore."

Sharif also said that "the whole nation will stand behind" a military offensive
against the extremists if peace efforts fail. The administration has pressed
Pakistan for years to launch a full-scale military assault against the Haqqani
network, a branch of the Afghan Taliban that is headquartered in the same tribal
area along the Pakistani-Afghan border as the Pakistani group.

But the lines dividing the groups are often hard to draw. In late 2009, seven
CIA officers and contractors were killed in Khost, Afghanistan, in a suicide
attack that al-Qaeda claimed as revenge for a CIA drone strike that year that
killed Pakistani Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud. He was replaced by his
clansman, Hakimullah Mehsud, who appeared in a subsequently released video along
with the bomber.

The strike that killed Hakimullah Mehsud was believed to be CIA retaliation for
the Khost attack.

deyoungk@washpost.com

greg.miller@washpost.com

Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


