                             211 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Drones and Yemeni Forces Kill Qaeda-Linked Fighters, Officials Say

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Saeed Al Batati contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen,
and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 882 words


WASHINGTON -- American drones and Yemeni counterterrorism forces killed more
than three dozen militants linked to Al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen over the
weekend in one of the largest such attacks there in months, officials from both
countries said Monday.

At least three airstrikes were carried out against Qaeda fighters in a convoy
and in remote training camps in southern Yemen. They were militants who were
planning to attack civilian and military facilities, government officials said
in a statement.

Yemen's Interior Ministry said Monday that as many as 55 militants had been
killed, but a senior Yemeni official put the figure in the 40s. The government's
statement also acknowledged that three civilians had been killed and five
wounded in one of the airstrikes on Saturday.

Yemeni officials said they were working to identify those killed in the attacks.
As part of a campaign using armed drones in Yemen, the United States has been
trying to kill Nasser al-Wuhayshi, the head of Al Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula, based in Yemen, and Ibrahim al-Asiri, the group's master bomb maker.
But American officials said Monday that those men were not the intended targets
in these strikes.

The precise role of the United States in the airstrikes and ground operations
was not immediately clear. American officials said the airstrikes had been
carried out by drones operated by the Central Intelligence Agency, but an agency
spokesman declined to comment. Other officials said American Special Operations
military personnel had supported the Yemeni operations on the ground with
intelligence and possibly logistical assistance. The Pentagon declined to
discuss the operations.

The White House press secretary, Jay Carney, referred all questions about the
operations, which started on Saturday and continued past midnight on Sunday, to
the Yemeni government, and he spoke only in broad terms about the
counterterrorism cooperation between the two countries.

''We have a strong collaborative relationship, as you know, with the Yemeni
government and worked together on various initiatives to counter the shared
threat we face from A.Q.A.P.,'' said Mr. Carney, referring to Al Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula.

American officials sought to play down the United States' role and to allow Abdu
Rabbu Mansour Hadi, Yemen's president, to bolster his domestic credibility and
claim credit for the operations. They had a troubled relationship with the
longtime president who preceded him, Ali Abdullah Saleh, but they have voiced
confidence in Mr. Hadi and increased aid to the country.

The drone attacks were the largest barrage of airstrikes carried out in Yemen
this year -- 11 in all so far, according to The Long War Journal, a website that
tracks drone strikes -- and one of the largest strikes carried out since
President Obama outlined a new strategy last May for targeting Qaeda militants
in battlefields outside Afghanistan.

In his speech in May, Mr. Obama said targeted killing operations were carried
out only against militants who posed a ''continuing and imminent threat to the
American people.'' He also said no strike could be authorized without ''near
certainty that no civilians will be killed or injured,'' a bar he described as
''the highest standard we can set.''

Given that the administration would not even confirm that American drones
carried out the strikes over the weekend, it was unclear how the people targeted
in the strike posed a threat to Americans. The Qaeda affiliate has in the past
targeted the United States Embassy in Sana, the Yemeni capital.

The raid by Yemen's Counterterrorism Unit late Sunday, which occurred on the
main road connecting the southern province of Shabwa with the adjacent province
of Marib, culminated nearly 48 hours of intensive airstrikes.

''The operation delivers a strong message to the criminal and terror operatives
that the armed forces and security personnel are ready to foil and thwart
terrorist acts in any time and place,'' Mr. Hadi said in the government's
statement.

The statement said three airstrikes had destroyed a Qaeda training camp in a
remote mountainous area in Abyan, a southern province, killing two dozen
militants, including foreign fighters.

The government said several other airstrikes had targeted vehicles and militants
in Abyan, Shabwa and Bayda Provinces.

Mohsen Labhas, a resident of Al Lahab, a village near a highway that connects
the cities of Ataq and Bayhan in Shabwa Province, said that after hearing
gunfire on Sunday night, he and other residents jumped in their cars and raced
to the scene. They were met by American drones and helicopters. ''We abandoned
our car since we thought that the aircraft might target us, but it turned out
that it warned us from approaching the area,'' he said.

''Nearly half an hour later, the aircraft fired a missile at a target on the
ground,'' Mr. Labhas said.

A strike on Saturday morning targeted a vehicle in Bayda Province, killing 10
militants and wounding one, according to the Yemeni government. It said
intelligence had indicated that the fighters were planning to attack important
installations.

''Regrettably, three civilians were also killed during the attack and five were
injured when their pickup truck unexpectedly appeared next to the targeted
vehicle,'' the statement said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/22/world/middleeast/us-drones
-and-yemeni-forces-kill-qaeda-linked-fighters-officials-say.html

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Vehicle wreckage after an airstrike in Yemen over the weekend,
part of nearly 48 hours of intensive counterterrorism attacks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


