                             2134 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            September 5, 2014 Friday

Brandishing a Gun to Woo Voters

BYLINE: FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 492 words



HIGHLIGHT: Firearm ads come and go as political staccato punctuating the
electioneering season.


"They call me a long shot," Estakio Beltran, a congressional candidate in
Washington state, declares in a TV ad, never once disclosing that he's a
Democrat but taking aim with his shotgun at a piñata - an elephant piñata in
case anyone doubts what he's gunning for. Bam! the gun goes off and the
sad-eyed, paper-tattered toy elephant topples. Mr. Beltran's ad is one of many
bamming and kerpowing across the land from candidates pandering to gun
enthusiasts. He may not win an election, but his seems the most entertaining or
at least the silliest. Particularly so when he racks the empty shell from his
gun in macho triumph and rides off like Clint Eastwood, heading east toward the
Capitol on a loping donkey (a Democratic donkey?).

Gun ads come and go as political staccato punctuating the electioneering season.
They play out as an entirely separate reality from such familiar Americana as
the accidental Uzi death last week at the hands of a nine-year-old in Arizona.
The latest ads were collected by National Public Radio and, unsurprisingly,
shooting a thick wad of "Obamacare" legislation is the cliché of choice among
Republicans bearing arms. Will Brooke, a Republican congressional candidate in
Alabama, has "a little fun," showing off his considerable arsenal of favored
weapons - everything from gleaming pistol to ominous assault rifle - and
shooting them all at what the Supreme Court has pronounced the law of the land.
Joni Ernst, a leather-clad Republican running for Senate from Iowa, dismounts
her motorcycle and gets off six rounds and a promise to "unload" on the
Affordable Care Act. "Give me a shot!" she implores voters in her sign-off.

So it goes, to the point where Republicans choosing other sorts of targets
provide merciful relief. Matt Rosendale, a Montana candidate for the House,
blasts up and away at what he would have you believe is a federal drone snooping
on his sacred freedoms. Dan Sullivan, an Alaska Republican running for the
Senate, drills a defenseless old TV set, standing his ground against
out-of-staters flooding the airwaves with mudslinging campaign ads.

So far, no one is making a commercial about the new Idaho law that allows
teachers and students to bring guns to class. A professor exercising his
"enhanced concealed carry" rights at the state university in Pocatello
accidentally shot himself in the foot Wednesday.

But in truth, there are moments of substance in the politics of the gun. The
ballot in Washington state has competing gun initiatives this fall, with rival
check writers going at it to finance TV commercials. Initiative 594 aims to
close the notorious loophole that lets people buy guns without background checks
online and at gun shows. Backing it are such major donors as Bill and Melinda
Gates and Nick Hanauer, the Seattle venture capitalist. In contrast, initiative
591 would prevent the expansion of background checks. The gun lobby stands
behind this as the ballot duel plays out.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


