                             2122 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (The 6th Floor)

                             August 11, 2014 Monday

Behind the Cover Story: Robert Draper on Libertarianism's Prospects

BYLINE: RACHEL NOLAN

SECTION: MAGAZINE

LENGTH: 1170 words



HIGHLIGHT: Robert Draper, a contributing writer for the magazine, wrote this
week&#8217;s cover story about the rise of libertarianism. Here, he discusses
the movement&#8217;s prospects.


 Robert Draper, a contributing writer for the magazine, wrote this week's cover
story about the rise of libertarianism. Draper is the author of "When the Tea
Party Came to Town." His last article for the magazine was about Wendy Davis.

Did you see or hear something in particular that made you think it was time to
write about libertarians?

I'm tempted to say that this article amounted to a lifestyle choice on my part,
being that libertarians as a general rule are fun and quotable. In truth, I'd
been thinking about libertarians ever since Rand Paul's filibuster last year to
protest the notion of drone missiles being used domestically and, in a broader
sense, the surveillance state. Ted Cruz's filibuster a few months later may have
catalyzed the government shutdown, but it had not roiled the Twittersphere (or
jolted the G.O.P. establishment) the way Paul's performance had. Arguably not
since the days of Reagan had a Republican sparked the imagination of young
Americans. So I asked myself: What does this say about Paul, about millennials
and about the Republican party? Exploring that question brought me to the
hypothesis that America had arrived at a libertarian moment, one that could
bring young voters into the G.O.P.'s camp - though only if the party does more
than simply pay lip service to the movement.

Are libertarians taking a new enough tack to really attract a "bigger tent"? How
far could they go before alienating their base?

As we've seen in the past two presidential election cycles, the Republican
Party's "base problem" presents a fundamental dilemma: Given that the G.O.P.'s
core constituency (middle-age white males) is a shrinking demographic, how does
it appeal to other voting groups without alienating its loyal followers? Herein
lies what David Frum called "the libertarian temptation." On the one hand,
Americans (especially young voters) increasingly favor gay marriage,
decriminalization of marijuana and less foreign adventurism - all libertarian
positions. On the other hand, the G.O.P. has long been propped up by the
three-legged stool of not only fiscal austerity, but also military hawkishness
and social conservatism, the latter two legs of which do not feel especially
supported by libertarians. It's a tricky balancing act - and, as I outline in
the article, Rand Paul's attempt to pull it off is both novel and precarious.

You interviewed several young women for this article. Do libertarians seem to
have less of a white, old-man problem than the G.O.P.?

Traditionally, libertarianism was even more of a bastion of white males than the
Republican Party - in part because its feeders were the male-dominated habitats
of laissez-faire economics, sci-fi, survivalism and video games. (The acolytes
of the libertarian writer and Objectivist philosopher Ayn Rand were and are
primarily young men.) Back in the late-'90s when Kennedy, the former MTV
personality, pronounced herself a libertarian, she had almost no female friends
in that tribe. Now there are the Sex and the State blogger Cathy Reisenwitz, the
YouTube ranter Julie Borowski and several other prominent female libertarians.
Still, young women happen to be among the demographic groups that are most
approving of an active governmental presence in American life and,
correspondingly, among the least apt to applaud the go-it-alone ethos championed
by Reisenwitz and other libertarian purists.

Several people in your article, including Paul himself, mention Silicon Valley
as a constituency. And yet that group has been notable so far for its political
noninvolvement. Has anyone from Silicon Valley donated to the libertarians?

Well, they've donated to causes that could be viewed as libertarian, like
marijuana decriminalization. But until Paul's arrival on the scene, there has
never been a plausible presidential candidate, including his father Ron, whose
supporters were animated by the goals of getting the elder Paul in every G.O.P.
debate and through the entire primary process, rather than by the quixotic
notion of a Ron Paul presidency. Still, both parties acknowledge that the
Silicon Valley electorate is a swing group, which is why Congressman Jared Polis
(the Democrats' closest thing to a libertarian on the Hill), from  Boulder,
Colo., told me that Nancy Pelosi applauds him publicly supporting Bitcoin, the
rollback of N.S.A. powers and other positions associated with the movement.

Are there any statistics or did you get a sense of the age profiles of
libertarians?

As I saw during my four months of reporting for this story, libertarianism has
many camps. Some are anarcho-capitalists who advocate communalism over
government. Some are motivated by regulatory and fiscal minimalism. For others,
the animating factor is government's intrusion into our personal life, whether
by N.S.A. surveillance or by marital restrictions. As the Reason Foundation
pollster Emily Ekins found, over half of millennial voters aren't wedded to
either party and tend to lean to the left on social issues while slightly to the
right on economic ones. Ron Paul's 2008 and 2012 campaigns were fueled by the
grassroots support of college students who had that sort of libertarian profile.
But presumably many of those Paul supporters got tired of supporting someone who
stood no chance of winning. We'll see if Rand Paul - who famously visited
Berkeley and received a standing ovation for his speech on privacy - makes
"libertarian Republicans" out of young voters who have been alienated by the
G.O.P.'s stances on social issues.

Short of gaining a lot more votes than they ever have, the only way for
libertarians to affect national politics is to pull one party, the G.O.P. being
the obvious candidate, in their direction. What would they need in order to do
that?

Earlier this summer I attended the Libertarian Party's national convention in
Columbus, Ohio, and sat at the dinner banquet with the New Jersey delegation. I
asked my tablemates if they could find it within themselves to support Rand Paul
should he become the G.O.P.'s presidential nominee. The delegates were stunned
by the question: support a Republican, rather than the party's chosen candidate?
To them, Rand Paul was just another standard-issue conservative politician who
would likely be beholden to the big donors who backed him. And at the
libertarian outdoor festival Porcfest, I found many supporters of Ron Paul, but
none for his son. For that matter, Nick Gillespie, the editor of Reason, told me
that he would "have to look at his platform" before deciding whether to support
candidate Rand Paul. Meanwhile, Republican stalwarts like John McCain and
Lindsey Graham have taken pot-shots at Paul, their Senate colleague, while over
in the House, the libertarian movement's current darling, Congressman Justin
Amash, is viewed with unalloyed contempt by G.O.P. House leaders. All of which
is to say that libertarians and Republicans generally don't play well together.
So Rand Paul has his work cut out for him.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


