                             2129 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             August 29, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: 'Google Dorking'

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 570 words



HIGHLIGHT: Why Bo Jackson is suing a small meat packager. Fifteen strategies to
help independent retailers. And what the S.B.A. could do to &#8220;unfreeze
small-business credit.&#8221;


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    Recent economic data is pointing up.
     ·    All of the Federal Reserve's regional surveys showed expansion in
          August.
     ·    Yet a poll indicates pessimism on the economy has grown.
     ·    Major seed companies don't plan to cut prices for the next growing
          season despite sliding corn and soybean prices.
     ·    United States refinery production has reached record highs and supply
          depots are full - meaning lower prices at the pump.
     ·    Lending for construction grew 4 percent in the second quarter.


The Law


     ·    The Supreme Court will take up a case that involvesthe proliferation
          of state licenses.
     ·    Here is why Bo Jackson won't stop suing a small meat packager.


Online


     ·    Businesses should be on the lookout for "Google Dorking," which is a
          term for the use of advanced search techniques by malicious hackers
          looking for stuff that companies didn't mean to put online.


Retail


     ·    Here's how to open a new bar that feels old.
     ·    Here are 15 strategies to help independent retailers stand up to the
          likes of Amazon and Walmart.
     ·    An online retailer says it will fine customers $250 if they threaten
          to complain about a purchase.


Employees


     ·    The California Supreme Court has rejected the idea that franchise
          companies are the employers of workers who are hired, fired and
          managed by independent store owners.
     ·    This graph sums up the American workday.


Management


     ·    Here's why Motorola no longer dominates the telecom industry.
     ·    Here's how once-cool Urban Outfitters lost its mojo.


Marketing


     ·    A grocery chains asks a 6-year-old to design its label.
     ·    Here are three ways to acquire customers who are not just one-offs.
     ·    The brand manager of a vacuum cleaner tries to show how good the
          product is at cleaning germs by eating off a subway floor.
     ·    If you want a response to an email, don't start it like this.
     ·    A publicist explains her love of publicity.


Finance


     ·    A former chief of the Small Business Administration thinks the
          government could be doing more to unfreeze small-business credit.
     ·    A new tech investment fund backed by Peyton and Eli Manning and
          Carmelo Anthony invests $35 million in a ticket search engine.
     ·    Andreessen Horowitz and Norwest Venture Partners invest $30 million in
          a new Internet of Things start-up that wants to connect your online
          social interactions.


Opportunities


     ·    An entrepreneur has found an opportunity making artisan soaps with
          olive oil from trees surrounding her home.


Around the Country


     ·    Apple's flagship store in San Francisco fills with protesters accusing
          the company of underpaying contract workers.
     ·    The price of a big Brooklyn laundry site doubled in a year.
     ·    A bike business expands in Schenectady, N.Y.
     ·    The Port of Long Beach has set a higher goal to buy goods and services
          from small businesses.


Around the World


     ·    China's toilet paper makers have plenty of cash.
     ·    British retailers are more optimistic than they have been in the last
          12 years. Still, according to this calculation, Britain is poorer than
          all but one American state.
     ·    There's a growing tech scene in Wales.
     ·    Russia's biggest bank is lending cats.
     ·    Walmart is trying to grow online in China.


Technology


     ·    Apple's iPhone 6, to be unveiled on Sept. 9, is expected to include a
          mobile-payments platform  powered by near-field communication.
     ·    Google is testing delivery drones.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


