                             2125 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                             (The Learning Network)

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday

Summer Reading Winner, Week 8 | The Art of Cabbage-Walking

BYLINE: THE LEARNING NETWORK

SECTION: EDUCATION

LENGTH: 843 words



HIGHLIGHT: Our winner this week was ClaireMCHS2014, and our Penguin Young
Readers guest judge was K.A. Harrington.


This week we received 574 entries for our Summer Reading Contest. After running
this contest for many years, we've learned that as the summer winds down, the
competition heats up.

So congratulations, ClaireMCHS2014. As always, we also honor several runners-up
and honorable mentions.

Thank you to K.A. Harrington, this week's guest judge from the Penguin Young
Readers Group. We love what she tweeted about the teenagers who responded:

I'm reading hundreds of entries from Week 8 of the @NYTimesLearning
#SummerReading contest and I am SO IMPRESSED with these students!

- Kim Harrington (@Kim_Harrington)12 Aug 14

She added: "Whether they were writing about the crisis in the Middle East, the
Ebola epidemic, or 'Sharknado 2', they approached their chosen topic with
passion, thoughtfulness and curiosity. It was truly inspiring to read their
words, and I'm thankful for the opportunity."

And keep those submissions coming - but remember that this Friday, Aug. 22, at 7
a.m. is the official end of the contest.

Winner: The Art of Cabbage-Walking

ByClaireMCHS2014

Being a person who's highly involved in the fine arts, I would say I'm a very
open-minded person when it comes to creativity and new modes of expression. Art
knows no limits, and in allowing this freedom, art allows the mind to constantly
push its boundaries. It's really where the beauty in art lies. However, despite
this belief, the video entitled "A Man Takes His Cabbage for a Walk," a supposed
breakthrough in artistic rebellion, had me a bit skeptical prior to watching it.
Compared to other groundbreaking works such as the works of the pseudonymous
graffiti artist, Banksy, whose street art blends dark humor and satire to
deliver profound messages on the flaws of the present, the idea of one man
walking a cabbage just didn't seem as if it could be quite as insightful or
compelling as other works of social commentary. However, as I said before, art
has no limits, and from what I've learned today, first impressions can be quite
deceiving.

Rather than scoffing at the content of this video or guffawing at the absurdity
of a man walking his cabbage, I found myself captivated by Han Bing and his own
interpretation of his art. In Han Bing's eyes, since the dawn of time, people
have had a "rock in their head," and this has ultimately made the human race a
very close-minded species. By walking his cabbage, he ultimately aims to
question normalcy and open the minds of the narrow-minded.

In this sense, the art of cabbage-walking, in my eyes, actually resonates a lot
more with the current generation than one would initially think. In a generation
where self-expression and creativity are becoming more celebrated and even
encouraged, many young people are beginning to challenge the status quo of
society and ultimately follow their own paths. Because of this and what I
personally believe Han Bing's cabbage to represent, I see Han Bing's art not as
an icon of artistic rebellion, but a symbol of our generation and what it stands
to represent: the importance of individuality.

Runners-Up


     ·    RachelPRHSLions2014 on "Am I Pretty?" videos
     ·    Ellie on the water crisis in Toledo
     ·    MadeleineMCHS2014 on overcrowded museums
     ·    Jayun on Ebola and compassion
     ·    NatalieWHSPAP14 on computer chips that mimic the way brains recognize
          patterns
     ·    Colby_AP_B14 on computer hacking
     ·    Paige BHSAP2014 on "When the College Admissions Battle Starts at Age
          3"
     ·    Grace_AP_B14 on autism
     ·    JessicaMCHS2014 on sexual assault on college campuses
     ·    Kerestin on teaching mathematics
     ·    LincolnLHS2014 on how New York City's prekindergarten program raises
          church-state issues
     ·    KStingoneBSGE on Saturn's hexagonal storm
     ·    bengal11Rosalyn100198 on caring for Alzheimer's patients
     ·    Carly S on issues of identity
     ·    MilkahPRHSLions2014 on Uganda's anti-gay legislation
     ·    AlexSARANAC14 on substance abuse in professional golf
     ·    Lindsay_AP_B14 on viewing art
     ·    Catherine_AP_B14 on gender roles for girls and boys


Honorable Mentions


     ·    HansenPRHSLions2014 on an interview with Sharon Sloane, C.E.O. of Will
          Interactive
     ·    KyleePRHSLions2014 on "precrastination"
     ·    AndreaPRHSLions2014 on digital books
     ·    Raphael H AAD2014 on issues of identity
     ·    SeungminPRHSLion2014 on drones
     ·    MelissaLHS2014 on expectations for girls and boys
     ·    DanielSJEMS on the conflict in Iraq
     ·    Stephanie MadHS on a book review of "What We See When We Read" by
          Peter Mendelsund
     ·    TaniaPRHSLions2014 on "Am I Pretty?" videos
     ·    BenPRHSLions2014 on issues of identity
     ·    Chris on "Sharknado"
     ·    NailahMCHS2014 on the abuse of teenage inmates at Rikers Island


Please note: If you are a winner, runner-up or honorable mention this week and
would like to have your last name published, please follow these directions.

More About Our Guest Judge, K.A. Harrington

K.A. Harrington is the pen name of Kim Harrington, author of several
paranormal/horror books. "Forget Me" is her first psychological thriller and her
first time writing under the name K.A. Harrington.

When not writing, you can probably find her reading, watching one of her
favorite TV shows, or fantasizing about her next vacation. She lives in
Massachusetts with her husband and son.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


