                             2106 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                              July 7, 2014 Monday

Morning Agenda: Curbing International Money Transfers

BYLINE: SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2086 words



HIGHLIGHT: Banks are curtailing money transfers, squeezing immigrants. | Wall
Street banks and private equity firms are competing for young talent. | American
Apparel&#8217;s future hangs in the balance. | SunTrust reaches a settlement
over mortgage modifications.


As regulators crack down on the financing of terrorists and drug traffickers,
many big banks are ending or limiting the business of transferring money from
the United States and other countries, moves that are expected to lead to higher
costs for immigrants sending money home to their families, DealBook's Michael
Corkery writes. While Mexico may be most affected, the banks' retreat over the
last year is also affecting other countries in Latin America and parts of
Africa.

JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America have done away with services that allowed
Mexican immigrants to send money to their families across the borders, and the
Spanish bank BBVA is reportedly exploring the sale of its unit that wires money
to Mexico and across Latin America. Citigroup's Banamex USA unit has now closed
a number of branches that served Mexicans living in the United States and
stopped most remittances to Mexico as it faces a federal investigation related
to money laundering controls.

While regulators "have not banned banks from engaging in higher-risk businesses
like money transfers to certain countries, they acknowledge that banks must now
invest significantly more to monitor the money moving through their systems or
face substantial penalties," Mr. Corkery writes. "The government's efforts to
root out illicit activity have effectively put the banks into a law enforcement
role, industry experts say. And the result is undercutting another public policy
goal [#x2012] helping immigrants, who are primarily low income, move into
mainstream banking."

WALL STREET'S COMPETITION FOR YOUNG BANKERS  |  Private equity firms are
pressing earlier than ever to lure top talent from investment banks, reflecting
changes on Wall Street since the financial crisis, William Alden writes in The
New York Times. Jobs at private equity firms like are Kohlberg Kravis Roberts,
Apollo Global Management and the Blackstone Group are seen as the next rung in
an elite career ladder, offering higher status and more pay. But the firms that
attract young bankers also happen to be the banks' clients, which can create
conflicts of interest.

For these junior bankers, known as analysts, "securing such a job means stepping
into the middle of a Wall Street struggle that has intensified since the
financial crisis," Mr. Alden writes. The whirlwind of interviews, which this
year started in February, far earlier than many in private equity had expected,
requires analysts to sneak around and often miss work, a far cry from the
organized college recruiting process. To recruit young talent today, the private
equity firms make offers as long as 18 months before a job begins.

Banks, facing new regulations and haunted by negative publicity, are taking
unusual steps to try to preserve their appeal for ambitious graduates, including
promising analysts time off and offering them longer contracts. Meanwhile,
private equity firms have grown stronger, benefiting from low interest rates and
a soaring stock market. They have raised huge new funds and expanded into new
businesses, requiring additional workers.

CRUCIAL TALKS FOR AMERICAN APPAREL  |  American Apparel, the struggling retail
company, headed into the July 4 weekend with its future hanging in the balance,
Alexandra Stevenson and Elizabeth A. Harris write in DealBook. The company was
said to be in discussions with the British private equity firm Lion Capital
about the repayment terms and timing on a $10 million loan that is now past due.
Lion Capital is said to have indicated it is prepared to take legal measures to
ensure that American Apparel makes the payment, pending last-minute negotiations
with one of the clothing company's most important shareholders, the hedge fund
Standard General.

The development is the latest turn in a tumultuous two weeks for American
Apparel during which its founder, Dov Charney, was fired as chief executive.
That activated a clause in the contract with Lion Capital that says if Mr.
Charney is no longer at the helm of the business, the loan can be declared in
default. Days after his ouster, Mr. Charney, the company's largest shareholder,
expanded his stake after striking a partnership with Standard General. As part
of the deal, the firm lent Mr. Charney $20 million to build his stake up to 43
percent from 27 percent, with the provision that Standard General has voting
control over Mr. Charney's stock.

If American Apparel defaults on its Lion Capital loan, it could lead to the
default of a $50 million loan from Capital One. It could also unsettle a group
of creditors who bought $210 million in American Apparel bonds in 2013. On
Thursday, FiveT Capital, an asset management firm in Switzerland that was
American Apparel's second-largest shareholder, sold three-quarters of its stake
in the company, lowering its holding to 3.19 percent from 12.5 percent. The
company cited "confusion" over what comes next.

ON THE AGENDA  |  Data on consumer spending is out at 8:30 a.m. Congress returns
from its Fourth of July recess.

SUNTRUST SETTLES OVER MORTGAGE MODIFICATIONS  |  Federal prosecutors and
SunTrust Banks have reached a settlement in a criminal investigation into the
bank's tardiness in approving mortgage modifications, Matthew Goldstein writes
in DealBook. The bank agreed on Thursday to pay as much as $320 million for a
combination of consumer relief and housing counseling services. Most of the
money being paid by the bank under the settlement will go toward a fund to
compensate borrowers who were shortchanged by SunTrust.

The agreement stems from an investigation by federal prosecutors in Virginia
into SunTrust's compliance with the Home Affordable Modification Program, one of
several initiatives enacted by the Obama administration to encourage banks to
modify loans for struggling homeowners after the financial crisis. Federal
prosecutors and investigators from several other federal government agencies
found that SunTrust not only acted slowly in processing borrower applications
for mortgage modifications but also made misrepresentations to homeowners.

|  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Holcim and Lafarge List Potential Asset Sales Ahead of Merger  |  Holcim and
Lafarge, the world's two largest cement and construction materials companies, on
Monday outlined the assets they planned to sell in hopes of easing regulatory
approval for their merger. DealBook »

Helvetia Agrees to Buy Swiss Insurance Rival  |  The $2 billion deal combining
Switzerland's Helvetia and Nationale Suisse would create the third-largest
insurer in the country, with about 7,000 employees and premiums of more than $10
billion. DealBook »

Banco Itaú of Brazil Sells Insurance Unit to Ace  |  The unit offering high-risk
corporate insurance was sold for $685 million, or about four times its book
value, making Ace Limited the largest provider of such policies in Brazil.
DealBook »

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Bank of America Names Co-Heads of Investment Banking in Britain  |  Ian
Ferguson, a managing director at the bank, and Michael Findlay, the co-head of
corporate broking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, will oversee
investment banking operations in Britain and Ireland. DealBook »

Joint Venture to Take Over Canary Wharf Driverless Train Line  |  Keolis of
France and Amey of Britain will begin in December to operate the railway that
serves the London financial hub under a seven-year, 700 million pound contract,
replacing Britain's Serco Group. DealBook »

Win or Lose, in Britain It's Where the Game Is Played That Matters  |  From
sports to commerce, Britain embraces "Wimbledonization," the idea that no matter
the outcome, it is much better to have all the players on its home turf.
DealBook »

Quick Stock Sales Toy With Volcker Rule's Spirit  |  At times, investment banks
have blurred the line between raising capital and banned proprietary trading,
Antony Currie of Reuters Breakingviews writes. DealBook »

PRIVATE EQUITY »

A.D.M. to Acquire a Swiss Food-Flavoring Company  |  Archer Daniels Midland will
pay $3.1 billion in cash and debt for Wild Flavors, which provides ingredients
to the food and beverage industry and is partly owned by funds affiliated with
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts. DealBook »

Morgan Stanley Asia Private Equity Fund Raises $1.7 Billion  |  Morgan Stanley
said on Monday that its Asian private equity unit had raised $1.7 billion for
its fourth Asia fund as it seeks investment opportunities in China and South
Korea, Reuters reports. REUTERS

HEDGE FUNDS »

Argentina Begins Debt Negotiations in New York  |  Axel Kicillof, Argentina's
economy minister, will lead the negotiating team traveling to New York to meet
with a court-appointed mediator on Monday as it tries to resolve a dispute with
holdout creditors over unpaid debts, The Wall Street Journal writes. WALL STREET
JOURNAL

If Convicted, Rengan Rajaratnam Faces Light Insider Trading Sentence  |  Rengan
Rajaratnam, who is on trial for conspiracy to commit insider trading, could get
just a few months in prison, legal experts say [#x2012] much shorter than the
11-year term being served by his brother Raj Rajaratnam, the former billionaire
hedge fund manager. DealBook »

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Intelligent Energy Valued at $1.1 Billion in London I.P.O.  |  Intelligent
Energy, a British developer of hydrogen fuel cells for automobiles and consumer
electronics, priced its offering of 16.2 million shares at £3.40 a share, in
line with the company's prior expectations. DealBook »

SABMiller to Sell Stake in South African Hotel and Casino Group  |  SABMiller,
the world's second-largest brewer, plans to sell its 39.6 percent stake in the
South African hotel and casino group Tsogo Sun Holdings for about $1.1 billion
after a strategic review. The brewer plans to sell most of its stake through a
private placement to institutional shareholders this month. DealBook »

VENTURE CAPITAL »

A Casino Town Rolls the Dice on High-Tech  |  The city of Reno, Nev., is looking
to shed its image as a fading casino town in favor of one as a high-tech hub of
e-commerce ventures, an Apple data center and a testing ground for drones, The
New York Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Airbnb's Promise: Every Man and Woman a Hotelier  |  Airbnb, a company valued at
$10 billion that has raised the suspicions of government officials, says that it
is helping New Yorkers stay in their homes, Ginia Bellafante writes in the Big
City column. NEW YORK TIMES

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Barclays Suit Sheds Light on Trading in Shadows  |  Barclays' dark pool seems to
have catered to high-frequency traders, the very participants it claimed to
protect against, a lawsuit contends, James B. Stewart writes in the Common Sense
column. NEW YORK TIMES

When Taxes and Profits Are Oceans Apart  |  Many American companies do not
divulge the tax bills they would face by bringing home their overseas earnings.
It's a figure that investors could benefit from knowing, Gretchen Morgenson
writes in the Fair Game column. NEW YORK TIMES

Hiring Is Strong and Jobless Rate Declines to 6.1%  |  Employers added 288,000
jobs in June, the Labor Department said on Thursday, the fifth month in a row
that hiring has topped the 200,000 mark. The unemployment rate dipped to 6.1
percent last month, the best reading since September 2008. NEW YORK TIMES

Jobs Numbers Raise Questions About Fall in G.D.P.  |  Growing employment is not
mathematically compatible with a contracting, productive economy, Jared
Bernstein writes on the Upshot. NEW YORK TIMES UPSHOT

Dow Closes Above 17,000 as Stock Rally Outpaces Economy  |  The current bull
market has lasted nearly 64 months, making it the fourth-longest since the crash
of 1929, and investors are showing few signs of slowing down. DEALBOOK

Corinthian Colleges Agrees to Sell Bulk of Campuses  |  Corinthian Colleges said
late on Thursday that it had reached a deal with the United States Department of
Education to sell most of its 107 campuses and wind down others, Reuters writes.
The agreement comes after months of financial difficulties for the publicly
traded company and underscores the uncertainty that for-profit colleges are
facing. REUTERS

France Puts Euro Zone Recovery at Risk, Economists Warn  |  France has been
hovering too long near stagnation and risks derailing a wider euro zone
recovery, a group of economists said at a conference in Aix-en-Provence, The New
York Times reports. NEW YORK TIMES

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


