                             2194 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     December 28, 2013 Saturday 3:02 PM EST

2013 is the year that proved your 'paranoid' friend right;
You owe your "paranoid" friend a beer.

BYLINE: Andrea Peterson

LENGTH: 667 words


Most people involved in the tech scene have at least one friend who has been
warning everyone they know about protecting their digital trail for years - and
have watched that friend get accused of being being a tinfoil-hat-wearing
conspiracy theorist. But 2013 is the year that proved your "paranoid" friend
right.

It's now a matter of public record that the NSA collects and stores the calling
records of domestic phone calls, tracks the location of millions of mobile
devices worldwide, infiltrates the data links between the data centers of tech
companies used by millions of Americans, piggybacks onto commercial tracking
mechanisms, collected potentially sensitive online metadata for years and
actively worked to undermine the privacy and security measures that underpin the
Internet. And considering the purported size of the Snowden cache, that could be
the tip of the metaphorical iceberg.

And while the NSA story alone undoubtedly gives the "paranoid" plenty of reasons
to say "I told you so," a slew of other reports from this year gave them even
more reasons to retreat into the wilderness and start subsistence farming.

For instance, the ACLU released a cache of documents showing that police around
the country are collecting license plate scanner information that could be used
to track physical locations of many Americans without consistent retention
policies. "Because of the way the technology works   these devices snap photos
of every passing car, not just those registered to people suspected of crimes
virtually all of the data license plate readers gather is about people who are
completely innocent," explained the ACLU, noting that the hit rates for the data
collected by these types of programs was often far below 1 percent. And while
one snapshot might seem innocuous, when you pool together huge databases of this
type of location information, it can create incredibly intimate portraits of the
how an individual lives their life   including where they work, which friends
the visit and what doctors they see. The associated report was aptly titled "You
Are Being Tracked."

Speaking of being tracked, an enterprising hacker discovered that the E-Z Pass
he used to make paying tolls simpler was being read all around New York City.
Turns out, the city had been tracking E-Z Passes for years as a way to measure
traffic patterns. The city wasn't very willing to reveal how long that data is
being retained or just how much information was being collected by these
clandestine readers. But the company that provides the RFID readers for the city
said it scrambles the tag IDs to make them anonymous and only held it for a few
minutes to compare against other traffic. Still, even if there are significant
safeguards in place, it's ample evidence that the technology you let into your
life that's capable of tracking you might not always be used in the ways you
expect.

Speaking of technology with obviously exploitable surveillance capabilities:
Someone might be watching you through your laptop's webcam  without even
activating the warning light. Reports say the FBI has had this capability for
several years, and researchers at John's Hopkins were able to demonstrate how to
covertly spy via webcams in MacBooks. Good thing you can cover up your webcam.
Too bad there's not a similarly easy solution for stopping hackers from
listening in on your laptop's built-in microphone.

Oh, and to top it all off: There was suspicious aerial activity going on at Area
51. Although no admissions of alien activity have emerged, much to John
Podesta's dismay, recently released documents reveal that the CIA tested its
first drones at the Nevada military base.

None of this means that we should all give up on modern technology or that we
now live in a surveillance-state dystopia. But it just might mean that we live
in a world where things that were once considered far-fetched science fiction
fantasy are increasingly being revealed as reality.

And that you owe your paranoid friend a beer.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


