                             2112 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                             July 17, 2014 Thursday

This Procedure May Improve Your Brain - and Uncover the Real You

BYLINE: ANNA ALTMAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 922 words



HIGHLIGHT: Transcranial direct-current stimulation delivers a small jolt of
electricity to the brain but may have a significant impact on how we learn,
recover from illness and combat mental illness. Will it also change our
personalities?


People are fascinated by the idea of enhancing themselves - by, say, 10,000
hours of practice or drugs to improve cognitive performance. Now a noninvasive,
20-minute procedure called transcranial direct-current stimulation, or tDCS, may
be able to help us learn a language faster, increase our alertness and curb food
cravings. It has been shown to help hasten stroke rehabilitation, ameliorate
chronic pain and treat even major depressive disorders.

The prospect has researchers as well as DIY enthusiasts enthralled, but some
people think the excitement is hyperbolic, premature and misguided.

In tDCS, a small current of electricity, about the strength of a nine-volt
battery, is delivered to the brain via an electrode affixed to the scalp. The
theory is that the electricity activates the neurons in the brain region closest
to the electrode and makes them more primed to fire.

It's sort of like jump-starting your car, only it's your cerebral cortex.

You can devise your own battery-pack shocker from consumer goods at Radio Shack
for about $20, according to Greg Miller at Wired. He details how DIYers have
embraced the technology, spreading online advice, subreddits for trading
information and how-to videos about delivering zaps at home.

All of the excitement, though, glosses over just how preliminary research on
tDCS is. R. Douglas Fields, writing for Scientific American, wonders whether the
findings "will land in the dustbin of pseudoscience." And Mr. Miller reports in
a second piece about tDCS in Wired that scientists who have conducted this
research and find it promising go to great lengths to warn the public against
jumping to any conclusions.

Marom Bikson, a biomedical engineer at City College of New York, told Mr. Miller
that we don't yet understand how the altered physiological state of the neurons
can have therapeutic effects on the brain. Mr. Bikson also took issue with the
notion that different skills can be targeted by electrode placement - there is
no "math" or "language" area of the brain to locate.

Vincent Walsh, a cognitive neuroscientist at University College London who led a
promising study on tDCS, argued that the field still needs bigger, more
carefully controlled studies to confirm early results. (So far, studies have
only used up to 50 subjects.)

These warnings haven't been successful at drowning out anecdotal reports from
those who have tried and really, really liked the treatment. Jad Abumrad, the
host of WNYC's Radiolab, gave it a try in the studio for an episode from last
month. Mr. Abumrad reported feeling "very, very awake."

Even the military has experimented with tDCS: Scientific American says that the
Air Force is using it to train pilots to guide drones, and the Radiolab segment
focused on improving attention and marksmanship for sniper training.

Sally Adee, who tried tDCS as part of an article she reported at The New
Scientist, was featured on Radiolab's episode and later wrote a personal essay
about the treatment. The shocks made her feel "like I had just had an excellent
cup of coffee, but without the caffeine jitters. I felt clear-headed and like
myself, just sharper. Calmer. Without fear and without doubt."

That clarity was emotionally profound: For days after the treatment, her mind
was free of the nagging voices of self-doubt and fear that she realized she
lived with daily.

Talking with Mr. Abumrad on his show, she said: "I was this person I hadn't
experienced before, and I thought maybe this is the actual core person who I am
when all my baggage isn't weighing on me. It was like somebody had wiped a
really steamy window and I was able to look at the world for what it was."

Ms. Adee's question of whether this was the real Sally recalls early misgivings
about cognitive-enhancing pharmaceuticals. Peter D. Kramer, writing about the
advent of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors in his landmark book,
"Listening to Prozac," told of a patient who, after years of fighting
depression, transformed within two weeks of beginning the drug. He reports that
she felt refreshed, as if she "had almost not known what it was like to feel
rested and hopeful." Mr. Kramer's observations made him wonder about the drug's
"ability to alter personality."

Ms. Adee, too, wonders about how tDCS might impact her personality. "Who was I
apart from the angry little bitter gnomes that populate my mind and drive me to
failure because I'm too scared to try?"

She then turned philosophical: "What role does doubt and fear play in our lives
if its eradication actually causes so many improvements? Do we make more ethical
decisions when we listen to our inner voices of self-doubt or when we're freed
from them? If we all wore these caps, would the world be a better place?"

Ms. Adee sees how tDCS might deepen inequalities or introduce new ones: "Is
brain boosting a fair addition to the cognitive enhancement arms race? Will it
create a Morlock/Eloi-like social divide where the rich can afford to be smarter
and leave everyone else behind? Will Tiger Moms force their lazy kids to strap
on a zappity helmet during piano practice?" Or, she asks, "Could school-age
girls use the zappy cap while studying math to drown out the voices that tell
them they can't do math because they're girls?"

With tDCS still in its infancy, the answers to many of these questions remain to
be seen. More studies will be needed to confirm or refute results released thus
far. In the meantime, and until devices are regulated, we can hope that DIYers
proceed with caution.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


