                             2195 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                  In the Loop

                     January 8, 2014 Wednesday 3:10 AM EST

Counter terror calendar 2014 is out!

BYLINE: Al Kamen

LENGTH: 467 words


Scrambling to find a belated Christmas gift for someone you overlooked? Someone
who remembered to send you an excellent present? Shop no more!

We've got a possible gift for that special someone: Yes, it's the new 2014
Counterterrorism Calendar, the 12th edition of the daily planner, which has been
put out for the last 10 years by the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) --
and before that by another government agency.

The cover is a bit grim. It's a photo taken from the Boston Marathon bombing.
Agency officials struggled with the photo selection because they wanted
something more positive in light of the agency's 10-year anniversary, one
official told us. "However, we cannot escape the harsh reality that, as proud as
we are of our part in many foiled plots, Boston still happened," he said.

It's in daily calendar format with, on the left, pictures, maps and data on
"most wanted" terrorists and organizations, starting with al-Qaeda co-founder
Ayman al-Zawahiri -- there's a $25 million bounty on him -- down to Abdul Rahman
Yasin, who was involved in the 1993 World Trad                           e
Center bombing in New York. (He's only worth $5 million.) You can pick up $10
million for info about Yasin al-Suri, who raises money and recruits for al-
Qaeda. Problem is he's hanging out in Iran these days and it might be tough to
get him.

Longtime calendar favorite  Anas al-Liby, worth $5 million for his involvement
in the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, is not listed
because he's now resting  in the slammer in New York.  He was picked up in
Tripoli on Oct. 5  by a Delta Force team. Unfortunately, another favorite, Faker
Ben Abdelaziz Boussara, is still at large, despite "his protruding ears" and "a
serious pituitary gland illness."

The right page of the planner has great factoids. For example, did you know that
Wednesday, 0r 6 Rabi' al-Awwal in the Islamic calendar, is the 16th anniversary
of the sentencing of Yasin's co-conspirator Ramzi Yousef? He got life plus 240
years in the bombing.

And did you know on what day in 2000  was Shining Path leader Carlos Fernandez
captured in Peru? That's right, Oct. 4 (or 9 Dhu al-Hijja).

Lots of people in  the calendar's "captured or killed" section, such as Anwar
al-Awlaki, are listed as "killed in an explosion." Hmmm. Well, explosions are
known to occur sometimes after drone strikes.

The calendars are given as resource guides for anti-terror folks, especially
those working in the field. You can get an online version on the NCTC Web site.
Budget cuts have reduced the number printed. But we're told the Government
Printing Office, for the first time, will be selling the 5-by-9-inch spiral
version online starting in a few weeks.

If you want one real quick, though, you got to know someone in the biz.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


