                             2146 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                           September 30, 2014 Tuesday

Today in Small Business: Paper or Plastic?

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 608 words



HIGHLIGHT: Mayor de Blasio plans to sign an executive order expanding New York
City&#8217;s living wage law. Macy&#8217;s is hiring for the holidays. How to
lose $1 million a month.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    Macy's holiday hiring hits a 14-year high.
     ·    Personal income and spending increased in August but pending home
          sales fell.
     ·    Manufacturing in the Texas region strengthened.
     ·    Economists see steady growth but remain mixed on their outlooks for
          various segments of the economy.


Employees


     ·    Mayor Bill de Blasio plans to sign an executive order expanding New
          York City's living wage law, covering thousands of previously exempt
          workers and raising the hourly wage to $13.13.
     ·    This is how to build a restaurant team.


The Environment


     ·    California Gov. Jerry Brown is expected to sign a bill imposing the
          nation's first statewide ban on single-use plastic bags.


Start-Up


     ·    A start-up has created a device that captures mileage data to
          determine how much a person should pay for car insurance.
     ·    Peter Thiel explains why you should run your start-up like a cult (and
          why he doesn't believe there's a tech bubble).
     ·    It's better to start a business while you're still employed elsewhere.
     ·    Here are five industries that entrepreneurs shouldn't overlook.
     ·    Some software start-ups are losing $1 million a month.


Social Media


     ·    Here are three techniques that will double your social media content
          with half the effort.


Management


     ·    Google's ex-chief executive and another longtime company executive say
          the "new style of managing" they developed should be widely copied.


The Mid-Term Elections


     ·    Marijuana entrepreneurs are pouring money into politics to support
          cannabis-friendly candidates.


Washington


     ·    The government aims at almost a half-billion dollars of grants to
          community colleges working with employers on job training.
     ·    The United States Department of Agriculture will put $52 million
          toward local and organic farming through farmers markets and organic
          research.


Marketing


     ·    National Coffee Day is proving to be more expensive each year.
     ·    Here are the coolest ways drones have been used in advertising.
     ·    A clever marketing campaign reversed Coca-Cola's 11-year decline in
          soda sales.


Around the Country


     ·    Mt. St. Helens could be getting ready to erupt.
     ·    A poll in Maine favors an increase in the minimum wage.
     ·    Bill Gates is still the richest person in America.
     ·    A Las Vegas pot dealer is arrested after posting weekly grow reports
          on YouTube.


Around the World


     ·    A lost Mozart sonata is discovered in Budapest.
     ·    Canada's small-business owners are looking for a big 2015.
     ·    South Africa may spend $270 million to aid small businesses.
     ·    Here are a few reasons to attend Britain's  2014 Festival of Female
          Entrepreneurs.


Cash Flow


     ·    Here is how accountants can pick up some cash on the side.
     ·    ATM fees keep climbing.


Health Care


     ·    A growing number of small-business owners are forgoing health coverage
          altogether and paying employees more to compensate for the lost
          benefits.


Energy


     ·    Solar energy could be the world's largest source of electricity by
          2050.


Retail


     ·    Dunkin' Donuts has plans to jolt slowing sales.
     ·    The Nightclub and Bar Convention and Trade Show has established an
          awards program to honor emerging small businesses.


Ideas


     ·    Economists think that both Uber and Lyft are good for consumers.
     ·    A Kenyan teenager's simple device could stop elephant poaching.
     ·    A start-up that is developing technology centered on biometrics, has
          raised $14 million in financing from a group of investors that
          includes MasterCard.


Technology


     ·    Microsoft hopes to repair its image with corporate America when it
          previews Windows 9 today.
     ·    Apple faces new wave of complaints over its iOS 8 upgrade.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


