                             2128 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                            August 28, 2014 Thursday

What We Write When It Won't Rain

BYLINE: ANNA NORTH

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1124 words



HIGHLIGHT: A new literature of drought may be emerging &#8212; one that harkens
back to the past, but also warns of an uncertain future.


"We do what we can to make it rain."

So writes Sterry Butcher in her Texas Monthly meditation on West Texas drought.
We do what we can, it seems, and we talk about what we've done, and how little
it yielded. Rain is something humans were worrying about in Biblical times, and
likely long before. But the long dry spell in the West has re-focused many
Americans' attention on water, and on what happens when there's not enough. And
a new literature of drought may be emerging - one with room for stories that
recall the past, but also for the possibility of trouble on a scale we've never
seen before.

Here's Ms. Butcher on drought superstition:

"A thunderstorm that glowers only a mile or two distant provokes the crossing of
fingers and messages sent heavenward to help steer the rain this way. It's
considered lucky to wash your car in such a circumstance, or hang out the
laundry, to entice - or dare - the rain to arrive. No studies exist to show the
effectiveness of such charms, but they can't hurt."

And on drought conversation:

"At an Alpine Cowboys baseball game this summer, I sat near two ranchers
commiserating about the weather. 'It's so dry I about can't stand it,' the first
fellow said. The other fellow nodded. 'When the mesquite starts to die, that'll
be it,' he said. 'If that happens, I'm rolling it up and we're done.'"

Take out the reference to studies, and much of this could apply a hundred years
ago - take out the cars and baseball and you could make it a thousand. And
indeed, a lot of what's written on drought today harkens back to an earlier era.
At San Diego Magazine, Clare Leschin-Hoar remarks on how little we still know:

"While the National Weather Service uses everything from a variety of
atmospheric models to weather balloons and drone planes to gather information,
scientists still can't predict precisely when a region will get rain, or how
much. That means water officials need to constantly plan for what's ahead."

Bobby Magill of Climate Central writes about a surprising consequence of the
California drought, under the very Biblical-sounding headline "Epic Drought in
West is Literally Moving Mountains."

And at The New Republic, Jeffrey Ball writes that "the scary statistics of
California's drought read like a latter-day version of the 1930s Dust Bowl
crisis." He notes that "whether climate change is at play is a question on which
scientists disagree." But this question seems to hang over much recent writing
on drought. At the very least, some writers may be starting to look at drought
as a sign that we need to change our relationship to water, and to the earth.

"I think there's a kind of visceral panic that occurs in people when suddenly
water seems to be unavailable," Scott Slovic, a professor of English and
co-editor of the anthology "Literature and the Environment," told Op-Talk.
"We're inspired to try to hoard water, to fill our bathtubs. Water is one of the
essential supplies that we're supposed to have in our homes should there be any
kind of disaster." When we see droughts like the one in California, he added,
"we begin to worry on a visceral, profound level that maybe there's something we
didn't quite bargain for."

Writers like Craig Childs, Ellen Meloy and Marc Reisner have tried to get
readers to take water more seriously, he said: "The literature has attempted to
make us revalue what is truly a precious resource."

And while writers have long been interested in the desert - "some of the oldest
tropes in world literature have to do with the power of dry places" - the way
they understand drought and dry landscapes may be changing. In the late 20th and
early 21st century, Mr. Slovic argued, writers have begun to challenge the "idea
that the boundaries of the desert are fixed. I think we increasingly have a
sense that aridity moves."

He sees Mr. Childs, for instance, as advancing the "notion that the American
desert is not just in a specific location. Many different, unexpected regions of
America and other parts of the world can easily become desert, and have perhaps
been desert historically" - a conception of "the fluid, moveable desert, of
uncertain climatic conditions that could result in water shortages for short
periods or immensely long periods."

Heather Houser, a professor of English and the author of "Ecosickness in
Contemporary U.S. Fiction," also sees a change. She traces it through the work
of the novelist Leslie Marmon Silko, author of "Ceremony" (1977) and "Almanac of
the Dead" (1991). "In 'Ceremony,'" Ms. Houser told Op-Talk in an email, "drought
drives a healing narrative: The protagonist, like the land, goes from a state of
sickness to one of health." But in "Almanac of the Dead," "drought is pervasive,
and one individual's actions aren't going to reverse it." Indeed, "the picture
Silko paints is apocalyptic; a local drought heralds global catastrophe."

Recent discussion of climate change, Ms. Houser argued, has led contemporary
writers to depict drought as a sweeping problem that's beyond any one person's
capacity to solve. Whether literature will motivate readers to solve it, though,
is an open question. "'Consciousness' is not the same as 'action,'" she said.
"The gap between these positions is often huge, even for the most stalwart
environmentalist."

Some writers, she added, have examined this gap, and "emotions like anxiety and
wonder that widen or shrink it." Richard Powers's 2006 novel "The Echo Maker,"
she said, "teaches readers about the destruction of sandhill crane habitat in
Nebraska and so raises awareness, but, in another plot about a neurological
disease, it also shows that the mind is astonishingly complex. We might feel
wonder and awe at the natural world and want to protect it, but there are
psychological and social obstacles obstructing the path from wonder to care."

Mr. Slovic sees, if not action, then at least rising concern. "Climate cycles
are not absolutely fixed and predictable," he said, "and that may be the great
lesson of the era that we're living through right now. Whether we believe in
human-caused planet-wide changes or whether we believe that these are natural
cycles, I think all of us in the early 21st century have this sense of a kind of
basic uncertainty about how conditions are changing."

He's noticed a growing desire to find ways to adapt to these changes: "The more
nimble we can be, the more lightly we can live on the planet, I think the more
able we will be to adjust to various shifts that we see occurring every day
right now and that are likely to continue to occur in the future, and I see this
reflected in the literature."

We don't yet know how to make it rain. But increasingly, we may be talking about
what to do when the rain doesn't come.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


