                             221 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 29, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Google building fleet of drones

BYLINE: Michael Liedtke

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 18A

LENGTH: 342 words


SAN FRANCISCO Google's secretive research laboratory is trying to build a fleet
of drones designed to bypass earthbound traffic so packages can be delivered to
people more quickly.

The ambitious program announced Thursday escalates Google's technological arms
race with rival Amazon.com Inc., which also is experimenting with self flying
vehicles to carry merchandise bought by customers.

Amazon is mounting its own challenges to Google in online video, digital
advertising and mobile computing in a battle that also involves Apple Inc.

Google Inc. calls its foray into drones "Project Wing."

Although Google expects it to take several more years before its fleet of drones
is fully operational, the company says test flights in Australia two weeks ago
delivered a first aid kit, candy bars, dog treats and water to two farmers after
traveling a distance of just over a half mile. Google's video of the test flight
can be seen on YouTube.

Besides perfecting their aerial technology, Google and Amazon still need to gain
government approval to fly commercial drones in many countries, including the
United States.

Amazon last month asked the Federal Aviation Administration for permission to
expand its drone testing. The FAA currently allows hobbyists and model aircraft
makers to fly drones, but commercial use is mostly banned.

Project Wing is the latest venture to emerge from Google's X lab, which has also
been working on self driving cars as well as other far flung innovations.

A team led by Massachusetts Institute of Technology aeronautics professor Nick
Roy already has been working on Project Wing for two years, according to Google.

Drones clearly could help Google expand an existing service that delivers goods
purchased online on the day that they were ordered.

The aerial vehicles also could make it easier for people to share certain items,
such as a power drill, that they may only need periodically and carry emergency
supplies to areas damaged by earthquakes, hurricanes and other natural
catastrophes, according to Google's Project Wing pamphlet.

LOAD-DATE: September 01, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


