                             2299 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 29, 2014 Tuesday 1:44 AM EST

With Israel, the world is blaming the victims;
The world exonerates the criminals for attacking Israel.

BYLINE: Richard Cohen

LENGTH: 726 words


Recep Tayyip Erdogan's anti- Semitism is getting the better of him. Once again,
the Turkish prime minister has trotted out the Hitler analogy in relation to
Israel and what it has done in Gaza. "They curse Hitler morning and night," he
said of the Israelis. "However, now their barbarism has surpassed even
Hitler's."

Erdogan's Hitler fetish is both revolting and inaccurate. Hitler murdered an
estimated 6 million Jews, not to mention millions of Poles, Russians, Gypsies
and, as a group, homosexuals; the Israelis have killed in the current Gaza
operation more than 1,000 Palestinians. The difference between murdered and
killed - the former on purpose, the latter mostly what's called "collateral
damage" - ought to be clear to anyone whose mind is not addled by anti-Semitism.

Israel has gone out of its way to try to avoid civilian deaths. It has often -
maybe too often - not succeeded. But it has warned civilians with telephone
calls and text messages and even dummy bombs hitting the roof. This, I point
out, is far more than President Obama has done when U.S. drones kill terrorists
in Pakistan or wherever. Hamas militants are also terrorists and they hide, as
every guerrilla army has ever done, among the people.

The loss of civilian life is awful, but it is no Holocaust. It is, though, an
opportunity for anti-Semites, latent or otherwise, to express their bigotry.
Their implied statement is that the Jews had it coming - see how they act now!
Their bigotry overpowers their logic and they deliriously lose all sense of
proportion - 6 million vs. 1,000 or so in Gaza - and they conflate the killer
with the killed. It is repugnant.

For Erdogan, the handier reference, one closer to home, would have been what the
Turks did to the Armenians. This genocide - the very word was coined by Raphael
Lemkin to encompass what happened to 1.5 million Armenians during and after
World War I - has been roundly denied by the Turkish government. In a dizzying
feat of irrationality, the head of that government brushes past the crimes of
his own nation to point an accusatory finger at the victims of another nation.

Erdogan's remarks are merely the reductio ad absurdum of the anti-Israel
argument. Some accuse Israel of a hideous lack of proportionality without
pausing to say what the proper proportion of death and destruction should be.
Would Hamas have ceased firing rockets into Israel if Israel had bombed less?
Somehow, I think not. Would Hamas have blown up its own tunnels if Israel had
ceased its attack after, say, a week? Again, no. After the attacks of Sept. 11,
2001, did the United States go into Afghanistan to kill exactly 2,977 al-Qaeda
and Taliban, an eye for every eye extinguished on that infamous day? Israel is a
small nation of only about 8 million people, more than a fifth of them Arabs.
Proportionality is a luxury beyond its reach.

It is clear that much of the world has grown weary of Israel. Its persistent
settlement of the West Bank is surely cause for indignation. Yet there is an
edge to the outrage that is elsewhere lacking. When did thousands gather in
Europe to protest the Syrian slaughter - not just the government's abhorrent
bombing, use of gas and repression but the torture and murder of about 10,000
activists and dissidents? It was a mass murder that the Syrian government
studiously archived - photos and such - which surely deserves the Nazi analogy
that comes so easily to the tongue of Erdogan and others. No matter. Silence.

To understand the fury of the European protests, it's useful to recall - and
expand upon - the remark of the Israeli psychiatrist Zvi Rex: "The Germans will
never forgive the Jews for Auschwitz." For any part of Europe that was
complicitous in the Holocaust - essentially most of it - this means coming to
grips with a terrible legacy that has to haunt subsequent generations and raises
a creepy question: Why did Grandpa kill the Jews? Look at what they have done in
Gaza. Now we know.

I take psychiatric theories with a grain of salt, but the effort of Erdogan to
make the victim worse than the victimizer is not only false and tasteless, it is
psychologically intriguing. It does more than blame the victim. It tends to
exonerate the criminal. History is repeating itself - not, as Marx said, as
either tragedy or farce, but in Erdogan's telling as pornography.

cohenr@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


