                             2209 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 6:44 PM EST

Rand Paul: So what if there is an al-Qaeda state?

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 924 words


Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) certainly blew his cover today, or what was left of it.
He has been claiming he's a Reaganite on foreign policy, but in an op-ed in the
Wall Street Journal he revealed that he is far, far outside the mainstream of
both parties on the establishment of an al-Qaeda state in Iraq. He doesn't think
we have a dog in that "civil war" there.

Paul says we shouldn't do things without the support of Congress (but the
president does have support on this) and the American people (whom he assumes
don't care if we face a launching pad for another 9/11). Understand that he
doesn't merely say we shouldn't put boots on the ground; he argues that we don't
have an interest in the outcome. He manages to get through an entire op-ed
without recognizing that a state dominated by the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) would represent a bigger threat to the United States than
Afghanistan did pre-9/11. Paul observes that the Iraq war was harder than
anticipated but ignores the success of the surge and the peaceful, stable state
in which the George W. Bush administration left Iraq. He also borrows President
Obama's false talking point that we couldn't leave forces there. (Paul
incidentally doesn't understand or is deliberately misleading readers when he
says our actions in Syria contribute to the rise of ISIS there; in fact, had we
swiftly pushed out Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, there would have been no -
zero - ISIS fighters there.)

By contrast, retired Gen. David Petraeus, who led the surge in Iraq, asserts:
"If President Obama and other leaders conclude that the threat posed by ISIS is
significant then I would support actions to target high value ISIS elements. If
ISIS is seen as a terrorist organization with the potential to engage in
terrorist acts beyond the Middle East, then that could warrant the targeting of
high value targets. . . .We must realize that ISIS poses a threat not only to
Iraq but to the UK and other countries as well. ISIS poses two challenges, to
the stability of Iraq, and also the emerging threat it poses beyond Iraq and
Syria."

So who is right - David Petraeus or Rand Paul?

Robert Kagan of the Brookings Institution, who has advised presidents of both
parties, says, "Fortunately, there is a very broad consensus in both parties, in
Congress, and in the administration that the US has a clear and direct interest
in preventing the establishment of a jihadi state in the Middle East."

Indeed, consider the contrast between Paul and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.):

The most acute security threat to the United States is the aggressive movement
of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) forces out of Syria and into Iraq
over the last six months.  These vicious Sunni fanatics may be relatively small
in number but they make up for it in sheer brutality.  Although President Obama
dismissed their aggression into Fallujah in January of this year as the
terrorist equivalent of the junior varsity, recent events suggest they are of a
much higher capability. . . .

Unlike Paul, Cruz has also been clear that under no circumstances should we
partner with Iran. ("Just because Iran fears the ISIS jihadists, it does not
follow that we should partner with them in this fight. The enemy of our enemy,
in this instance is not our friend.") One of these senators is acting in a
Reagan mode, and one sure isn't.

I asked Michael O'Hanlon, an early critic of the war strategy pre-surge and a
respected analyst of the surge's impact, why it was not a good idea simply to
sit on the sidelines. He replied that then "we get a prolonged period of
sanctuary for al-Qaeda in the region." He explained, "So it's not just about
outcomes, but about how long the chaos and the conflict persist, as well. What's
happening now already hurts our interests badly I'd argue, and with each passing
day/week/month, we are at greater risk of direct attack."

So what is Rand Paul for? He doesn't want to disrupt formation of an al-Qaeda
state, he doesn't want to back non-jihadi rebels in Syria, he doesn't want to
use drones to kill American jihadists in the area and he doesn't want a National
Security Agency surveillance system to detect jihadist plots. He is giving Obama
and his hapless secretary of state "time for diplomacy" with Iran, as Iran races
to its nuclear threshold and its economy rebounds. (About the only thing left is
to buy more ambulances for the next attack.) This is isolationism and
irresponsibility of the worst order.

David Adesnik, an expert on U.S. isolation, agrees in a piece thoroughly
debunking Paul's position:

Rand Paul has difficulty understanding why Al Qaeda safe havens threaten those
interests. It's hard to imagine [former Defense Secretary Casper] Weinberger or
[President Ronald] Reagan being so naive. Finally, the Weinberger Doctrine
insists on the use of force only as a last resort. In principle, that's an
entirely uncontroversial idea. The problem is to determine in reality when the
last resort has been arrived at. When ISIL controls large swathes of territory?
When it sets up a government? When Ayman al-Zawahiri arrives for a visit?

In that regard, Paul's views are closest of any GOP senator or congressman to
the president, although in his defense, Obama has figured out that it would be
bad to have a terrorist state smack dab in the middle of the most volatile place
on the globe. Maybe Paul should run for the other party's presidential
nomination; he's clearly to the left of Hillary Clinton on all of this. The
University of California at Berkeley crowd would love it.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


