                             2271 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 14, 2014 Monday 11:14 PM EST

MAP: How Asia is scared of China

BYLINE: Ishaan Tharoor

LENGTH: 329 words


A substantial Pew survey of global opinion released on Monday revealed, among
other indicators, how majorities in countries across Asia fear the threat posed
by China. Beijing's many territorial disputes with its neighbors -- ranging from
islands near Japan, shoals in the South China Sea and rugged Himalayan highlands
along its vast land border with India -- have flared alongside its own military
expansion. As China's economy booms, other Asian nations are growing
increasingly wary of its intentions and capabilities.

"In all 11 Asian nations polled, roughly half or more say they are concerned
that territorial disputes between China and its neighbors will lead to a
military conflict," read a Pew statement.

Pew data also shows how, despite its bad publicity for National Security Agency
spying and the use of drones, the United States is still seen in a more
favorable light than China by much of the world.

This is in part a consequence of the durability of the American brand, despite
the perceived heavy-handedness of its foreign policy, as well as genuine
concerns about what the world would look like if China is able to rival the
United States' superpower status. There's an emerging global consensus,
according to Pew, that China could surpass the United States as an economic
power.

Pew also provided a breakdown of who various Asian publics consider their friend
and foe. It shows clearly the hardening of the post-World War II consensus in
the Pacific, where a host of Asian democracies now appear to be looking for a
renewal of the Pax Americana in the face of provocations from China, including
numerous maritime standoffs with Chinese vessels. One prominent exception is
Pakistan, where public opinion regards China favorably and the United States
(and neighbor India) much less so. This is despite China's conspicuous crackdown
on Muslims in the far-western region of Xinjiang, on the other side of the
border with Pakistan.

You cam read the full report here.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


