                             2229 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      June 25, 2014 Wednesday 6:20 PM EST

The swift, quiet rise of Lt. Gen. Joseph Votel, Special Operations commander

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 1003 words


Shortly after a controversial Dec. 11 drone strike in Yemen, Lt. Gen. Joseph
Votel began pressing for the United States to push back on accusations that it
had killed numerous civilians in a wedding party in the process. He believed the
criticism was unwarranted and didn't want al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula to
use the narrative to score a propaganda victory, even though human rights
advocates concluded that civilians had indeed died.

Those details, reported in the Wall Street Journal in May, are among the only
recent public characterizations of Votel. The Army Ranger has led the military's
secretive Joint Special Operations Command since June 2011, overseeing the
military's most highly classified missions and well trained units. They include
the Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta, commonly known as
Delta Force, the Naval Special Warfare Development Group, often called SEAL Team
Six, and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron, which frequently deploys
with them.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced Tuesday that Votel is President Obama's
pick to serve as the next commander of U.S. Special Operations Command, the
powerful four-star command that oversees U.S. Special Operations forces across
the globe. The decision requires Senate confirmation, but it's hardly a
surprise. Rather, it continues a swift, quiet ascent by Votel through the most
elite forces in the military.

Votel, a married father of two, is rarely quoted, and has spent most of the last
decade quietly working in Special Operations. He'll spend just three years as a
three-star general if confirmed as the next chief of SOCOM, a relatively short
time for any senior officer.

In becoming the next SOCOM nominee, Votel follows a recent playbook. The current
SOCOM chief, Adm. William McRaven, previously served as the head of JSOC from
June 2008 to August 2011. But the White House hasn't always moved JSOC's
commander into the SOCOM job afterward.

In 2007, for example, President George W. Bush chose then-Vice Adm. Eric Olsen,
SOCOM's deputy commander at the time, to run the four-star organization. JSOC
had been run at the time by then-Army Lt. Gen. Stanley McChrystal for four
years. McChrystal would move on in 2008 to serve as the three-star direct of the
Joint Staff before ultimately being promoted and taking over the war in
Afghanistan in June 2009. In other words: If confirmed, Votel will move through
the Army's highest ranks faster than McChrystal, perhaps JSOC's most celebrated
commander ever.

Votel's résumé is bolstered by command assignments in a variety of influential
jobs. As a colonel he led the 75th Ranger Regiment - the Army's elite
light-infantry Rangers - as its members parachuted into Afghanistan on Oct. 19,
2001, to set up what would become Camp Rhino, the first U.S. base established in
the country.

In 2003, Votel established the U.S. Army's Counter Improvised Explosive Device
Task Force as a one-star general, advancing the military's ability to respond to
the threat IEDs posed in Iraq. The organization was eventually broadened to
become the Pentagon's Joint IED Defeat Task Force, or JIEDDO, and Votel stayed
on as its deputy director.

He was later became the deputy commanding general of the Army's famous 82nd
Airborne Division, of Fort Bragg, N.C., and served as the deputy commanding
general of operations for the Army task force that oversaw U.S. military
operations in eastern Afghanistan for 15 months beginning in February 2007. He
was subsequently selected to become a two-star general in September 2008 while
serving as a deputy commanding general at JSOC. He held that job from July 2008
until July 2010.

Through all that, Votel mostly stayed out of the public eye. In October 2010,
however, Gen. James Mattis, then the head of U.S. Central Command, chose him to
lead an investigation into how British aid worker Linda Norgrove was killed that
Oct. 9 during a failed rescue attempt in Afghanistan by JSOC troops.

Votel was serving at the time as the chief of staff of SOCOM, and some
questioned whether he'd spent too much time in JSOC to investigate its forces
critically. But Mattis and others pushed back, saying he was the most qualified
for the job, according to an Army Times article published at the time. The
troops involved in the botched mission were "shaking when they knew who was
coming to do the investigation," one source told the newspaper.

The investigation ultimately found that Norgrove was mortally wounded by a
grenade tossed by a U.S. service member. Three troops were disciplined for not
disclosing the details of the blast, U.S. officials said afterward.

Votel took over at JSOC in June 2011, shortly after a JSOC-led overseen by
McRaven killed terrorist leader Osama bin Laden in Pakistan on May 1. While
there, he has pressed industry to improve the military's ability to share
intelligence quickly and detect chemical weapons. The civil war in Syria and the
use of chemical weapons there is a good example of things the United States
needs to worry about, he said at the Special Operations Forces Industry
Conference in Tampa in May.

"The proliferation that has taken place in the last number of years, not only in
Syria, but in a variety of other locations where there are large stockpiles of
chemicals or other munitions out there that would pose a significant threat," he
said. "I think we always have to be concerned about those."

Votel's JSOC forces also have been busy within the last year in several
high-profile missions, including the capture of  Nazih Abdul-Hamed al Ruqai, an
alleged al-Qaeda official, outside his home in Tripoli, Libya, in October, and
the more recent raid in Benghazi, Libya, that led to U.S. troops - said to be
Delta Force operators - taking one the top suspects of the 2012 attacks on U.S.
compounds there into custody

Ahmed Abu Khattala was now transported to the USS New York. He is now believed
to be on his way back to Washington to be prosecuted, and is likely traveling
under guard on the USS New York.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


