                             2270 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                        July 14, 2014 Monday 5:29 PM EST

Isolated on foreign policy

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 968 words


The mainstream media and a good number of Democratic spinners (a few Republicans
as well) like to say that the GOP is divided or at war with itself over foreign
policy between the internationalist wing and the Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) wing.
But in fact what we've seen is that the Paul wing is just Rand Paul. (This is
the flip side of the Scoop Jackson wing of the Democratic Party that didn't
extend beyond former senator Joe Lieberman.)

The extent of Rand Paul's extremism is slowly coming to light. American
Enterprise Institute's David Adesnik has analyzed Paul's recommended summer
reading list. "The foreign policy section of the list consists entirely of works
that blame the United States for the rise of Islamic extremism while offering
solutions that verge on isolationism. Most of the books also express a sharp
hostility toward Israel and toward those who believe that U.S. foreign policy
should serve the cause of human freedom." Specifically, he includes Pat
Buchanan's anti-Semitic tract: "If Ron Paul's message isn't clear enough, the
curious student may turn to another book on the list, Pat Buchanan's critique of
George W. Bush's foreign policy, Where the Right Went Wrong. 'America's huge
footprint on the sacred soil of Saudi Arabia led straight to 9/11. The
terrorists were over here because we were over there. Terrorism is the price of
empire.' . . . Buchanan explains that 'the Beltway Likud was plotting and
propagandizing for war on Iraq long before 9/11.' The distinctive trait of this
clique is that it sees 'U.S. and Israeli interests as identical.' "
Unfortunately it's becoming clear that Paul's views are virtually identical to
his father's (who has three books on his son's list). Suffice it to say, there
is no elected Republican in Congress who would embrace these ideas.

On Sunday, Gov. Rick Perry got some help in taking Paul to task for his
blindness to the ISIS threat and isolationist outlook. Sen. John McCain
(R-Ariz.) had this to say on CNN's "State of the Union," my comments are in
brackets:

Senator Paul is part of a wing of the party that's been there ever since - prior
to World War I in our Republican Party. And that is a withdrawal to fortress
America. And I believe that the president of the United States has shown, absent
American leadership, what can happen in the world today.

Then there was former senator Rick Santorum (R-Pa.) on "Meet the Press": "I'm
with Rick Perry on that."

Previously, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) let it be known he's not with Paul on foreign
policy. In his internationalist, anti-Putin, anti-containment of Iran stances,
Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) also stands on the other side of the divide from Paul.
Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) put forth a budget that increases defense spending and
has spoken out about the need for U.S. leadership in the world. If you go down
the list of potential 2016 contenders (e.g. Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, Jeb
Bush) there isn't a Rand Paul-type on foreign policy in the batch. Save one
other senator, Paul was at odds with every member of the GOP conference on the
Menendez-Kirk bill, choosing instead to side with Majority Leader Harry Reid and
others who wanted to give President Obama time for diplomacy (but without the
threat of sanctions hanging over Iran).

Even more important, Perry drew praise from the largest pro-Israel group in the
country, Christians United for Israel. (CUFI previously tangled with Rand Paul
over his accusations that certain unnamed Christians wanted war in the Middle
East.) Its executive director, David Brog, told Right Turn, "Governor Perry's
argument will resonate with our membership. We know there are no easy answers
for stopping ISIS without boosting Iran. But Perry is right to stress the threat
posed by ISIS and the need for American leadership to combat this and related
threats in the long run." Candidates and GOP consultants, not to mention the
media, underestimate at their peril the importance of foreign policy to
Christian conservatives.

There is little appetite in the GOP at large for following the Obama example of
retrenchment; there is even less support for taking containment of Iran
seriously, as Paul does, or objecting to "tweaking" Vladimir Putin, as Paul did,
or nixing the use of drones against American jihadists overseas (except if
actually in combat, whatever that means), as Paul does. Because his views really
don't fly in the mainstream GOP, Paul has already tried to plead that he is
Reagan-like on foreign policy and tried to distance himself from his "we have no
dog in the fight" notion about Iraq (now saying he's for aid to Iraq's
government). Likewise, the rest of the GOP recognized that the Iraq war was won
when it was handed off to Obama and that the failure to leave a stay-behind
force was a critical Obama-Hillary Clinton error; Paul seems to think President
George W. Bush is to blame for the implosion there. (Paul of course was
perfectly content with Obama's refusal to leave troops in Iraq.)

Indeed, as the Obama foreign policy vision collapses, our allies openly bemoan
the lack of U.S. involvement and events spin out of control in Iraq, Paul's
credibility as a potential commander in chief is cracking badly as well. He can
try to use invective against critics and shimmy away from his own bizarre views
on everything from the start of World War II to former vice president Dick
Cheney's motivations for the Iraq war), but ultimately if he runs, it will be
him on the debate stage sounding on foreign policy like Obama (but worse) and
everyone else.

Perry deserves credit for landing the first real blow (Cruz to an extent as
well) from a potential 2016 opponent, but others are likely to follow. There
simply isn't any political mileage to be gained from agreeing with Paul's views
- unless of course you're a liberal Democrat.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


