                             2257 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 10, 2014 Thursday 1:57 AM EST

Obama defends not visiting Texas border, saying he's 'not interested in photo
ops';
The president forcefully defended his decision not to visit the border to view a
burgeoning humanitarian crisis.

BYLINE: Katie Zezima;David Nakamura

LENGTH: 1115 words


DALLAS - President Obama on Wednesday forcefully defended his decision not to
visit the Texas border with Mexico to view a burgeoning humanitarian crisis,
saying he's "not interested in photo ops" and challenging Congress to give him
new authority to respond to the situation.

"Nothing has taken place down there that I'm not intimately aware of," Obama
said during a hastily arranged news conference here, where he began a two-day
visit to the state for Democratic fundraising and an economic event. "This is
not theater."

His remarks came after a meeting with Texas Gov. Rick Perry (R) and local
leaders to discuss his administration's response to an influx of tens of
thousands of foreign children, mostly from Central America, who have entered the
state illegally.

Obama, under mounting pressure from members of both parties to view the border
situation firsthand, said he has been well briefed by his Cabinet aides and
called on Congress to quickly approve $3.7 billion in emergency funding to help
manage the influx.

Perry, in particular, has loudly criticized Obama's border policies in recent
days. In their meeting, Perry asked the president to beef up border patrols,
deploy Predator drones and National Guard troops, and pursue changes to federal
law that would allow the minors to be deported more quickly, according to aides
on both sides.

Obama said there was nothing Perry asked for that he had a philosophical
objection to and said he had instructed his staff to work with the governor on
some of his suggestions. But the president added that "if you ask people what we
should be doing, they give suggestions that are already embodied in legislation
I've sent to Congress.

"The challenge is, is Congress prepared to act to put resources in place to get
this done?" Obama said. "Another way of putting it is, are people more
interested in politics than solving problems? If they are interested in solving
the problem, this can be solved. If they prefer politics, the problem won't get
solved."

Perry, who had warned Obama of a rising number of minors at the border in a 2012
letter, sounded a sharper note in a statement released by his office after the
meeting.

"Five hundred miles south of here in the Rio Grande Valley there is a
humanitarian crisis unfolding that has been created by bad public policy, in
particular the failure to secure the border," the statement said. "Securing the
border is attainable, and the president needs to commit the resources necessary
to get this done."

Sen. John Cornyn (R-Tex.) said in a statement after Obama's Dallas remarks that
"Texans do not need a lecture from a man who refuses to even see the crisis
firsthand. President Obama can fundraise and issue statements. Texans will work
to solve the problem."

White House officials ruled out a visit by the president to the border amid his
scheduled stops in Dallas on Wednesday and Austin on Thursday, leading to
criticism from lawmakers who also chided him for a series of lighthearted events
in Denver on Tuesday night. The president drank beer and shot pool with
Colorado's governor and was photographed shaking hands with a man wearing a
horse-head mask. He also spoke about the economy and attended a fundraiser.

"If he had time, with all due respect, to have a beer and play pool like he did
in Colorado last night, then I think after the fundraisers he should make time
to go down there," Rep. Henry Cuellar (D-Tex.) told CNN.

Rep. Filemon Vela (D-Tex.) said in an interview that "if he's not going today,
he should go sometime very soon, and it's not so much to see the facilities but
to see the children."

Though administration aides said they have no regrets about forgoing a border
trip, the pressure clearly got to the White House. Cuellar said he was visited
by White House officials to discuss his concerns, though he declined to say with
whom he spoke.

Meanwhile, aides arranged the president's meeting with local officials at the
last moment before leaving Washington and accepted Perry's demands for a
face-to-face meeting.

Rep. Pete Gallego (D-Tex.), whose district stretches from San Antonio to El Paso
and includes the longest stretch of the U.S.-Mexico border of any House
district, defended the White House on Wednesday.

A presidential visit "would create an unneeded distraction by diverting law
enforcement and other resources at a critical time," Gallego said in a
statement. "We don't need photo ops, we need action. The ball is in Congress's
court to do this right."

Obama said he pressed Perry to lobby Capitol Hill Republicans, especially the
Texas delegation, to support his emergency funding request. GOP lawmakers have
reacted skeptically, saying the president has not proved he will strictly
enforce border-control laws and should not be given more money until he does so.

Perry, Obama said, suggested the president take far stronger actions along the
border without waiting for Congress. Obama said he reminded Perry that House
Speaker John A. Boehner (R-Ohio) has announced a lawsuit against the president
for abusing his executive authority.

"Don't wait for me to take executive actions if you have the capacity to get the
job done," Obama said of Congress.

The ill will between Obama and Perry dates back several years. In a letter to
Obama more than two years ago, Perry raised alarms about an increase in
unaccompanied children crossing the southern border, citing federal statistics
at the time showing that the number of minors had shot up 90 percent.

"By failing to take immediate action to return these minors to their countries
of origin and prevent and discourage others from coming here, the federal
government is perpetuating the problem," Perry wrote to Obama in May 2012.
"Inaction encourages other minors to place themselves in extremely dangerous
situations. . . . Every day of delay risks more lives. Every child allowed to
remain encourages hundreds more to attempt the journey."

The number of unaccompanied children at the border, which was 5,200 in 2012, has
shot up to more than 52,000 this year.

Perry said he never received an answer to his letter, but White House officials
said federal officials briefed the governor's staff more than once on the
administration's efforts to deal with border security after receiving the it.

On Wednesday, Obama said: "It would be useful for my Republican friends to
rediscover the concept of negotiation and compromise. These days in Washington,
everything falls victim to partisan politics. If I sponsor a bill declaring
apple pie American, it might fall victim to partisan politics."

katie.zezima@washpost.com

david.nakamura@washpost.com

Nakamura reported from Washington. Ed O'Keefe contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


