                             227 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 19, 2014 Tuesday 5:16 PM EST

Video: The Navy's X-47B drone reaches a new milestone;
The test, conducted Sunday, was hailed as the first successful integration of
carrier-based drones and manned fighter jets.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 268 words


The Navy is still finalizing what it wants from a new armed aerial drone that
will fly off aircraft carriers to perform a variety of missions. As noted
earlier this month on Breaking Defense, among others, the big argument is
whether the Unmanned Carrier-Launched Surveillance and Strike aircraft will be
designed primarily to launch strikes or conduct surveillance missions. And it
appears to be slowing down the project.

While the defense industry waits for the Navy to release details for the UCLASS
drone, a separate but related drone, the X-47B, continues to undergo testing.
The latest step: On Sunday, it was launched from the USS Theodore Roosevelt, an
aircraft carrier, alongside an F/A-18E Super Hornet in the Atlantic Ocean. Navy
officials hailed it as the first successful integration of carrier-based drones
and fighter jets - something the service must get right in order to integrate
the two in the future.

As Checkpoint covered previously, the 44,000-pound first landed on a carrier -
the USS George H.W. Bush - last summer. The X-47B is seen by many as a precursor
to the even larger UCLASS fleet of aircraft. But as the debate continues to rage
over how large the Pentagon can afford to make the UCLASS drone, some analysts
argue that the Navy can't afford to cut corners in making it lethal.

The more weapons and technology that are added to the next generation of drones,
the more expensive they will be. That's politically difficult in an era where
the Defense Department faces close scrutiny over its budget.

The specifications for the UCLASS drone are expected to be released within
weeks.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


