                             2202 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 She the People

                       March 1, 2014 Saturday 3:23 AM EST

Recline, don't 'Lean In' (Why I hate Sheryl Sandberg);
A foreign policy expert says asking women to juggle demanding careers and the
demands of home will disproportionately push them out of the workplace.

BYLINE: Rosa Brooks

LENGTH: 1788 words


I had an epiphany the other day. I was in the middle of marking up a memo on
U.S. drone policy while simultaneously ordering a custom-decorated cake for my
daughter's sixth grade musical cast party and planning my remarks for a
roundtable on women in national security.

Suddenly, it hit me: I hate Sheryl Sandberg.

It's not because she's so rich, or because she's the COO of Facebook, or because
she has gleaming, meticulously coiffed hair. True, Facebook is the Internet
equivalent of Shiva, Destroyer of Worlds, and my own hair will never approach
the glossy perfection of Sheryl Sandberg's. I have nothing against rich people,
who sometimes fund my projects or buy me lunch at fancy restaurants. Rich
people, I love you!

It's also nothing personal. I'm sure Sheryl Sandberg is a delightful person, and
I'd love her, too, if I knew her and she bought me lunch at a fancy restaurant.
In fact, she and I probably have some friends in common; we were college
classmates, though I don't remember if we ever met.

"Did we know Sheryl Sandberg?" I asked my friend Suzanne, who was also in my
college class.

She gave me a funny look. "Well, I knew her. Don't you know if you knew her?"

"I can't remember."

"If you knew her, you would remember," said Suzanne. "She was one of those
people you would definitely remember. I used to go to an aerobics class she
taught."

That explained it. Some college students, like my friend Suzanne, take aerobics
classes. Some college students, like Sheryl Sandberg, teach aerobics classes.
Other college students, like myself, lie around the dorm reading novels. Sheryl
Sandberg was already busy leaning in. I was busy leaning back on my sofa, with a
good book and a nice cup of cocoa.

This, of course, is also why I hate her.

Sheryl, have you ever stopped to consider that all this "leaning in" is ruining
life for the rest of us?

Long ago, before Sandberg's book "Lean In" convinced me to change my ways, I had
a life. I had friends, family, children. I had hobbies. I had a job, too, of
course, but I also took occasional vacations, knocked off work at a sensible
hour and got eight hours of sleep each night.

Then I read "Lean In" and realized that I was self-sabotaging slacker.

I resolved to do better. I started stepping up at work: "I'll handle both those
complex and urgent projects," I informed my colleagues, with just the right mix
of confidence, assertiveness and non-threatening feminine charm. "With a little
creative, outside-the-box thinking, I can take care of both by tomorrow!" I
stopped turning down invitations to speak at conferences in inconveniently
far-off places. I accepted every media request. I promised to write articles and
reports and books.

I leaned in to the other spheres of my life, too: I became a room parent at the
children's school, hosted the class potluck and the mother-daughter book club,
and decided that my children would go to school each day with organic, homemade
lunches packed in eco-friendly containers.

Just as Sandberg promised, the rewards of leaning in quickly became evident. My
confident, assertive yet non-threatening feminine charm helped me rapidly expand
both my business and social networks.

When I dropped the kids off at school, other mommies gazed upon me with
approval. Older colleagues took me aside to tell me I was an up-and-comer and
offer me plum assignments. Younger colleagues asked me to mentor them and join
their Lean In Circles. Speaking engagements flowed my way, and rich people asked
if they could buy me lunch. With my confident yet charmingly self-deprecating
smile, I accepted all offers and invitations.

Soon, the rewards of leaning in doubled.

Then they quadrupled. Then they began to increase exponentially.

I leaned in some more. I ate protein bars and made important telephone calls
during my morning commute. I stopped reading novels so I could write more
articles and memos and make more handicrafts to contribute to the school
auction. I put in extra hours at work. When I came home, I did radio interviews
over Skype from my living room while supervising the children's math homework.

And I realized that I hated Sheryl Sandberg.

Because, of course, I was miserable. I never saw my friends, because I was too
busy building my network. I was too tired to do any creative, outside-the-box
thinking. I was boxed in. I wondered if foreign-policy punditry was just too
much for me. I wondered if I should move to Santa Fe and open a small gallery
specializing in handicrafts made from recycled tires. I wondered if my husband
and kids would want to go with me.

But then -- after my I-hate-Sheryl epiphany -- I came to a bold new conclusion.

Ladies, if we want to rule the world -- or even just gain an equitable share of
leadership positions -- we need to stop leaning in. It's killing us.

We need to fight for our right to lean back and put our feet up.

Here's the thing: We've created a world in which ubiquity is valued above all.
If you're not at your desk every night until nine, your commitment to the job is
questioned. If you're not checking email 24/7, you're not a reliable colleague.

But in a world in which leaning in at work has come to mean doing more work,
more often, for longer hours, women will disproportionately drop out or be eased
out.

Why? Because unlike most men, women -- particularly women with children -- are
still expected to work that "second shift" at home. Men today do more housework
and childcare than men in their fathers' generation, but women today still do
far more housework and childcare than men.

And just as work has expanded to require employees' round-the-clock attention,
being a good mom has also started requiring ubiquity. Things were different in
my own childhood, but today, parenting has become a full-time job: it requires
attendance at an unending stream of school meetings, class performances and
soccer games, along with the procurement of tutors, classes and enrichment
activities, the arranging of play dates, the making of organic lunches and the
supervising of labor-intensive homework projects.

It's hard enough managing one 24/7 job. No one can survive two of them. And as
long as women are the ones doing more of the housework and childcare, women will
be disproportionately hurt when both workplace expectations and parenting
expectations require ubiquity. They'll continue to do what too many talented
women already do: Just as they're on the verge of achieving workplace leadership
positions, they'll start dropping out.

The general American tendency to think that "more time at work" equals "better
work" is exacerbated by the All Crisis All the Time culture of foreign policy.
Global crisis never sleeps, and neither do the overworked staffers at the
Pentagon, the State Department or the White House. It's little wonder that many
of the gifted young female staffers who enter these workplaces hit a wall at
some point, and come to the painful realization that work and family obligations
aren't always things you can simply "balance." Often, these weights become too
heavy. They can crush you.

And this isn't just about women. Men -- and our society more broadly -- also
suffer when both work and parenting are intensive, round-the-clock activities.

Back in the day, Henry Ford didn't advocate the eight-hour day for his auto
assembly line workers because he was a nice guy. He advocated the eight-hour day
because research demonstrated that worker productivity cratered after more than
eight hours. As Brigid Schulte documents in her forthcoming book, "Overwhelmed:
Work, Love and Play When No One Has the Time," humans can only take so much for
so long. When a workplace is full of employees who always lean in and never lean
back, it's full of employees who are exhausted, brittle and incapable of showing
much creativity or making good decisions.

Sometimes, overwork gets downright dangerous. We have tough legislation
mandating adequate rest periods for truck drivers and airline pilots -- not
because we think they need their beauty sleep, but because when overtired
drivers and pilots make mistakes, people can die. When did we come to believe
that crucial national security decisions are best made by people too tired to
think straight?

If we truly want gender equality, we need to challenge the assumption that more
is always better, and the assumption that men don't suffer as much as women when
they're exhausted and have no time for family or fun. And we need to challenge
those assumptions wherever we find them, both in the workplace and in the
family. Whether it's one more meeting, one more memo, one more conference, one
more play date, one more soccer game or one more flute lesson for the kids,
sometimes we need to say, "Enough!"

In 1929, Virginia Woolf issued a cri de coeur: How can women become poets and
writers, she asked in her now-classic essay, "A Room of One's Own," when they
have no money, no independence, no privacy and no space? "A woman must have
money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction," declared Woolf.

Other forms of creativity are no different. If we want to do more than just go
through the motions, both love and work require a protected space in which
creativity can flourish.

Today, most women can make money on their own and acquire rooms of their own --
but they still get too little psychic space and too little time for the kind of
unstructured, creative thinking so critical to any kind of success.

Perhaps the modern equivalent of Woolf's "room of her own" is the right to stop
"leaning in" all the time. There is, after all, much to be said for leaning out
-- for long lunches, afternoon naps, good books and some nice, slow hours in the
La-Z-Boy.

Sandberg can keep right on leaning in if it makes her happy, but here's my new
feminist manifesto -- call it a Manifestus for the Rest of Us.

We need to fight for our right to lean out, and we need to do it together,
girls. If we're going to fight the culture of workplace ubiquity, and the
parallel and equally-pernicious culture of intensive parenting, we need to do it
together -- and we need to bring our husbands and boyfriends and male colleagues
along, too. They need to lean out in solidarity, for their own sake as well as
ours.

Women of the world, recline!- -- -            Brooks is a law professor at
Georgetown University and a fellow at the New America Foundation. She served as
a counselor to the U.S. undersecretary of defense for policy from 2009 to 2011
and previously served as a State Department senior adviser. A longer version of
this post appeared previously in Foreign Policy.

RELATED: 5 real and scary reasons why you should stop working so hard

GALLERY: What I wish I knew at 17

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


