                             2210 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 8:15 PM EST

U.S. readies advisory mission in Iraq. But what will it look like?

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

LENGTH: 601 words


Iraq is getting a fresh influx of up to 300 U.S. troops. And while they "will
not be returning to combat," as President Obama said Thursday, they will be
taking on a role advising their Iraqi counterparts from the sidelines.

What's that mean exactly?

Special Operations troops say a big part of the job will likely be providing
command-and-control expertise, along with advice on how to integrate ISR
(intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) feeds to allow for better
intelligence-sharing.

Command-and-control entails using service members assigned to use communications
gear to connect combat troops with higher command, while ISR refers to various
forms of intelligence-gathering, whether it be drones, communication intercepts
or human intelligence.

While the type of units deploying to Iraq have yet to be named, some are
watching for Army Special Forces as well as some other Special Operations units.

"Army Special Operations Forces is the dominant component under SOCOM in terms
of numbers," said a current Army Special Forces non-commissioned officer,
referring to Special Operations Command. "I think the effort is going to be led
by [Army Special Operations] leadership and at lower levels you're going to have
some Marine Special Operation Units and some SEALS."

While Obama alluded to the possibility of airstrikes in the future against the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, the officer speculated that the mission is more
likely to begin by emulating the U.S. Special Operations missions being carried
out in the Philippines.

While American advisers have been in that country for more than a decade, they
have stayed mostly out of combat by providing their Filipino counterparts with
American-staffed command operation centers from behind friendly lines.

"I see it looking like a Philippine model in the beginning, but I see it
creeping towards a combat support role," said the anonymous Special Forces
member, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

A senior-ranking staff non-commissioned officer who works in the Marine Corps'
Special Operations component agreed that the initial advising mission might look
like the one currently playing out in the Philippines. But he added that Iraqi
forces were not well-equipped to handle a paramilitary force like ISIS, the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.

"We trained [the Iraqis] for counter-insurgency," he said. "Not for fighting a
standup force."

If Obama does authorize airstrikes, it will mean putting Americans that much
closer to the enemy, as precision airstrikes, especially those in populated
areas, require troops on the ground to "control" the aircraft dropping the
ordinance. This usually means talking to the pilots over radio, identifying the
target either with a ground laser or GPS coordinates and making sure the bomb
drops on target. Very rarely are fixed-wing airstrikes authorized without some
sort of ground element verifying the target.

On Thursday, Obama emphasized his commitment to intelligence-gathering, saying
"because of our increased intelligence resources, we're developing more
information about potential targets associated" with ISIS.

The Army Special Forces member said he believes that gathering enough
intelligence to attack the enemy, whether from the ground or air, will mean
Special Operation forces will have to interact with locals, thus putting them
that much closer to the fight.

"The mission has generated a lot of excitement in the [Army Special Forces]
community, because it's one of those once in a decade missions that is uniquely
set up for Army Special Forces," he said. "Like early Iraq and early
Afghanistan."

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


