                             220 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 8, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Drone crashes into Yellowstone hot spring

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 261 words


JACKSON, WYO. A tourist flew a drone into a Yellowstone National Park hot spring
despite a park ban on drones.

Park spokesman Al Nash said the drone's operator reported that the aircraft
crashed into the picturesque Grand Prismatic Spring last weekend.

Tourists witnessed the crash.

The drone is submerged in the spring's 160 degree waters. Officials hope to
remove it. "Our concern is about any potential impacts to the iconic Yellowstone
thermal feature," Nash said.

Grand Prismatic is known for its vivid colors and measures 300 feet across.

Nash said few details are being released because the incident is under
investigation.

In July, a drone crashed into Yellowstone Lake near the Grant Village Marina.
And officials in Grand Teton National Park issued one citation for flying a
camera carrying drone within park boundaries. That drone was trapped in a tree,
and someone later stole it from the tree, said park spokeswoman Jackie Skaggs.

She warned that park rangers will soon be less lenient with those who
unknowingly violate the National Park Service ban.

"Although we often try to educate people, at this point there is less discretion
being used for issuing citations relating to drone use," Skaggs said.

In Yellowstone, Nash noted, "We are beginning to get an increasing number of
complaints from park visitors about people illegally flying these devices.

"Think of how many people are going to be on the boardwalk at Old Faithful on a
given August afternoon. What might happen if someone even had one of these
smaller devices and lost control of it over a big crowd?"

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


