                             2285 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 21, 2014 Monday 5:45 PM EST

Why the Ukraine separatists screwed up: Badly organized insurgents can't master
complex weapons systems;
Many insurgent organizations don't have the internal institutions that would
allow them to really use complex modern weapons systems. This helps explain why
Flight 17 was shot down.

BYLINE: Stephen Biddle;Ivan Oelrich

LENGTH: 1345 words


Stephen Biddle is a professor of political science and international affairs at
George Washington University and an adjunct senior fellow for defense policy at
the Council on Foreign Relations.

Ivan Oelrich is a former vice president of the Strategic Security Program at the
Federation of American Scientists, and serves as an adjunct professor of
international affairs at George Washington University.

For many people, "nonstate actors" are supposed to be ill-equipped militias,
warlord bands or Vietcong insurgents in black pajamas. Because they lack
sophisticated weapons, so the common assumption goes, they resort to irregular
guerilla tactics. But if they somehow got modern precision weapons, it is often
argued, they would quickly become a grave danger to state militaries like the
Americans' - or the Ukrainians. In fact, the increasing proliferation of modern
weapons to nonstate actors has given rise to a new category of "hybrid" threats
- nonstate actors who combine irregular or terrorist tactics with precision
firepower, and which many now see as a central defense planning challenge for
the United States.

This brings us to the problem of the Russian-designed SA-11 antiaircraft missile
now widely believed to have shot down Malaysian Airlines flight 17 on July 17.
Many now assume that Ukrainian separatist rebels acquired at least one SA-11 TEL
(transporter-erector-launcher), and used it to fire the fatal shot. The SA-11 is
certainly a sophisticated weapon: a modern, radar-guided surface-to-air missile
(SAM), it has a slant range of over 20 miles, a speed of about Mach 3, and is
capable of tracking and engaging multiple high-performance aircraft
simultaneously. How, then, could such a sophisticated weapon shoot down a
civilian airliner? And what, if anything, does this tell us about the larger
problem of how to assess the threat posed by advanced weapons in nonstate
actors' hands?

In fact the real military capability conveyed by any given weapon is only weakly
related to the weapon's technical characteristics. Especially for nonstate
militaries, the presence or absence of the institutional infrastructure needed
to use complex systems effectively is a much stronger predictor of real power.
Some nonstate actors are actually surprisingly mature on this score; others much
less so. And the difference matters - a lot.

Consider the problem of modern air defense weapons, like, say, the SA-11. Modern
airspace on a continent like Europe is crowded - there is often a complex mix of
civilian aircraft, friendly combat planes and hostile threats intermingled in
the sky. To use a SAM effectively requires, inter alia, the ability to shoot
down only the enemy while avoiding everyone else. This is a tall order. In air
defense, life and death decisions have to be made in minutes or seconds - jet
aircraft close with potential targets at hundreds of miles an hour, and if a
radar blip is actually an enemy airplane trying to kill you, you need to engage
it as quickly as possible. All modern air defense systems thus have complex IFF
(identification, friend or foe) systems to distinguish enemy aircraft from one's
own, and combat planes from civilian airliners. These systems typically combine
antennas that receive coded transponder signals from friendly combat planes and
noncombatant aircraft, software that uses features of the target's radar
signature to identify the kind of airplane being tracked, and contextual
information received from other radars and communication systems in a larger
network. Taken together, a trained crew, working with other trained crews in a
networked IADS (integrated air defense system) can usually arrange to shoot down
the enemy rather than someone else. But this is a very demanding job requiring
close cooperation among many technically proficient people in many locations.

To do this well requires a well-functioning organization. A few individuals in
one place operating on their own cannot accomplish this. Accuracy on these
timelines demands constant practice and the ability to trust that other people
in distant locations are themselves going to have the training and skills needed
to make quick calls accurately on the basis of very abstract incoming
information. A pickup team of separatist rebels, some of whom might have trained
on similar equipment once upon a time when they used to be soldiers, few of whom
have had much if any chance to train together, some of whom may represent
factions who distrust other parts of the rebel movement, and many of whom may
never have met one another or know whose faction other people in the radio net
report to, is going to have a very hard time making fast, accurate, consistent
decisions on what to fire at. This is so hard that even professional state
militaries sometimes get this wrong: U.S. Patriot missile batteries have shot
down more British fighters accidentally than the Iraqi Air Force ever did
deliberately, and the USS Vincennes accidentally shot down an Iranian airliner
over the Persian Gulf in 1988. For a poorly institutionalized pickup militia of
Ukrainian separatists to get this right, every time, is a very challenging
project.

Yet some nonstate actors have shown impressive skill in using even complex
modern weapons. In 2006, the Shiite militia Hezbollah deployed mobile encrypted
communications systems, Russian-made SA-14 and SA-16 guided surface-to-air
missiles, Iranian-made armed drones, and large numbers of modern guided antitank
missiles, including the Russian-made second-generation Kornet and Metis-M
systems, which they used very effectively against the Israel Defense Force.
Hezbollah really does pose an important threat for Israelis. Crucially,
Hezbollah in 2006 was among the most elaborately institutionalized nonstate
actors in the world, with a formal hierarchical military command structure and a
regime of multiple civil administrative agencies that ran an extensive system of
clinics and schools in southern Lebanon. Though a nonstate actor, it resembled a
state government in many important respects - including its military
organization.

Other nonstate actors have had much less success. Many have long had access to
far more sophisticated weapons than they could actually use. Mohammed Farah
Aideed's Somali Habr Gidr militia of Blackhawk Down fame, for example, had
access to at least 86 modern wire-guided TOW antitank missiles during their
battle with the U.S. Rangers in Mogadishu. The Habr Gidr proved unable to
operate them, however, and they sat unused throughout the conflict. In fact,
heavy weapons have long been much more widespread than the institutional
maturity needed to use them effectively. As Stathis Kalyvas and Laia Balcells
have shown, nonstate actors with conventional weapons have been common across
the international system for decades. Real military power, by contrast, has been
much more scarce.

For the Ukrainian separatists on July 17, this challenge was probably beyond
their organizations' capacity. The ability to defend airspace effectively is a
much bigger problem than having the right radar and a fast missile. A nonstate
actor's hardware is simply not a good predictor of their real military
capability: effectiveness lies in the interaction between an actor's hardware
and the institutional wetware that has to use it.

Past Monkey Cage posts on developments in Ukraine, Russia and Crimea can be
found by clicking here. Recent posts include:

Joshua Rovner: Putin's Grand Strategy is Failing

Ivan Katchanovski: What do citizens of Ukraine actually think about secession?

Oxana Shevel: Will the Malaysia Airlines tragedy change the trajectory of events
in Ukraine?

Austin Long: Was the downing of the Malaysian Air flight accidental?

Henry Farrell: Europe may get a lot tougher on Russia sanctions

Sergiy Kudelia: Ukraine's 2014 presidential election result is unlikely to be
repeated

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


