                             228 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 1, 2014 Wednesday 9:31 AM EST

Around the world, drones have changed the way we see protests

BYLINE: Rick Noack

LENGTH: 336 words


As thousands of protesters demonstrated in Hong Kong against Beijing's rejection
of open election nominations, drones flew above their heads to capture those
memorable moments. This video, published on Facebook on Monday, shows crowds in
the city's central business district, according to Storyful.

It's not the first time that drones have shot videos of demonstrators. Over the
past few years, videos shot by drones have gone viral on the Internet and caused
reactions ranging from distress to amazement. Here is a selection of some of the
most impressive (and at times disturbing) drone videos of protests.

Bangkok, Thailand

These two clips were uploaded in late 2013 and early 2014. While the first video
shows clashes between police and protesters, the second one focuses on another
detail: The emptiness of streets in Bangkok during the protest shutdown.

Kiev, Ukraine

This drone takes us to Ukraine's Maidan Square in Kiev in late 2013 when
protesters demanded the resignation of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych.
What is striking is the visual difference between the protests at day and night.

Taksim Gezi Park, Turkey

This video was uploaded in 2013 and appears to show Turkish protesters in the
Taksim Gezi Park. Referring to the same YouTube account, Wired reported in 2013
that Turkish authorities deliberately targeted civilian drones capturing the
protests from above.

New York City, U.S.

Sept. 21, more than 300,000 protesters united in New York City to raise
awareness for the repercussions of climate change.

Warsaw, Poland

These two videos, which appear to have been taken during Polish Independence Day
in 2011, seem more like the opening minutes of a movie than real footage. The
drone rises toward the sky, and soon Polish police officers appear in the shot.
The drone camera turns and follows the officers through the streets of Warsaw,
preparing for clashes with demonstrators.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


