                             222 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 13, 2013 Friday
                                Regional Edition

13 dead in U.S. drone strike, Yemeni security officials say

BYLINE: Ahmed al-Haj

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: SANAA, YEMEN


SANAA, Yemen - Missiles fired by a U.S. drone slammed into a convoy of vehicles
traveling to a wedding party in central Yemen on Thursday, killing at least 13
people, three Yemeni security officials said.

The officials said the attack occurred in the city of Radda, the capital of
Bayda province, and left charred bodies and burnt-out cars on the road. The
city, a stronghold of al-Qaeda militants, witnessed deadly clashes early last
year as armed tribesmen backed by the military attempted to drive al-Qaeda
gunmen out of the city.

Details on who was killed in Thursday's strike were not immediately available,
and there were conflicting reports about whether militants were traveling with
the wedding convoy.

A military official said initial information indicated that the drone mistook
the wedding party for an al-Qaeda convoy. He said tribesmen known to the
villagers were among the dead. One of the security officials, however, said
al-Qaeda militants were suspected to have been traveling with the convoy.

The CIA declined to comment on the drone strike. Although the United States
acknowledges its drone program in Yemen, it does not usually talk about
individual strikes.

If further investigations determine that all the victims were civilians, the
attack could fuel anger against the United States and the government in Sanaa
among a Yemeni public already opposed to U.S. drone strikes.

Civilian deaths have bred resentments on a local level, sometimes undermining
U.S. efforts to turn the public against the militants. The backlash in Yemen is
still not as large as in Pakistan - but public calls for a halt to drone strikes
are starting to emerge.

The missile attacks in Yemen are part of a U.S.-Yemeni campaign against al-Qaeda
in the Arabian Peninsula, which Washington has called the most dangerous branch
of the global terrorist network.

Thursday's drone strike is the second since a car bombing and coordinated
assault on Yemen's military headquarters last week killed 56 people, including
foreigners. Al-Qaeda asserted responsibility for that attack, saying it was
retaliation for U.S. drone strikes that have killed dozens of the group's
leaders.

Security forces in the Yemeni capital boosted their presence Thursday, setting
up checkpoints across the city and sealing off the road to the president's
residence, in response to what the Interior Ministry called threats of
"terrorist plots" targeting vital institutions and government buildings.

Meanwhile, in Yemen's restive north, ultraconservative Sunni Muslim militants
and rebels belonging to a branch of Shiite Islam battled each other with
artillery and machine guns in clashes that killed more than 40 people, security
officials said.

The violence between Salafist fighters and Houthi rebels has raged for weeks in
the province of Saada, but the latest sectarian clashes marked an expansion of
the fighting to the neighboring province of Hajjah.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


