                             2281 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 18, 2014 Friday 11:45 PM EST

Should passenger jets have missile defense systems?

BYLINE: Nancy Scola

LENGTH: 1008 words


When a plane like Malaysia Airline Flight 17 is suddenly dropped from the sky by
a missile attack launched from a vehicle no larger than a tank, the temptation
is to look for the technology that will protect airline passengers from such
threats. So should we be equipping commercial passenger planes with missile
defense systems?

For about a decade, Israel has been trying to do just this. And the country's
experience serves as an interesting test case.

In 2002, an Israeli charter flight flying at a height of 500 feet was attacked
above Mombasa, Kenya, by a shoulder-launched missile. No one was hurt, but it
prompted the Israeli government to begin searching for ways to protect its
country's passenger planes and helicopters from the threat of so-called MANPADS,
or Man Portable Air Defense Systems.

That produced a government project called SkyShield, powered by a program called
C-MUSIC, for Commercial Multi-Spectral Infrared Countermeasures.  The program
uses lasers and radar jamming, explains Adi Dar, the general manager for Elbit
Systems, the Haifa-based lead contractor on the project that has worked for
nearly a decade developing anti-missile technologies for passenger planes.

With MANPADS long believed to be the greater threat, commercial aviation missile
defense systems have not been engineered to protect against longer-range
surface-to-air missiles (SAM) like the Buk SAM believed to have been involved in
the Ukraine attack.

But at any height targeting the head of a missile from a moving passenger plane
is technologically complex, says Dar, a former Israel Defense Forces official.
"It's like hitting a tennis ball with a laser from an aircraft that is moving
800, 900 kilometers per hour."

Israel has focused on fully-automated systems like lasers and radar jamming out
of a belief that other, more manual techniques used in military settings, like
the distribution of chaff -- small pieces of glass, metal, or plastic used to
confuse tracking systems -- place too much of a burden on commercial air pilots.

There are other challenges, says Dar. Fuel consumption is a concern, as the
anti-missile technology can create drag since it is attached to the aircraft's
underbelly.

Elbit Systems, says Dar, has been deploying its countermeasure technologies
among militaries in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere in Europe. And, he says,
they've been working to protect heads of state and other "VIPs" around the
world. But Elbit has not contracted with commercial airlines outside Israel.

But some experts doubt Israel's approach. Professor Theodore Postal, a professor
of science, technology, and international security at MIT, thinks missile
defense systems are largely futile. Especially given the increased
sophistication of missiles designed to evade detection and destruction, argues
Postal, protecting passenger planes from attack is "extremely difficult to do."

After all, "combat aircraft have pretty sophisticated electronic
countermeasures," says Postal, "and they get shot down all the time."

Regardless, some U.S. lawmakers have pressed for this country to follow Israel's
lead.

In the United States, both the 2002 Mombasa attack and the attacks of September
11th, 2001, increased interest in the protection of passenger planes. In May
2002, the FBI warned that "given al Qaeda's demonstrated objective to target the
U.S. airline industry," the country should consider the possibility that
shoulder-fired missiles could be used against U.S commercial aircraft.

Partly in response, in 2003, Senator Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) and Congressman
Steve Israel (D-New York) introduced the Commercial Airline Missile Defense Act.
The bill would have required the Department of Defense to pay an estimated $1
million a piece to equip U.S. commercial passenger planes with anti-missile
technologies. With 6,800 planes, the price tag would have been nearly $7
billion--a number that, no surprise, caused many to balk. The Defense Department
took instead to nudging aircraft providers to explore adapting military
anti-missile techniques for commercial use, which led to, among other things,
Northrop Grumman's Guardian Anti-Missile program.

In Israel, the government picks up the cost of the SkyShield project, estimated
by Dar to be at least a few hundreds of millions of dollars on research and
implementation thus far. Elbit won't disclose what it costs to attach its
anti-missile systems to aircraft, but Dar allows that it is in the neighborhood
of "several million dollars" per plane. Israel, reports Elbit, has conducted
successful tests of its anti-missile systems on Boeing 737s and Boeing 80os,
including recent tests in southern Israel.

The cost is lower for Israel than it would be for the United States largely
because of the size of its fleet. The three major airlines participating in
SkyShield together own and operate about 40 planes. "We're not talking about
Lufthansa," admits Elbit's Adi Dar, of the German airline that alone has nearly
300 planes. "We're a small country."

Faced with the potential costs of such a program, the trend in recent years in
the United States has been a move away from anti-missile systems that place the
responsibility for protection on airlines and pilots. The Department of Homeland
Security's Project Chloe, named for a character on the television program "24,"
has begun exploring the use of missile-detecting and missile-defeating drones
that would hover over U.S. airports.

And so, for now at least, wide-scale use of anti-missile technologies on
commercial passenger planes remains largely limited to Israel.

"In Israel, " Dar goes on, "most of the government decided that the threat is
real. And they decided to invest the money required. Other countries, other
airlines have to be cost-effective in deciding what they want."

Update: This piece originally grouped Man Portable Air Defense Systems, or
MANPADS, with the type of surface-to-air missile that is believed to be involved
in the Ukraine attack. That has been corrected and a clarifying paragraph has
been added.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


