                             2237 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                        June 27, 2014 Friday 1:16 AM EST

Happy Hour Roundup

BYLINE: Paul Waldman

LENGTH: 713 words


· Today, the Supreme Court struck down a Massachusetts law providing a 35-foot
"buffer zone" around abortion clinics so women could enter without being
harassed. Amanda Marcotte argues that the court may have emboldened
anti-abortion activists to get more in women's faces. "One reason the areas
around Massachusetts clinics are relatively peaceful is because protesters had
to stand back a little. Ironically, it's that peacefulness that allowed the
court to argue that the buffer zone is an overkill."

· Supreme Court watchers believe that Justice Samuel Alito is writing the
opinion in Harris v. Quinn, which will be released Monday. Andy Kroll describes
it as "a blockbuster case that could, in a worst-case scenario, wipe
public-employee unions such as SEIU and AFSCME off the map," and if Alito's the
one writing the decision, it well might.

· President Obama is asking Congress for $500 million to train and equip "vetted
members of the Syran opposition." Let's hope the vetting is comprehensive.

· A new Civitas Institute poll shows Sen. Kay Hagan holding a narrow 47-43 lead
over Thom Tillis in North Carolina.

· Fernando Espuelas says Republicans are doing themselves untold harm by killing
immigration reform:

Many commentators in the right-wing media bubble write and speak about
immigration and Latinos like scientists trying to understand some obscure
species. They roll out polls that show Latinos are more interested in the
economy than immigration. Is that different from any other voter group?

It's one thing to speak to people about their most important issues, but if
you've also communicated your contempt for them, no message will be easy to
deliver.

· Steve Benen shares with us the bizarre story of Virginia Republicans breaking
into Gov. Terry McAuliffe's office over Father's Day weekend to deliver the
budget, in order to give him less time to deal with it. Classy!

· The Hill looks at the transcript of Hillary Clinton's interview with the
Guardian that got her in some trouble to see whether her remarks were unfairly
taken out of context. It seems Clinton has a strong case - when she said of
herself and her husband "we pay ordinary income tax, unlike a lot of people who
are truly well off," there's really no reason to assume she wasn't including
them in that group. But it's interesting that even in this article, the Hill
misquotes her in the first paragraph, saying "Hillary Clinton said she and her
husband were 'unlike the truly well off'.'" If you're going to write a piece on
whether someone was being taken out of context, you really ought to get their
words right.

· Brian Beutler looks at the increasingly desperate conspiracy theorizing over
former IRS official Lois Lerner's missing e-mails. Among her other nefarious
powers, Lerner apparently is able to travel back in time, which she did to make
her computer crash in 2011, two years before the scandal broke. "By sheer
coincidence, pretty much every Republican in Congress who's 'not a scientist'
turns out to be an IT expert," Beutler writes, "and they've rendered a unanimous
judgment: The official explanation of the missing Lois Lerner emails is a lie,
and the IRS is perpetrating a coverup."

· Republicans, strong 10th Amendment advocates that they are, just love messing
around with the District of Columbia's laws. But something odd happened today:
the House Appropriations Committee, in seeking to nullify a law passed by the
D.C. City Council decriminalizing possession of small amounts of marijuana, may
have inadvertently legalized pot in the District. What were those Republicans
smoking?

· Linda Greenhouse has the best explanation of why the Supreme Court ruled
yesterday that the police need a warrant to search your phone: justices have
cellphones, too.

· Over at the American Prospect, I asked whether there's anything the United
States can do to stop drones from making it a more dangerous world and argued
that John Boehner's lawsuit against the Obama administration is just one more
iteration of Republicans' unwillingness to accept the legitimacy of the Obama
presidency.

· And finally, here's something to make you feel smug: Only 40 percent of
Americans know that Republicans control the House and Democrats control the
Senate, and 28 percent have no idea about either.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


