                             2234 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       June 26, 2014 Thursday 5:01 PM EST

Obama gambling with U.S. security

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 898 words


The full extent of the Obama administration's foreign policy debacles is coming
to light in a number of respects. Recent events also obliterate arguments from
the far left and right favoring a rollback in anti-terror tactics. And current
events suggest a complete lack of seriousness in recognizing and addressing the
jihadist threat.

Only now with Iraq in shambles is the administration wising up to the problem of
allowing jihadists free rein in Syria. The Wall Street Journal reports: "The
Sunni militant advance in Iraq has reignited a debate in the Obama
administration over its policy toward Syria, increasing pressure on the
president to act more aggressively against a growing regional threat, according
to current and former government officials. Some argue that any U.S. military
action against the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham, or ISIS, in Iraq will fall
short if it doesn't hit the group's major strongholds in neighboring Syria. ISIS
now occupies territory on both sides of the border." Wow. Just like conservative
hawks have been arguing for years. Moreover, had the president acted promptly to
force out Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and back the Free Syria Army, a
non-jihadi group, early in the civil war, ISIS would never have achieved a
foothold in Syria.

Meanwhile, a new report also shows the complete failure during the Obama/Hillary
Clinton/John F. Kerry era to address embassy security. As first reported by the
conservative Free Beacon, a new Government Accountability Office (GAO) report
blasts the lack of oversight from the Department of State on security for its
people around the world.

The report includes these broad criticisms:

Although State has established physical security standards for most types of
overseas facilities, GAO identified some facility types for which standards were
lacking or unclear, instances in which the standards were not updated in a
timely manner, and inconsistencies within the standards. . . . Furthermore, GAO
found that State lacks a process for reassessing standards against evolving
threats and risks. GAO identified several posts that put security measures in
place that exceed the standards because the standards did not adequately address
emerging threats and risks. Without adequate and up-to-date standards, post
officials rely on an ad hoc process to establish security measures rather than
systematically drawing upon collective subject-matter expertise. Although State
takes steps to mitigate vulnerabilities to older, acquired, and temporary work
facilities, its waivers and exceptions process has weaknesses. . . .

The State Department apparently accepted some 13 GAO recommendations, raising
the question as to why nothing was done about these glaring weaknesses, even
after the Sept. 11, 2012, attack. Even high-risk facilities were not adequately
protected. In short, security for State Department posts and personnel was not a
problem addressed in any serious manner. In some respects, we are lucky there
have been only two (Egypt and Libya) embassy assaults during Obama's presidency.

And finally, the idea that al-Qaeda is on its heels, that we need not keep up
National Security Agency surveillance to detect plots and that American
jihadists who go overseas to take up arms against the United States is
discredited - as its promoters are - with each new revelation about the
increasing threat from ISIS. The Journal again reports: "A Sunni jihadist group
that has seized vast territories in Iraq and Syria is parlaying its battlefield
successes into a recruitment drive that is attracting more foreign fighters, say
Western and Arab officials. The message from the Islamic State of Iraq and
al-Sham, or ISIS: Join us in forming a Sunni-led religious state spanning from
the Mediterranean to the Persian Gulf. One recruitment video, released on
Friday, shows gun-toting militants, speaking with British and Australian
accents, extolling the virtues of jihad and inviting viewers to join their
battle in Syria and Iraq."

In light of this, it would seem incredibly reckless to suggest trying and
imprisoning foreign jihadists in U.S. prisons where they have a ready crop of
recruits handy. It also seems to be an exceptionally poor move to make it more
difficult to detect plots and disrupt them in advance. Suggestions to revise the
successful NSA program, which has been found not to be abusive, should be
reconsidered. And what of the Americans recruited to join the jihad in the
Middle East?  Lacking "boots on the ground," it seems that drones are more
necessary than ever when Americans can be operating in the vast ISIS territory.
Otherwise, they in effect gain immunity as soon as they reach ISIS territory. If
we can't act to eliminate threats before plots are hatched, we are reduced to
waiting for terror to strike.

At this point, the Obama administration and those on the left and far right who
have cheered the head-in-the-sand approach to national security - or worse,
portrayed the government as the real danger - now bear the burden of a huge
risk. Have they set up the United States or more U.S. personnel to be hit again?
That is certainly why the administration now has snapped-to, declaring a
terrorist state in the region to be a real threat to the United States. Let's
pray that it's not too late for a serious re-evaluation of how we got to where
we are and a needed course correction.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


