                             2265 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 11, 2014 Friday 9:14 PM EST

Dispatch: I've been to Gaza before, but it has never been like this;
The Post's Jerusalem bureau chief recalls his time in Gaza.

BYLINE: William Booth

LENGTH: 658 words


This is not my first time in Gaza, but it is my first time here during a
military operation. It is disorienting. The distances are so close.

The Gaza militants are lobbing rockets from palm groves and melon fields as
you're driving by. "Oh, look, another rocket." You get out of the car and take a
iPhone photo of the vapor trail and start counting, one Mississippi, two
Mississippi, as you would for lightning, followed by a thunderclap, to gauge
distance. Though in this case you're counting to see whether the rocket is
intercepted by Iron Dome (kind of a puff sound, with white smoke) or lands just
over the Gaza border in Sderot (concussion) or is far, far away and cannot be
heard.

Then our police scanner crackles, and my fixer, Islam Abdul-Kareem, tells me,
"sirens in Jerusalem," and I phone my wife at home, who says, "yeah, we just
heard two big booms."

It is all very intimate. We visited a house in Maghazi that had just been hit by
an Israeli airstrike a few hours earlier. While I was interviewing the members
of the Nawasrah family who survived, one of the cousins opened up a plastic bag
and handed me a little finger.

I didn't flip out, only because it was the second time that day someone had
shown me something like this. After the rocket attacks, the Palestinians collect
the dead from the debris, and sometimes the dead are no longer whole, and so
they gather what they can for burial. Like a fingertip.

Are the Nawasarah family terrorists? I honesty don't know. We always ask: "Are
you resistance, are you Hamas?" They usually say no. But sometimes a neighbor,
or someone in the crowd, will tell us that the fellow who lived in the house was
maybe a Hamas operative.

It is a very aural military operation, too. There are many whooshes, kabooms,
window rattlings and thuds you can feel in your teeth. But mostly there is this
constant whine, like mosquitos in a room. These are the Israeli drones.

Little kids are expert at the sounds. I didn't believe this at first, but it is
true. In Beit Hanoun, we were gathered with a crowd of gawkers, all of us
staring at a house down the lane that had been hit by a small non-lethal
missile, what the Israeli military calls "the knock on the door" that signals
the occupants to get out. We all had our mobile phones out, ready to snap a
picture, when it was destroyed by a serious missile.

Suddenly, behind us, maybe a kilometer away, we heard a rushing galloping sound:
vvippps! My shoulders shot up to my ears. Rocket. Outgoing. Close. A child told
me, "Grad." I wrote it down in my notebook. He was probably about 8.

One afternoon, we were talking to a gathering of middle-aged men, sitting out
the battle and the heat, fasting during the day because it is Ramadan (and so
nobody is smoking, eating or drinking during daylight). I asked them if they
thought the war, or whatever one calls this, would go on long. "Who cares?"
answered Abu Ahmed, 46, an out-of-work construction worker. I asked, what do you
mean, who cares? "We lived in hell before, we will live in hell again," he said.
The sleepy guys on the stoop just nod in the heat. Yup. Hell.

Gaza is a young place. Usually there are children everywhere underfoot. But not
now so much. During the day, you see men in the mosques, in the markets, but
very few women. They are all cooped up at home in their airless apartments,
waiting for the six hours of electricity to turn the fans.

A colleague in Washington asked me what the Palestinians do during an airstrike.
Do they run to the bomb shelters? I think about this. It is not a dumb question.
There aren't any shelters or sirens. The Palestinians don't really do anything.
When they run around is afterward.

Related content:

The lopsided death tolls in Israel-Palestinian conflicts

How Israeli soccer hooligans fanned flames of hate

The Israeli-Palestinian Twitter war, in 8 graphics

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


