                             2239 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 30, 2014 Monday 11:52 AM EST

The war on terror didn't defeat al-Qaeda. But ISIS could.;
The power of an insurgency is in its currency. And today, analysts say, al-Qaeda
is a declining power.

BYLINE: Terrence McCoy

LENGTH: 802 words


One of the great ironies of the current battle for Iraq is that for all the
billions spent on the war on terror, all the bullets fired, all the lives lost,
what may ultimately defeat al-Qaeda isn't the United States or another Western
power - but a group from within the jihadist movement. It didn't take drones. Or

 the surge. It took a charismatic, emergent leader known as Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, who recently threw off the yoke of al-Qaeda's command and decided
he and his militant pals would do their own thing.

They would become the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, which on Sunday declared
the restoration of the 7th-century Islamic caliphate. Baghdadi, anointed caliph,

 would rule over its vast tracts of captured territory in northern Iraq and
Syria, the message said. And all Muslims worldwide must now pledge allegiance to
him.

For a group long on guns and cash and defined by acts of audacity and ambition,
Sunday's declaration was perhaps its boldest move yet. It has announced
something no other modern jihadist movement has done before - though some have
wanted to - and showed its intention to destroy al-Qaeda. "This is a threat to
the legitimacy of al-Qaeda as the representative of global jihad, and it lays
down the threat big time," Charles Lister of Qatar's Brookings Doha Center, told
The Washington Post's Liz Sly. "Put simply, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi has declared
war on al-Qaeda."

The ideological and recruiting power of al-Qaeda remains grounded in the
mythology of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. But that power weakens the older
those attacks become, analysts say. Today's young foreign recruits, for whom
jihadist groups compete and who are essential to the continuance of any
insurgency, aren't bound by that lineage. "Al-Qaeda's greatest achievement was
the 9/11 attacks, but that was 13 years ago," wrote Haverford associate
professor Barak Mendelsohn in Foreign Affairs. "Many of today's jihadis were
young children at the time" and don't have much loyalty to the aging movement.

As such, analysts warn against underestimating Sunday's declaration. "ISIS now
see themselves as the legitimate leaders of the movement, and they expect
everyone to fall in line," Peter Neumann, who studies radicalization at King's
College London, explained to the Guardian. "For ideological jihadists, the
caliphate is the ultimate aim, and ISIS - in their eyes - have come closer to
realizing that vision than anyone else.... This could be the end of al-Qaeda....
This could mark the end of Bin Laden's vision and his legacy."

That end, if it comes to pass - and there are reasons it may not - has roots
deep in the past.

"During the Iraq war, Zarqawi's brash personality and belief that authority is
derived from those on battlefield front lines rather than behind the scenes
would create even more tensions," wrote Aaron Zelin in the report. "Zarqawi
became a household name for his brutal personal beheadings and fast-paced
suicide bombing.... As a result, many foreign fighters wanted to join."

This challenged bin Laden, who wanted to "own" the Iraqi jihad. But then, when
it seemed as though they'd split, Zarqawi relented and pledged fealty to bin
Laden in 2004.

ISIS leader Baghdadi, who assumed control of al-Qaeda in Iraq in 2010, appears
to be an amalgamation of those two jihadist leaders. He's reportedly a
well-educated man but is also a battlefield tactician who's willing to order
such shocking acts of brutality that foreign fighters, including thousands from
the West, have flooded his ranks. Baghdadi, who chafed under al-Qaeda
leadership, wouldn't be as conciliatory as Zarqawi.

In the winter of this year, after Baghdadi publicly said he "choose the rule of
God" over the rule of al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, the insurgencies split.
"In addition to killing one another on the battlefield ... it is likely that
social media, especially Twitter, has amplified mutual hatred," according to the
Washington Institute.

But more than social media, what has hurt al-Qaeda has been ISIS's recent
territorial gains. Those successes have attracted fresh recruits and, analysts
say, made al-Qaeda under Zawahiri appear weak, diffident and indecisive.
"Al-Qaeda has maintained a slim but diminishing lead over ISIS among key key
influencers in the movement," wrote expert J.M. Berger, who runs the Web site
IntelWire.

He said it also appeared to hurt al-Qaeda's fundraising. Sunday's "proclamation
will likely generate new streams of fundraising and fighter recruitment" to
ISIS, he wrote.

The power of an insurgency is in its currency. And today, the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy said, al-Qaeda is a declining power. "It is too
early to know, but if current trends hold, ISIS has opened up a lead on
al-Qaeda, which has a steep hill to climb just to stave off its own relative
decline."

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


