                             2287 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 22, 2014 Tuesday 1:20 AM EST

In Gaza, burying those killed by Israeli airstrikes is getting more dangerous;
Morgues and cemeteries are overflowing, and families must avoid Israeli
airstrikes during burials.

BYLINE: William Booth

LENGTH: 665 words


GAZA CITY - More than 560 Palestinians have been killed in the 14-day battle
with Israel. Burying the bodies has become more difficult and dangerous with
each passing day.

Movement can be a risky sprint not only for ambulances but also for the beat-up
vans that ferry the dead to cemeteries. The central morgue in Gaza City is
overflowing, its wheezing refrigerators losing the struggle against the smell.
The graveyards are filling, and mourners dig their own holes.

In the early days of the current Israeli offensive    against Hamas, the
militant movement that controls the Gaza Strip, people took bodies to the mosque
and gathered afterward in mourning tents. There were parades and battle flags.
Clerics gave defiant speeches.

No more. Funerals are now rushed, anxious family affairs that take place under
the sound of Israeli artillery and drones.

The two Hamdeiah brothers were dug out of the ruins of their home in the
besieged Shijaiyah district of east Gaza City on Monday morning, not long after
an Israeli airstrike killed them. Moataz, 18, and Ahed, 23, were found alongside
the bodies of a cousin, Yussef, 22, and three passing neighbors.

A friend of the brothers said in an interview that another member of the
Hamdeiah clan was "wanted," meaning he was a known fighter and the likely target
of the strike, which killed six. Israel launched its offensive to stop Hamas
from firing rockets and digging tunnels that could be used to kill or abduct
Israelis.

The brothers arrived at Shifa Hospital gray and lifeless, their clothes matted
and darkened by soot and cement dust. Their family members gathered, and while
the bodies were still on the metal gurneys in triage, they wrapped them in
muslin cloth and zipped them into white body bags.

Then they tried to figure out where to bury them.

At the entrance of the morgue, Mohammed Jindeya, a teacher, stood watch over the
body of his aunt, which was on the floor. She was one of the neighbors killed in
the Israeli strike.

"She was just walking by and then . . . " Jindeya pointed to the bundle wrapped
in a blanket at his feet. "There's no room in the refrigerators," he said.

Asked how much longer he thought the hostilities would last, Jindeya shrugged.

"Days? Weeks? I don't think the Israelis are finished killing us yet," he said.
He said he also wasn't sure where his aunt would be buried.

"We are asking permission to go back into Shijaiyah to bury them close to home,
but I do not think it will be possible," he said. The Israeli military is still
bombing the neighborhood.

He looked exhausted. Shijaiyah has been the scene of the most intense Israeli
barrage of the offensive, as well as running street battles between Israeli
soldiers and Hamas fighters, who have used land mines, booby traps and antitank
missiles to counter the Israeli advance.

Eventually, the six bodies emerged from the morgue to be stacked into a
Volkswagen van, a taxi and a small truck.

As is traditional in Gaza among religious families, the women would not attend
the burials, so they approached the van to get a last look. They were possessed
by grief. Several collapsed in a near faint and had to be carried away.

The Israeli military has warned residents in wide stretches of Gaza to evacuate
their neighborhoods, so many graveyards have become off-limits.

As the van, taxi and truck sped off with the six corpses, family members inside
were still making mobile telephone calls to find a place for them to go.

They eventually arrived at a cemetery in Jabalia, north of Gaza City, and
because the area nearby was being bombarded, the family members rushed to dig
graves. A dozen other groups were also interring their dead in the sand.

The prayers were abbreviated and quick. Relatives scrawled the brothers' names
on pieces of cardboard and pushed the temporary headstones into sand wetted with
buckets of water. By the time they were leaving, one of the markers had already
blown away.

william.booth@washpost.com

Islam Abdul-Karim contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


