                             2243 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      July 2, 2014 Wednesday 11:46 AM EST

Morning Bits

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 798 words


It's hard to recollect a worse presidential campaign pre-season. "The Clintons,
him and her, are revealed as money grubbers, looking for cash in all the easy
places, and Hillary imagines nobody will notice the greed if she poses as the
selfless philanthropist, Lady Bountiful giving away her $250,000 speaker's fees
to the Clinton family foundation. The public, however, is on to the foundation
scam, which looks like a tax dodge. The Clintons control their foundation, and
the public suspects that the chief beneficiaries of the foundation 'charity' are
named Bill, Hillary and Chelsea."

Remember how we got to the contraception mandate. "The problem that the Obama
administration hoped to address with the HHS mandate wasn't compromised access
to contraceptives but the president's reelection prospects. His political
advisers knew that the 2012 campaign could be won only if, among other things,
very high numbers of young, single women came out to vote and cast their ballots
for Barack Obama. The issue they settled on to drive these voters to the polls
was the HHS mandate. To generate the kind of political reaction they were
seeking, it wouldn't suffice to simply create another program trying to
subsidize access to contraceptives for those without coverage through an
employer. They needed to make an ideological point that they knew would create
some opposition. Hence, the requirement that all employers covered by
Obamacare's regulations pay for contraceptives, sterilization procedures, and
products that induce early-pregnancy abortions. And the requirement isn' t only
to pay part of the cost; the employers must cover all of the expenses so that
these products and services will be entirely free to employees."

It's getting hard to recall a warning that made any difference to our foes.
"Last week, John Kerry said that Russia needed to pull back in Ukraine in a
matter of 'hours, literally.' But more than 100 hours later, Russia has done no
such thing."

It seems like yesterday that Obama was dismissing a reversion to Cold War
thinking. No one told Vladimir Putin: "Ukrainian forces struck at pro-Russian
separatist bases in eastern regions with air and artillery strikes on Tuesday
after President Petro Poroshenko announced he would not renew a ceasefire but go
on the offensive to rid Ukraine of 'parasites.' His decision quickly drew fire
from Russian President Vladimir Putin who said Poroshenko had disregarded the
advice of himself and German and French leaders. Putin said Poroshenko would now
have to bear full responsibility for veering off the road to peace."

The inspector general recounts the latest list of Obamacare defects. "Overall,
we identified deficiencies in internal controls related to (1) verifying
identity of applicants and entering application information, (2) determining
applicants' eligibility for enrollment in QHPs and eligibility for insurance
affordability programs, and (3) maintaining and updating eligibility and
enrollment data."

Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) reminds us how poorly run this mammoth program is.
"Specifically, the reports found that a number of the controls in place to
protect taxpayers were ineffective and that HHS was unable to resolve 2.6
million of 2.9 million verification inconsistencies because the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) eligibility system was not fully operational.
It now appears that the Administration's promises to protect taxpayers from
wasteful and fraudulent payments will join 'if you like your plan, you can keep
it' and lower premiums as just the latest in a string of Obamacare's broken
promises. This report is one more example of just how flawed the President's
health care law is. Whatever one's opinion of Obamacare, the American public
deserves to know that their tax dollars are allocated appropriately and that
public officials take their responsibility to accurately and faithfully apply
the laws enacted by Congress seriously."

Roger Clegg recapitulates why no free pass is deserving for this
unconstitutional gambit. "Senator Paul plans to use Article I, Section 4 as the
basis for the congressional authority in the bill he is contemplating that would
overturn state disenfranchisement of (some) felons. But this approach is at odds
with the text of the Constitution in a number of ways, as reflected in the fact
that the Federalist Papers, in separate discussions by James Madison and
Alexander Hamilton, do not interpret that provision the way Senator Paul would.
It is also an interpretation at odds with a number of Supreme Court decisions."
(For a "constitutional conservative," Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky is confused on
a lot of constitutional issues including drones, National Security Agency
surveillance, trials for terrorists and presidential war powers.)

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


