                             2276 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      July 16, 2014 Wednesday 4:01 PM EST

Terrorism deniers exposed

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 1027 words


If nothing else, Alliance for a Strong America, the project of former vice
president Dick Cheney and his daughter Liz Cheney, has performed a public
service in calling attention to a report that received practically no mainstream
news coverage. The Rand Corporation's National Defense Research Institute put
out a lengthy report in June that documents the extent to which terrorist groups
have grown in numbers, strength and controlled territory at their disposal for
operations. It is a damning indictment of the failure of the Obama
administration to stem the tide of al-Qaeda and related groups and makes clear
that the notion that al-Qaeda was damaged or on its heels was utterly untrue.

The report looked at thousands of unclassified and declassified documents and
compiled a database of jihadist (referred to as Salafi-jihadist) attacks. The
report's summary explains: "Beginning in 2010, there was a rise in the number of
Salafi jihadist groups and fighters, particularly in Syria and North Africa.
There was also an increase in the number of attacks perpetrated by al Qa'ida and
its affiliates . . . There was a 58-percent increase in the number of
Salafi-jihadist groups in North Africa, and Syria. The number of Salafi
jihadists more than doubled from 2010 to 2013, according to both our low and
high estimates. The war in Syria was the single most important attraction for
Salafi-jihadist fighters." There have also been a substantial increase in the
number of terrorist attacks between 2007 and 2013, with "most of the violence in
2013 perpetrated by the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham (43 percent), which
eventually left al Qa'ida; al Shabaab (25 percent); Jabhat al-Nusrah (21
percent); and al Qa'ida in the Arabian Peninsula (10 percent)."

The report  explains that there are core al-Qaeda groups, formal affiliates, "a
panoply of Salafi-jihadist groups that have not sworn allegiance to al Qa'ida
but are committed to establishing an extremist Islamic emirate" and "inspired
individuals and networks." Some represent a localized threat, others an
immediate and direct threat to the United States. It's hard to look at the data
and conclude that we should shackle our National Security Agency surveillance
programs that may pick up communications among these groups or that we should
eschew drones to target American jihadists who fall into one of these camps. One
must be seeped in years of conspiratorial crackpottery to think that our own
government poses a bigger danger than the conglomeration of these forces.

In light of this information, it also is folly - dangerous folly - to support a
strategy of shrinking the defense budget, drawing down or abandoning forces
altogether or claiming to be preoccupied with domestic issues. The data make
clear that the Benghazi, Libya, attack was a symptom of a much wider phenomenon
that the Obama administration ignored or missed, a security failure akin to
missing the fall of the Soviet empire or the development of nuclear weapons by
Pakistan. Those who claim our absence from foreign locales makes us and our
allies safer are misinformed or intentionally misinforming the public. The idea
that a group like the Islamic State is of no concern to the United States is an
infinitely more egregious misreading of international events than was the
failure to recognize the rise of core al-Qaeda before the attacks of Sept. 11,
2001, in part because we have the example of those attacks and the ability (one
presumes) to view developments up close given our intelligence capacities and
forward positioning of troops in Afghanistan. Worst of all, the idea of "ending
wars" propagated by this president reveals a commander in chief deeply
disconnected from reality.

The report specifically recommends "the need for a long-term engagement
strategy-including direct U.S. involvement-in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Yemen, and
possibly Syria, where there are significant terrorism threats to the United
States and limited government capacity. It also highlights the importance of
developing a long-term forward partnering relationship with a small set of
countries in Africa (Nigeria, Algeria, Somalia, Libya, and Egypt) and the Middle
East (Lebanon and Iraq), with the involvement of regional allies like Israel and
Jordan. Finally, this framework identifies a subset of countries-such as Morocco
and Mali-where the United States may want to encourage others (like NATO allies)
to work with local governments, since the terrorist threat to the United States
is limited." This doesn't mean, as the president and neo-isolationists on the
right claim, a constant state of war with "boots on the ground."

It does, however, mean that "complete withdrawal of U.S. military forces from
Afghanistan by 2016 could seriously jeopardize U.S. security interests because
of the continuing presence of Salafi-jihadist and other terrorist groups in
Afghanistan and Pakistan" and the urgency of a "more aggressive strategy to
target Salafi-jihadist groups in Syria, either clandestinely or with regional
and local allies." These both, not incidentally, are equally useful in checking
the rise of Iran.

In sum, "the United States should prioritize its U.S. counterterrorism
resources-such as military, intelligence, diplomatic, financial, and law
enforcement assistance-more systematically than it has done. It highlights the
need for a long-term engagement strategy in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Yemen, and
possibly Syria, where there are significant terrorism threats to the United
States. Over the long run, the United States needs to devote sufficient
resources-from signals collection capabilities to human intelligence
collectors-to understand and counter Salafi-jihadist threats in these areas."
That the extent of the jihadists' expansion comes as a surprise and that we have
no discernible strategy along these lines speaks volumes about the incompetency
and irresponsibility of the Obama/Hillary Clinton/John Kerry foreign policy. And
this data should serve as a test for 2016 candidates: Do they comprehend the
threats we face? Are they willing to do what is necessary to prevent a far more
potent strike than 9/11?

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


