                             2246 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 3, 2014 Thursday 1:33 AM EST

Old photographs bring old Petworth back to life on Fourth of July;
Where can you find Uncle Sam? In the 1920s, Petworth found him at a home for old
soldiers.

BYLINE: John Kelly

LENGTH: 745 words


Have you ever seen Uncle Sam? I mean the real Uncle Sam?

Of course you haven't. There's no such thing. Uncle Sam is a mythical figure
most memorably personified in artist J.M. Flagg's 1917 recruiting poster: a
top-hatted, goateed man in red, white and blue exhorting, "I want you for U.S.
Army."

And yet when I looked at the photos that Virginia Baker Gist sent me, I thought
I was looking at the real deal.

Virginia is 91 and lives in Silver Spring. She grew up in Washington's Petworth
neighborhood at a time when the Fourth of July was a big deal. Every
neighborhood had its own Independence Day parade. Because Petworth is close to
what was known back then as the Old Soldiers' Home, its parade featured an
actual old soldier.

"Every year, they would select a soldier to march in the parade as Uncle Sam,"
Virginia told me.

In 1920, her mother, Lilliane, snapped a few photos of that year's honoree. The
images are remarkable. Dressed in striped pants and star-bedecked top hat,
clutching an American flag, the man looks like he stepped straight out of
history, which I suppose is exactly what he did.

That unnamed veteran was probably too old to have served in the Great War, whose
hostilities had ended less than two years earlier. Perhaps he was from the
Spanish-American War or the Indian wars or even the Civil War.

Neighborhoods such as the Palisades and Takoma Park still have Fourth of July
parades. The spirit might be the same, but the details sure are different. For
example, the parade on the grounds of the old Walter Reed Army hospital featured
marching Red Cross personnel who were followed, according to The Post, by
"patients in gayly decorated wheel chairs."

After the parade were what were described as "athletic events of a unique
nature." These included a "50-yard hop" for leg amputees, a one-legged hurdle
race and an artificial-leg walk, "to be judged by form only." Entrants were
classed according to whether they had amputations of both legs, or of one leg,
either above or below the knee.

They sound like modern paralympians.

Over in Piney Branch, there was the typical children's parade, followed by
"races for small boys." But there were also balloon ascensions. The evening's
fireworks were supplied by an Army arsenal. Wrote The Post: "Many rockets such
as were used on the western front by the army will add to the instructive
advantages of this portion of the day's events."

Oh for some drones to fly low over Washington this Fourth of July!

Nearly every Independence Day event that I read about in The Post's old stories
featured a reading of the Declaration of Independence or the preamble to the
Constitution. Would we even have the attention span for that today?

In 1928, when Virginia was 5, she was chosen to help lead Petworth's Fourth of
July parade. She wore a striped pinafore and held a parasol. Her co-leader was a
little boy named Nelson Smith, dressed as a miniature Uncle Sam.

At the time, Virginia's family lived at 4016 Illinois Ave. NW. Nelson's lived
two houses up. She says she doesn't remember much of the parade, just that the
route stretched from Sherman Circle to the Soldiers' Home, what we today call
the Armed Forces Retirement Home. There were marching bands and floats and Camp
Fire Girls dressed as Native Americans.

And there was Uncle Sam, ramrod straight.

In the city, seasons don't have much detail. It's hot. It's cold. But in the
country, things change from day to day. One year, I visited Camp Moss Hollow
when the butterflies were out in profusion. This year, it was the day lilies.

As I bounced on the gravel road that leads to the camp's entrance, I was
surrounded by the orange flowers, their blossoms seeming to greet me (but in
reality just straining toward the sun).

I'll report on my visit to camp next week. In the meantime, we have a little
more than a week left in our campaign for this summer camp for at-risk kids from
the Washington area. Our goal is $500,000. Donate at www.familymattersdc.org. Or
send a check, payable to "Send a Kid to Camp," to Family Matters of Greater
Washington, 1509 16th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20036, Attention: Accounting
Department.

Clyde's is providing gift certificates to its fine restaurants. If you donate
$200 to $299, you'll receive a $25 gift certificate. Give $300 or more, and
you'll get a $50 gift certificate. (Certificates will be mailed in August.)

john.kelly@washpost.com

Twitter: @johnkelly

For previous columns, visit washingtonpost.com/johnkelly.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


