                             2254 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 9, 2014 Wednesday 12:43 PM EST

Wonkbook: Washington's legal marijuana policy experiment;
Washington state's experiment with legal recreational marijuana begins.

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 4532 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: 4.6 million. That's the number of U.S. job
openings in May, the highest level in seven years.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: 30 years of companies abandoning the U.S. for lower
taxes, in one chart.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) Washington's recreational-marijuana rollout; (2)
Obama's border-crisis funding request; (3) improving your experience at the
doctor's office; (4) highway, Ex-Im progress?; and (5) another bad day for the
NSA.

1. Top story: Washington state's experiment with legal recreational marijuana
begins

Sales of recreational marijuana begin in Washington state. "Washington's
experiment with licensed, legal recreational marijuana began tentatively in a
handful of places around the state on Tuesday, with limited supplies...but with
great enthusiasm and hoopla in the places where the sales occurred.Where the
experiment will lead after the novelty wears off remains deeply
uncertain....Possessing marijuana in small amounts and consuming it at home has
been legal in Washington for almost two years now...and local law enforcement
agencies had mostly backed off enforcing marijuana laws before that. It had not,
however, been legal to sell it for recreational purposes until Tuesday." Kirk
Johnson in The New York Times.

Explainer: How the recreational marijuana system in Washington state works. Katy
Steinmetz in Time Magazine.

Chart: Where you can maybe buy recreational marijuana. German Lopez in Vox.

Slight problem: There's a shortage of legal pot. "Although some of Denver's
marijuana shops ran out of product when they opened in January, the kind of
shortages expected in Washington are above and beyond....The contrast speaks to
just how varied different states' experiences might be as they strive to
legalize marijuana for recreational and medical purposes....Strangely enough,
the lack of regulations on the medical marijuana system, which isn't going
through a shortage, could be the saving grace for Washington's pot enthusiasts.
Because the system is so unregulated, many of Washington's marijuana users
already have access to the drug through friends and medical dispensaries....The
shortage might only affect curious newcomers and tourists." German Lopez in Vox.

Interview: Why illegal/unlicensed pot dealers are freaking out. Matt Berman in
National Journal.

Lessons from Colorado: A pot learning curve. "The two states have been under
scrutiny as they embark on test cases in legalization, watched closely by
everyone from legalization critics to advocates pushing legal marijuana in other
states, including Oregon and Alaska. Observers are keeping tabs both on how
smoothly the rollout goes, as well as looking to the differences in the two
states' approaches....The area of legalization under the most scrutiny in
Colorado is the sale of 'edibles.'...In response to Colorado's experiences,
Washington last month issued some new rules governing the packaging, labeling,
and sale of edibles, and it has yet to issue a license for a kitchen to produce
such products." Amanda Paulson in The Christian Science Monitor.

Explainer: 7 differences between Colorado and Washington state's
recreational-marijuana systems. Trevor Hughes in USA Today.

It takes a lot to protect a pot shop. "To protect the people working, the pot
and the profits, several layers of security are needed, he said. 'You can't cut
in from above. You can't tunnel in from below,' said Davis, pointing to a maze
of circuits on the ceiling. 'The system will pick you up before you ever manage
to get inside.' Davis also has 14 high-definition, infrared cameras always
rolling. Bullet-resistant glass is part of a demolition-resistant wall that
customers first see after they walk through the front door. The facility is
outfitted with motion sensors, heavy-duty locks and alarms.This, plus panic
buttons for the workers, are what's necessary to deal with cannabis in an
all-cash environment, he said." Natalie Swaby in KING-TV.

What's the pot-shop experience like? "Seattle's first pot shop, in an industrial
district south of downtown, is no Starbucks. It's on a busy six-lane road on
which trucks frequently rumble by, and it has no off-street parking. The store's
name is in small print above the mailbox. Under state rules, cannabis can't be
displayed in windows and the stores can't be near schools, playgrounds,
libraries, or parks. Inside, glass jewelry cases once used in a Sears (SHLD)
department store display pipes and bongs. The bright lights and wood laminate
flooring call to mind an optometrist's shop in a mall, except for the cash
machine next to the register. There's no place to comfortably sit; pot can't be
consumed on the premises." Peter Robison in Bloomberg Businessweek.

Quotable: "It's the quality. It's like a candy store, like chocolates. You can
never get enough." - Deborah Greene, a customer at a new recreational-pot shop
in Wash. state. Maria L. La Ganga in Los Angeles Times.

Whose pot is better: Washington's or Colorado's? It's hard to say. "Retailers in
Washington braced for long lines and high demand. The same happened when
Colorado legalized recreational sales Jan. 1, and tens of thousands of buyers
got the chance to pick from a wide variety of strains, from Blue Dream to AK-47
and Facewreck. Those names represent known genetic strains of marijuana plant -
think Macintosh and Granny Smith apples - that are cultivated the world over.
But even though the genetics are the same, how the plants are grown makes an
enormous difference, experts say. That makes it all but impossible to make
consistent comparisons." Trevor Hughes in USA Today.

Explainer: A guide for recreational-marijuana shoppers. Trevor Hughes in USA
Today.

Cuomo signs bill legalizing medical pot in N.Y. state. "The measure, which
passed both houses of the legislature during the final moments of the
legislative session, in June, is significantly more restrictive than other
medical-marijuana laws in the nation." Erica Orden in The Wall Street Journal.

Other legal reads:

Odd couple - Cory Booker, Rand Paul - team up on sentencing reform bill. Ed
O'Keefe in The Washington Post.

Mob-busting tool used against online crime. Andrew Grossman in The Wall Street
Journal.

Top opinion

PORTER: Blueprints for taming the climate crisis. "It offers a sobering
conclusion. We might be able to pull it off. But it will take an overhaul of the
way we use energy, and a huge investment in the development and deployment of
new energy technologies. Significantly, it calls for an entirely different
approach to international diplomacy on the issue of how to combat climate
change....But despite these risks, the report offers a promising new path to
overcome the decades-old logjam of climate change negotiations. For the first
time, when we say we can stop the climate from heating we will more or less know
what we are talking about." Eduardo Porter in The New York Times.

McARDLE: Who's the real Hobby Lobby bully? "I think...Hobby Lobby and Little
Sisters of the Poor are obviously correct - they are being forced by the
government to buy something that they don't want to buy....If it weren't for
state power, the Little Sisters of the Poor would be happily not facilitating
the birth-control purchases of its employees; the Barack Obama administration
has attempted to force them to do otherwise....All this is old ground. The
interesting question is why people on the other side view ceasing the coercion
as itself coercive while arguing that the original law did not, in fact, force
anyone to violate their religious beliefs." Megan McArdle in Bloomberg View.

CHAIT: GOP after the apocalypse. "The reformicons' retreat from Ryan-style
apocalypticism is not only a shrewd tonal shift, but also a welcome - albeit
unacknowledged - recognition that the party's doomsaying has not come to pass,
and that the American way of life will indeed survive Obama's reforms. Indeed,
the success of Obama's domestic agenda may create more space for a conservative
counteroffensive, in the way that Reaganism opened political room for Bill
Clinton. Whether or not the reformicons ever compose a workable domestic agenda,
they have come to recognize that they cannot run a presidential campaign
promising to rescue America from fire and rubble visible only to themselves."
Jonathan Chait in New York Magazine.

KRUGMAN: Conservative delusions about inflation. "Confronted with a conflict
between evidence and what they want to believe for political and/or religious
reasons, many people reject the evidence. And knowing more about the issues
widens the divide, because the well informed have a clearer view of which
evidence they need to reject to sustain their belief system....I found myself
thinking about the similar state of affairs when it comes to economics....And if
you look at the internal dynamics of the Republican Party, it's obvious that the
currency-debasement, return-to-gold faction has been gaining strength even as
its predictions keep failing. Can anything reverse this descent into dogma? A
few conservative intellectuals have been trying to persuade their movement to
embrace monetary activism, but they're ever more marginalized." Paul Krugman in
The New York Times.

EDSALL: How much do our genes influence our political beliefs? "It's been a key
question of American politics since at least 1968: Why do so many poor,
working-class and lower-middle-class whites - many of them dependent for
survival on government programs - vote for Republicans? The debate over the
motives of conservative low-income white voters remains unresolved, but two
recent research papers suggest that the hurdles facing Democrats in carrying
this segment of the electorate may prove difficult to overcome." Thomas B.
Edsall in The New York Times.

WEISER: Sharing the leverage. "In their new book House of Debt, economists Atif
Mian and Amir Sufi connect the vast increase in consumer debt with the Great
Recession and slow-motion recovery. But rather than sing a requiem for a
half-century of proxy Keynesianism...they shout hosannas for even more
debt....Complex and opaque debt structures enable politicians and crony
capitalists to disguise high leverage while spinning the predictable blowups as
black swan events. If a consumer debt hangover is hindering the economy, as Mian
and Sufi plausibly argue, then the government should be encouraging writedowns
in exchange for the elimination of future guarantees and other hidden debt
subsidies. Borrowers and lenders, not taxpayers, should bear the risk." Jay
Weiser in National Review.

Animals interlude: Looks like Grumpy Cat has some company. "Purrmanently sad
cat" looks adorably sad all the time.

2. Obama's requests emergency-funding to deal with the migrant crisis

Obama's border migrant-crisis funding request faces tough path on Capitol Hill.
"Hours after the Obama administration requested $3.7 billion in emergency
funding to address the current child immigration crisis at the southern border,
few on Capitol Hill were predicting speedy passage - if at all - of legislation
to provide Obama with the money he has requested. Instead, the conventional
wisdom on the Hill among both Democrats and Republicans is the same as it has
been for any number of issues this year - from minimum wage, to unemployment
extension, to any number of jobs bills: probably not going to happen." Wesley
Lowery in The Washington Post.

Chart: A breakdown of the White House's request. The Washington Post.

Border help for HHS, amid a potential new public-health crisis. "Those funds
will help HHS provide 'appropriate care' for the children, who are mostly coming
from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras....HHS is one of the agencies
responsible for caring for the children, a little-known task that could prove
arduous as the number of unaccompanied kids continues to surge. The department's
Unaccompanied Alien Children (UAC) program handled about 6,000 to 8,000 children
a year between 2003 and 2011 while they were readied for deportation or took
their cases to court. But a new wave of immigrants from Central America means
the workload could soar to 90,000 unaccompanied kids this fiscal year and
127,000 in 2015, advocates told The Hill." Ferdous Al-Faruque in The Hill.

U.N. urges U.S. to treat migrant children as refugees. "People who enter the
U.S. and nearby countries illegally from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras
should not be forced to return home and should be treated as refugees, a U.N.
agency says. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees says people from those
countries are subject to persecution....The call from the U.N. echoes statements
made in the spring, when the refugee agency released 'Children on the Run,' a
report that cited interviews with migrant children who had crossed international
borders to flee violence. This week, the U.S. and its neighbors will hold
meetings in Nicaragua to discuss 'updating a 30-year-old declaration regarding
the obligations nations have to aid refugees,' the AP says." Bill Chappell in
NPR.

Obama will visit Perry, but not the border. What will they discuss? "President
Barack Obama will meet Texas Governor Rick Perry on Wednesday to discuss a surge
of Latin American young people crossing the U.S.-Mexico border that has put the
two leaders at odds with each other. Perry's office welcomed the meeting, to
take place in Dallas on the governor's turf, in a Tuesday statement that said
they would discuss the humanitarian and national security crises along the
southern border....But the White House said he would not visit the border, a
sign that officials do not see a political upside." Mark Felsenthal and Jon
Hershkovitz in Reuters.

Other immigration reads:

Mark Zuckerberg's immigration push hits brick wall. Jessica Meyers in Politico.

ALDEBOT-GREEN: America's young refugees. "The president's solution to change the
law governing the processing of unaccompanied youth would be a disaster,
particularly for youth who have valid immigration claims. For now, the White
House has decided to separate its emergency funding request from these
contentious policy changes in order to more carefully consider the competing
needs of respecting due process and speeding up removal. This is a good and
prudent start to setting better policy in a trying context. No doubt the United
States is now facing a refugee crisis within its borders. Yet the administration
should not bow to pressure simply to gain political cover. Rather, it should
advance policies based on the principle that unaccompanied youth migration is a
humanitarian crisis." Scarlett Aldebot-Green in Foreign Policy.

Wonky caffeine interlude: What does it take to make a decent cup of coffee in
space?

3. Improving your experience with your doctor

What are drug companies paying your doctor? You can find out soon. "The
financial ties, which naturally raise conflict-of-interest concerns, aren't
always clear, but that's about to change because of a lesser-known Obamacare
provision. Some of the major drugmakers have been reporting some information
about financial relationships with care providers - some voluntarily, some as
the result of litigation - but a comprehensive nationwide effort is about to
launch this summer, and the federal government is now looking to bring even
greater transparency. Drug and device companies will now have to report to the
government payments to doctors and teaching hospitals of at least $10 (or $100
over the year), and the Medicare agency will soon post the reports in a public
database." Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

Long wait times have become the norm. "One small consolation of our high-priced
health care system - our $2.7 trillion collective medical bill - has been the
notion that at least we get medical attention quickly. Americans look down on
national health systems like Canada's and Britain's because of their notorious
waiting lists. In recent weeks, the Veterans Affairs hospitals have been
pilloried for long patient wait times, with top officials losing their jobs. Yet
there is emerging evidence that lengthy waits to get a doctor's appointment have
become the norm in many parts of American medicine, particularly for general
doctors but also for specialists. And that includes patients with private
insurance as well as those with Medicaid or Medicare." Elisabeth Rosenthal in
The New York Times.

Doctors may soon be paid for not making you wait. "More doctor pay is being tied
to patient satisfaction metrics, another sign health care may be coming more
consumer-friendly, according to a new national analysis of physician
compensation. Already, doctors and hospitals increasingly have more of their pay
tied to health outcomes and related clinical measures as medical care moves
toward value-based compensation rather than fees for service. But momentum is
slowly building for physicians to also be measured on how quickly phone calls
are returned to how long a patient sits in a physician office waiting area as
part of 'patient satisfaction metrics' insurers are working into contracts with
medical-care providers." Bruce Japsen in Forbes.

Preventive services differ between primary care docs and OB/GYNs. "The services
women receive during annual preventive care visits may partially depend on what
type of doctor they see, suggests a new report. Women who saw primary care
doctors for their annual checkup tended to receive a broader range of services,
compared to those who saw obstetrician/gynecologists (OB/GYNs), researchers
found." Reuters.

Explainer: 4 medical tests that are awkward, embarrassing, and unnecessary.
Sarah Kliff in Vox.

Other health care reads:

Smallpox vials found in storage room of NIH facility. Lena H. Sun and Brady
Dennis in The Washington Post.

Without federal action, states move on long-term care. Michael Ollove in Pew
Stateline.

U.S. Democrats aim to turn contraception into campaign drive. David Morgan in
Reuters.

Food science interlude: The chemistry of why meat browns on the grill, or not.

4. Signs of promise on highway funding, Ex-Im Bank reauthorization

First, highway stopgap funding. "House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave
Camp (R-Mich.) on Tuesday proposed a transfer of almost $20 billion from the
general tax fund to help sustain transportation funding until next
April....Without the transfer, federal officials have warned that money for the
nation's major transportation projects would begin to slow after Aug. 1 as the
Highway Trust Fund dwindled. Separately, senators said Tuesday that they are
nearing an agreement on a plan to replenish the highway fund. Senate Finance
Committee Chairman Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) and Sen. Thomas Carper (D-Del.)...declined
to specify the parameters of their emerging plan." Ed O'Keefe and Ashley Halsey
III in The Washington Post.

Primary source:

Need to get up to speed? See our previous coverage of this issue.

There's one problem, though: Can negotiations get done in time? "The plan by
House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp, a Michigan Republican, would
offset its costs by letting employers delay contributions to their employee
pension plans, which raises corporate taxable income in a boon for the U.S.
Treasury. It also would boost customs user fees and transfer $1 billion from a
federal leaking underground storage trust fund. The proposal diverges from a
plan in the Senate, complicating the ability to forestall a slowdown in
disbursements from the highway trust to states next month." Laura Litvan in
Bloomberg.

And Ex-Im Bank renewal could be part of government funding bill. "High-level
discussions between the two chambers are in their infancy....But there are
forces in both chambers pushing to renew the Export-Import Bank and pass an
extension of the Highway Trust Fund before the election. The House will go
first, and plans to extend the Highway Trust Fund sometime in the next two
weeks, keeping the program funded until early 2015, Republican sources said.
That would give Congress more time to debate a more permanent solution....Senate
Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) is considering attaching a short-term
reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank to a continuing resolution that would
keep the government funded past Sept. 30." John Bresnahan and Jake Sherman in
Politico.

S&P issues warns on potential downgrades if Ex-Im renewal falls short.
"Political infighting regarding renewal of the charter of a U.S. agency that
provides customers of big American corporations with loans for their wares is
beginning to have an effect on investor thinking. Standard & Poor's Monday
cautioned Boeing, the largest beneficiary by far of the Export-Import Bank,
could face a weakening long-term credit rating should the bank lose its
charter." Greg Morcroft in International Business Times.

Democrats: The party of big business? Not so fast. "Democrats are seeing a new
opportunity to rebuild frayed relations with business groups, whose traditional
alliance with the Republican Party has been strained by tea-party opposition to
rewriting immigration laws, a renewal of the Export-Import Bank and the pursuit
of other business priorities....But Democratic outreach faces a big obstacle:
Many business leaders, despite their frustrations with the GOP, have a hard time
seeing a home in the Democratic Party, with its history of supporting tax
increases and government regulation....Business groups in Washington find
themselves in a tricky political situation, with anticorporate sentiment on the
rise among elements of both parties." Janet Hook in The Wall Street Journal.

Dancing interlude: Watch Tom Hanks dance to "This Is How We Do It" by Montell
Jordan.

5. The NSA just had another bad day

Long read: Meet the Muslim-American leaders the FBI, NSA have been spying on.
"Among the Americans on the list are individuals long accused of terrorist
activity, including Anwar al-Awlaki and Samir Khan, who were killed in a 2011
drone strike in Yemen. But a three-month investigation by The
Intercept...reveals that in practice, the system for authorizing NSA
surveillance affords the government wide latitude in spying on U.S. citizens.
The five Americans whose email accounts were monitored by the NSA and FBI have
all led highly public, outwardly exemplary lives. All five vehemently deny any
involvement in terrorism or espionage, and none advocates violent jihad or is
known to have been implicated in any crime." By Glenn Greenwald and Murtaza
Hussain in The Intercept.

The government has asked Verizon for information 190,000 times, and it's only
July. "Verizon's just published its second-ever transparency report, showing
that in the first six months of 2014, the company received nearly 149,000
requests for customer data from the government. That's fewer than the 160,000
times that federal, state and local law enforcement asked Verizon for
information on its customers during a similar period in 2013. For the first
time, Verizon's described (albeit in pretty general terms) the number of
Americans affected by each request. Of the more than 72,000 requests that came
in the form of a subpoena during the first half of the year, 90 percent targeted
three or fewer customers, according to the company." Brian Fung in The
Washington Post.

Senate panel advances cybersecurity information-sharing bill, but privacy
advocates fear it would give more power to NSA. "The legislation includes
provisions aimed at protecting privacy, such as requiring that companies that
share information first strip out personally identifiable data (such as names,
addresses, and Social Security numbers) of known Americans. But the privacy
groups are still worried that the legislation could encourage a company such as
Google to turn over vast batches of emails or other private data to the
government. The information would go first to the Homeland Security Department,
but could then be shared with the NSA or other intelligence agencies." Brendan
Sasso in National Journal.

Primary source:Financial services industry backs Senate bill.

Interview: Hillary Clinton: "Surveillance on Merkel's phone was absolutely
wrong." Marc Hujer and Holger Stark in Der Spiegel.

Other tech reads:

Tech CEOs push billions for Wi-Fi in schools. Kate Tummarello in The Hill.

Password protected: States pass anti-snooping laws. Jeffrey Stinson in Pew
Stateline.

Speed demon interlude: Girl recites the names of the 50 states in under 20
seconds.

Wonkblog roundup

Cheer up, Brazil. Your epic World Cup loss could bode well for your economy. Max
Ehrenfreund.

One insurer's answer to the skyrocketing bills for cancer care. Jason Millman.

The rise and fall of Crumbs, America's first public cupcake company. Roberto A.
Ferdman.

Refinancing could save these homeowners nearly $200 a month. Here's why they
won't do it. Dina ElBoghdady.

30 years of companies abandoning the U.S. for lower taxes, in one chart. Roberto
A. Ferdman.

A leaked document shows just how much the EU wants a piece of America's fracking
boom. Lydia DePillis.

Et Cetera

How a text message could revolutionize student aid. Owen Phillips in NPR.

Long read: Evangelicals are changing their minds on gay marriage. Jim Hinch in
Politico Magazine.

Gay rights groups withdrawing support of ENDA after contraceptive decision. Ed
O'Keefe in The Washington Post.

The Boehner lawsuit against Obama is beginning to take shape. Billy House in
National Journal.

Congress looks for new ways to combat sex trafficking of children. Renee Schoof
in McClatchy Newspapers.

Global poverty levels halved, but more Africans in extreme poverty than in 1990.

 Avaneesh Pandey in International Business Times.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


