                             2214 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       June 23, 2014 Monday 11:46 AM EST

Morning Bits

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 612 words


An apt description. "In an era of deep polarization and critical distrust of all
things Washington, [Ohio Gov. John] Kasich is not perfect; he is not all things
to all people. But he is an example of a competent manager hell-bent on reform,
on being a doer, and that is something both sides desperately want all across
the country."

A keen eye spotted Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) at this gathering: "This week, the
Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation is marking its 20th anniversary. Last
week, the anti-Communist world, so to speak, marked 25 years since the Tiananmen
Square massacre. In November, there will be a celebration: the 25th anniversary
of the Fall of the Wall. VOC (as the Victims of Communism foundation is known)
is intended to teach people about Communism: its ideology, its record. The
organization was founded by Lee Edwards, a Heritage Foundation scholar, and the
late Lev Dobriansky, who taught economics at Georgetown." Good for Sen. Cruz.

An effective argument for why we need drones. "Senate Intelligence Committee
Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) said Sunday that Sunni extremists taking
over parts of Iraq could pose an immediate threat to the United States. On CNN's
'State of the Union,' Feinstein said the U.S. knows of at least 100 U.S.
citizens who have gone overseas to fight alongside terrorists." Someone tell
Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.).

Then tell him about this insightful analysis. "Well, I think right now [ISIS is]

 focused on establishing the Islamic state in the region. But I think after that
is the external operations against the West and the United States. It is the
number one threat to the homeland. The secretary of homeland security agrees
with me that in that assessment. And why is that? Because you're having foreign
fighters pour all over this world into this region with legal travel documents:
100 Americans, many Europeans, people from Australia. This is a major threat to
not the region and Iraq but also to the security of the American people on
American soil."

Another able analysis, this time from David Brooks: "The first is the discrete
ISIS issue, which we simply cannot allow there to be an ISIS caliphate. And I'd
say that's got to be a strategy. So far, I think there's a bipartisan agreement
on what needs to happen, and we heard it today. The only disagreement is how
aggressive you're going to be."

We can only hope the next administration will be more adept at dealing with - at
least more honest about - the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. "Accusations that
[Prime Minister Benjamin] Netanyahu is reluctant to negotiate for peace bury the
true headline: that his government has unilaterally reduced Israeli settlement
construction and largely constrained it to a narrow segment of territory. This
might well be the signal that Israel's historical settlement enterprise is
nearing its end, and whatever its reasons - international pressures, demographic
fears, or a shift in public opinion - it is a trend that deserves U.S.
attention. At the very least, American and European condemnations of Israeli
settlement activity should be replaced with comments that reflect this new
reality. Israel is still constructing, but not in a way that will prevent a
realistic peace settlement."

A skillful response to the church's noxious BDS resolution. "You know, I would
suggest to those Presbyterian organizations to fly to the Middle East, come see
Israel for the embattled democracy that it is, and then take a bus tour. Go to
Libya, go to Syria, go to Iraq, and see the difference. And I would give them
two pieces of advice: One is make sure it's an armor-plated bus. And, second,
don't say that you're Christians."

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


