                             2226 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 6:39 PM EST

Iraq and ISIS: Waging war with hashtags

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

LENGTH: 532 words


In the war of selfies and hashtags, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria might
have won an early victory, but that doesn't mean the battle with social media is
lost. Overwhelmed by ISIS tweets and other online propaganda, pro-Iraq social
media accounts have fired back with a hashtag of their own: #No2ISIS.

While ISIS's brutality - and its inclination to display it on every social media
platform available - has been well covered, the Iraqi counter-campaign has
garnered relatively little attention in Western outlets.

But the #No2ISIS hashtag has already surged on Instagram and seems to be doing
so on Twitter as well. Anti-ISIS protesters in London began using the hashtag
earlier today on posters, while the Iraqi ambassador to the U.S., Lukman Faily,
has even appeared in photos holding placards with the hashtag.

The idea is simple: For many Iraqis, the quickest way to counter the ISIS
propaganda machine is to make one themselves.

Thousands of Iraqis take to social networking site twitter to say no to
terrorism #NO2ISIS pic.twitter.com/POqTdWFunY

ISIS has used online propaganda to devastating effect, but rather than using a
single unified hashtag to deliver its message, the group has instead hijacked
other hashtags, including those used by World Cup fans. By using hashtags like
#Brazil2014 and #WC2014, ISIS has flooded feeds on Twitter and other social
media with recruiting images specifically curtailed to the West. Its
well-produced videos, images and well-tuned Photoshop skills have allowed it to
seem relatable, and at times even comical, to the West.

#ISIS propaganda banner:"You Only Die Once:Why Not Make It Martyrdom? "..
walla,dude, makes sense #fedupwiththisworld pic.twitter.com/MtlkWA94Mv - dona
(@donatelladr) June 24, 2014

Last week, ISIS tweeted a picture of first lady Michelle Obama holding a sign
that initially showed the hashtag #bringbackourgirls - a reference to the more
than 200 kidnapped Nigerian schoolgirls - but that was Photoshopped to say
#bringbackourhumvee, an obvious dig at the American-supplied Humvees recently
captured by ISIS in northern Iraq.

ISIS's propaganda videos are also a spectacle. Gone are the grainy images of
yesteryear where masked men jumped over oddly placed obstacles and played on
monkey bars for no reason. ISIS appears to have adopted the use of small
high-definition video cameras, of the likes adorned on soldiers' helmets in
Afghanistan, as well as professional production values to elevate propaganda
video to 21st-century standards. The beginning of their newest video, "Clanging
of the Swords IV," even features scenes shot from a small drone mounted with an
HD camera, giving  viewers a bird's eye view of Anbar province under ISIS reign.

The propaganda has allowed ISIS members to portray themselves as a larger and
more capable fighting force than they actually are. A recent article in the
Guardian asserted that ISIS propaganda helped intimidate the Iraqi army in
Mosul, where it was ultimately routed. Yet, for all ISIS's propaganda successes,

 Iraqis appear to have been quick to catch on.

"Fear not, #ISIS social media thugs pose no threat," a #No2ISIS tweet reads.
"Cowardice behind a screen will not harm you."

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


