                             2247 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       July 3, 2014 Thursday 12:44 PM EST

Morning Bits

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 640 words


An open invitation: "Texas Gov. Rick Perry said Wednesday that President Barack
Obama must visit the Texas southern border to see the immigration crisis for
himself. 'If he doesn't come to the border, I think it's a real reflection of
his lack of concern of what's really going on there,' Perry said on FOX News'
'FOX and Friends,' noting that Obama is planning to be in Texas next week for
fundraisers." Smart political move by the governor.

You'd think this would open up the field to new up-and-coming Democrats, but so
far the old guard isn't going away gracefully. "By all accounts the Democrats
face significant challenges in the midterm elections. It can't help them that
the party's two most prominent figures-President Obama and Hillary Clinton -have
become tone deaf. . . . After Hillary Clinton left the State Department in
February 2013, Gallup tested her public standing that April, finding that 64% of
Americans had a favorable impression and 31% unfavorable. By June 8 of this
year, Mrs. Clinton's favorables in the Gallup poll had dropped to 54% while her
unfavorables had risen to 43%, which were her numbers at the end of the brutal
2008 Democratic primaries. And this was before her book tour."

Obama opened himself up to just such criticism. "He can do some small temporary
measures, but think about this: Bush tried to do it when he had all Republican
control. Then they tried to do it when there was Democratic control of the House
and Senate and a Republican president. Then we had all Democratic control for
two years. It didn't get done." He certainly is all bark and no bite these days.

The voters no longer seem open to the "blame Bush" routine. "The public largely
blames President Obama for the flood of children who have poured over the border
in recent weeks, creating a growing humanitarian crisis, according to the latest
IBD/TIPP Poll released Monday. The late June survey found that the public
largely blames Obama policies for the crisis in Iraq and believes the lost IRS
emails are an administration effort to cover up wrongdoing at the agency." By a
56 to 41 percent margin, Americans think our premature exit from Iraq caused the
current crisis there.

Obama gave the jihadists an opening, which they surely will seize."[W]hen
America withdraws all its troops by 2016, as President Obama is planning to do,
it will not take long for the Taliban to regroup and retake territory it had
lost to the Americans. Then al Qaeda will be free to return to Afghanistan and
reestablish the safe haven it lost in that country after the 9/11 attacks.
Moreover, without bases in Afghanistan, America will be unable to carry out
drone strikes in Pakistan, giving al Qaeda freer movement within the trial
regions of Pakistan." Read the whole thing.

As Obama's presidency sinks, Democrats open fire on one another. "Alaska Sen.
Mark Begich says fellow Senate Democrat Claire McCaskill is investigating
contracting practices in his home state because she 'refuses to try and
understand the history and culture' of Alaska. . . . Begich, who is up for
reelection this fall in a conservative state, called his Democratic colleague's
actions 'troubling' and mocked her legislative specialty of investigating waste
and fraud, an unusual personal attack between senators of an opposite party and
even rarer for fellow Democrats." Yikes.

You'd think someone would be worried about opening up our secrets to another
leaker. "The Department of Homeland Security has awarded a $190 million contract
to the company accused of methodically defrauding the government while carrying
out background checks on millions of people, including former National Security
Agency contractor Edward Snowden. The department's U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services hired US Investigations Services LLC to help operate the
nation's immigration system."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


