                             2218 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                        June 23, 2014 Monday 6:36 PM EST

EXCLUSIVE: Right Turn talks to Dick Cheney (part 1)

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 1012 words


Former vice president Dick Cheney is plainly worried. In an expansive interview
with Right Turn, he outlined the concerns that motivated him and his daughter
Liz Cheney to form a new organization, Alliance for a Strong America. Why did he
choose to act now? He told me: "It's stimulated by a lot of things. I generally
avoid going out all the time as a typical talking head. I do from time to time.
I stick my head up and voice my sentiments. I've become concerned - and Liz, too
- deeply, deeply concerned about the damage that's being done to the U.S. from
the nation's standpoint and from the standpoint of our ability to be able to
influence events in key parts of the world. Some of it was stimulated by a trip
that Liz and I took to the Middle East this March. To a person, everybody we
dealt with was deeply disturbed, concerned, upset by the state of affairs
vis-à-vis the Obama administration. They had doubts about the commitment of the
U.S. They had concerns about the Iranian nuclear situation. They were also
concerned about Iran as a force for trouble with support for terrorism and that
it wasn't being addressed by the U.S."

Drawing on contacts throughout the Middle East, including those in the United
Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Egypt, Cheney listened to the range of concerns.
"They saw what happened to Egypt with the Muslim Brotherhood taking control," he

 said. "Gen. [Abdel Fatah al-]Sissi had responded to the overwhelming sentiment
in the country to step in. The Saudis and Emiratis had to make up the shortfall
to the Egyptian military because there was a feeling the U.S. was going to put
the screws on Egypt because they believed Obama was on the side of the Muslim
Brotherhood. You have a situation where Sissi can go to Russia looking for help
and that's acceptable politically, but he can't go to the U.S. because that is
not politically acceptable." The problem is not Iran per se or Iraq per se but
the entire foreign policy of this administration. Cheney said, "Egypt is just an
example of the transition that has occurred under this administration. Add that
all together and [our allies] get the sense the U.S. is rapidly withdrawing from
the region. You see this as a significant diminution of the U.S influence in the
region."

In addition to "a whole combination of problems" around the world, Cheney said,
"I worry that we're at a time when there seems to be a growing sense of
isolationism in this country, to some extent in the Republican Party." The group
is not focused on specific candidates, but rather will seek to "try to influence
the policy debate and actively raise these issues, encourage the debate and
stimulate thought about them in the body politic." He is obviously trying to
change the debate in the country but also inside the GOP. He said, "The best way
to do this was to set up this 501(c)4. It is the best procedure,
organizationally, to help the Republican Party reclaim and recommit our party to
something that has been the cornerstone of our philosophy in the past in favor
of a strong America militarily and politically, ready to step up and lead when
necessary."

Dick and Liz Cheney have exchanged words through the media about Sen. Rand Paul
(R-Ky.) and the junior senator's aversion to projecting U.S. power to influence
events in the region. He told me, "I don't know Sen. Paul. I met him a couple
times. I described him yesterday as an isolationist. It's the notion we don't
have a dog in that fight. I did [an] interview back in April 2001, some months
before 9/11, and I was asked the most serious threat we faced. I mentioned
terrorists with weapons of mass destruction. And then that was reinforced on
9/11 when we had 19 guys with box cutters, nothing more sophisticated than that,
deliver the worst attack ever on the homeland, and killed 3,000 people, brought
down the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon, etc. That reinforced the notion
that the threat is especially important when you contemplate the possibility of
a terrorist with a nuclear device. I think the whole concept [of] isolationism
went out in the '30s, but if you didn't believe it then ... the fact you had 19
people with box cutters from Afghanistan could come over here and do that kind
of damage should have demonstrated to anybody who had questions that we have an
interest in that part of the world, that it matters." But this is not merely
about one senator, as wrongheaded as he may be. Cheney recognized, "I worry this
is not just a problem with Sen. Paul, but there is public sentiment behind it in
the country. We need to explain why there is a danger there and an interest in
what happens."

He is particularly concerned about the creeping inclination to treat the
jihadist threat as a criminal justice matter. One sees it in the
administration's inclination to try the Libyan terrorist captured in connection
with the attack on Benghazi and in Rand Paul's fixation with drones, suggesting
that we can't use them against Americans who have taken up arms against the
United States. "Before 9/11," Cheney recalled, "we treated terrorist attacks
like the 1993 World Trade Center bombing as a law enforcement matter. Then came
9/11. It was an act of war, and we needed to use all of our capabilities." He
dismissed the concern about droning American jihadists who have joined up with
U.S. enemies overseas. "What I hear in Rand Paul's argument seems to be based on
the assumption we have a law enforcement problem. Now, if an American winds up
in Yemen recruiting terrorists, he is an unlawful combatant. We don't capture
him and read him his Miranda rights." Cheney concedes that there is sentiment
against a long, protracted war. "As Americans, we have a culture to solve a
problem. Then move on. This is going to take a very long commitment. It may be
like the Cold War in terms of duration. It requires presidential leadership to
help the public understand why it's necessary and to help build support."

I will have more tomorrow from the interview, including Cheney's views on Iraq,
Iran, Syria, Vladimir Putin and 2016.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


