                             2266 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 11, 2014 Friday 10:59 PM EST

Ready or not, Japan wants to buy the Pentagon's controversial Osprey aircraft;
The Osprey's history of deadly crashes has complicated matters in Japan.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 421 words


Japanese Defense Minister Itsunori Onodera arrived at the Pentagon on Thursday
in a gleaming MV-22 Osprey, the revolutionary, though controversial, tilt-rotor
aircraft that can take off like a helicopter but fly like an airplane.

The point was plain - and plane. If I'm riding in it, Onodera seemed to say,
it's safe.

The visual was relevant because Japan wants to buy the aircraft as it expands
its military in the face of a rising China. Japanese officials said Thursday
that they would budget money to buy them in the fiscal 2015 budget. By 2018,
Tokyo wants 17 of them, offering them more speed and range than traditional
helicopters.

The Osprey's history of deadly crashes has complicated matters in Japan,
however. The Marine Corps first deployed the aircraft there in 2012 amid
protests by tens of thousands of people, and concerns remain. Even a
six-inch-long metal rod falling off an Osprey into the ocean near Okinawa and
doing no harm in June received media attention, given the circumstances.

The Osprey purchases did not come up during a news conference Friday at the
Pentagon with Onodera and Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel. But it's part of a
broader shift in Japanese defense strategy toward "collective self-defense"
after decades of "internal self-defense." In addition to the Ospreys, Japan
plans to buy at least 42 F-35A Joint Strike Fighter jets to replace its
decades-old F-4EJ Kai Phantoms, several Global Hawk surveillance drones and
other equipment.

It's the Ospreys, though, that seem to get the bulk of the attention. And that's
in part because of Japan's history with other American aircraft. Many are still
upset by an Aug. 13, 2004, CH-53D helicopter crash on an occupied building at
Okinawa International University in which U.S. Marines cordoned off Japanese
authorities for seven days. No civilians were injured in the crash, but rallies
against U.S. aviation have continued there ever since, including a "die-in"
protest last summer on its ninth anniversary.

The Osprey, meanwhile, has become a common sight in the U.S. military. It was
deployed to Iraq from 2007 to 2009, and has been in Afghanistan since. It also
has been added to President Obama's fleet of aircraft, Marine Corps Helicopter
Squadron One, although it is used to fly support missions, not the president.

Air Force Special Operations Command also flies a variant of the Osprey, the
CV-22, and the Navy signed a $6.5 billion deal in June with the Osprey's makers,
Textron Inc.'s Bell Helicopter and Boeing Co., to buy 99 of the aircraft.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


