                             2233 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 26, 2014 Thursday 3:54 PM EST

Book review: 'Good Hunting: An American Spymaster's Story' by Jack Devine;
Jack Devine recounts his 32 years as a spy in Chile and Italy and secretly
fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan.

BYLINE: Mary Louise Kelly

LENGTH: 1014 words


There is an art to writing a CIA memoir. You must divulge enough insider
tradecraft and gossip that readers feel they're getting a glimpse behind the
curtain, but not so much that the censors swoop down. You have to describe
covert operations in colorful detail, without revealing still-classified
information. And - a challenge inherent to any Washington memoir - you want to
settle old scores ("setting the record straight" is the preferred term) but not
come across as an embittered has-been.

Jack Devine's memoir, "Good Hunting," mostly succeeds at navigating these
treacherous waters. Devine was a CIA spy for 32 years. He was in Chile when
Salvador Allende fell, he later ran CIA stations in Latin America and Rome, and
he eventually rose to become acting chief of the agency's clandestine service.
His book jacket promises a "master class in spycraft." The memoir doesn't quite
live up to that, but Devine does share tales of filing expense reports written
with invisible ink and attempting to recruit a foreign agent in Santiago while
gagging on spoonfuls of raw sea urchins.

There are flashes of the author's keen sense of humor. While serving undercover
in Rome, Devine was invited to Pope John Paul II's private chapel at the
Vatican. After Mass, the pontiff leaned in and inquired, "Where do you work?"
Devine, wary of failing his next polygraph, managed to stammer, "Your Holiness,
I work for the U.S. government." (He titles the chapter "Do I Lie to the Pope,
or Break Cover?")

The book, however, is a mostly serious reflection on a long career at an
institution that Devine clearly still loves. "When an autopsy is done," he says,
"you're going to find that part of my heart contains the CIA's stamp."

Devine provides an accounting of his role in some of the agency's most
controversial entanglements, from Iran-contra to the covert war against the
Soviets in Afghanistan. He ran that war in the late 1980s, as director of the
CIA's Afghan Task Force. To this day, on his office wall in New York hangs a
print of an official agency painting depicting the moment Afghan mujahideen
fighters shouted "Allahu Akbar!" and fired a Stinger missile for the first time
at a Soviet helicopter gunship. (By the way, who knew that the CIA commissions
oil paintings of key moments in agency history? How much does this cost? And
what other moments have made the cut?)

Oil paintings aside, Devine doesn't deliver Earth-shattering revelations. His
strength lies instead in humanizing the many larger-than-life characters he
tangled with over the years. That list includes the 11 CIA directors he served.
There's a great scene featuring the famously irascible William Casey, President
Ronald Reagan's CIA chief. Devine recalls Casey flying into Panama for meetings
and insisting on donuts for breakfast. "Procuring U.S.-style donuts was
impossible in Panama in those days," Devine protests, noting that in his thank
you cable to staffers after the visit, Casey signed off with: "NEXT TIME, YOU
WILL GET DONUTS."

One character who haunted Devine throughout his career was Aldrich Ames. The two
men first crossed paths as junior officers, combing through secret cables side
by side in a basement vault at Langley. Years later in Rome, when Devine was
directly supervising the man who would prove to be the greatest traitor in CIA
history, he writes, "I had an eerie sensation that something was wrong, although
I couldn't put my finger on it." Devine recalls having dinner at Ames's home, at
which Devine and his wife enjoyed a "meat and vegetable dish" and a "decent red
wine." By that point, Ames had been selling secrets to the Russians for years.

Elsewhere in the book, Devine writes of the importance of instinct in the
intelligence business. "The most important thing is to let your inner ear speak
to you," he notes. If he feels guilty because his inner ear failed him on Ames,
he doesn't directly say so.

Devine retired from government in 1998, before the two most troubling episodes
in modern CIA history: the failure to prevent the 9/11 attacks and the
pre-Iraq-war intelligence fiasco. That makes it tempting to engage in
finger-pointing, and Devine's comments on Iraq in particular can come across as
preachy. "As it happened, I saw the disastrous Iraq War coming," he remarks,
adding that he could not "have abided the way intelligence on weapons of mass
destruction was handled." In hindsight, of course, no one is happy with the way
intelligence on Iraq was handled. But Devine's tone will probably still strike a
sour note with some former colleagues.

Looking forward, Devine offers a prescription for the CIA. The thrust of his
argument is that the agency must return to what it does best - traditional
espionage and covert action - while ceding some of its post-9/11 paramilitary
role to the Pentagon. In this, his thinking appears to be aligned with that of
the agency's current leadership. (At his confirmation hearings last year, CIA
Director John Brennan asserted, "The CIA should not be doing traditional
military activities.")

But this rebalancing is proving difficult to implement. "This decade of war has
created a drift toward militarization of CIA personnel that may make it
challenging to get everyone back to the traditional core mission," Devine
writes.

Today, CIA drones continue to prowl the skies above Pakistan and Yemen - an
arrangement Devine welcomes because the spy agency, unlike the Pentagon, has the
ability to operate "below the radar and in ways that preserve some level of
plausible deniability."

That ability remains the CIA's raison d'etre. Devine has produced an
entertaining chronicle of his decades at the agency and a persuasive case for
its continued relevance. During his years as a spy, he liked to sign off on
classified cables with the phrase "GOOD HUNTING," a reference to the pursuit of
intelligence sources and of America's enemies. A fitting title for the book -
and for a life's work.

bookworld@washpost.com

Mary Louise Kelly, a former NPR intelligence correspondent, is the author of the
espionage novel "Anonymous Sources."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


