                             2208 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 6:35 PM EST

An enclave strategy for Iraq;
The United States needs an enclave strategy as the Middle East continues to
fracture.

BYLINE: Fareed Zakaria

LENGTH: 762 words


Can Iraq hold together? It's worth examining what is happening in that country
through a broader prism. If you had looked at the Middle East 15 years ago, you
would have seen a string of strikingly similar regimes - from Libya and Tunisia
in the west to Syria and Iraq in the east. They were all dictatorships. They
were all secular, in the sense that they did not derive their legitimacy from
religious identity. Historically, they had all been supported by outside powers
- first the British and French, then the superpowers - which meant that these
rulers worried more about pleasing patrons abroad than currying favor at home.
And they had secure borders.

Today, across the region, from Libya to Syria, that structure of authority has
collapsed and people are reaching for their older identities - Sunni, Shiite,
Kurd. Sectarian groups, often Islamist, have filled the power vacuum, spilling
over borders and spreading violence. In Iraq and elsewhere, no amount of U.S.
military power can put Humpty Dumpty back together.

There are exceptions. Algeria remains an old-fashioned secular dictatorship.
Egypt, perhaps the longest-functioning state in the world, has reasserted the
old order by using force. The Gulf monarchies - Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United
Arab Emirates - have withstood the turmoil partly because of greater legitimacy
and mostly because of massive patronage systems. And most hopefully, Morocco,
Jordan and Tunisia have reformed enough to keep revolutionaries at bay.

The old order was probably unsustainable. It rested on extreme suppression,
which was producing extreme opposition movements, and on superpower patronage,
which couldn't last. The countries with significant sectarian divides and in
which minority groups ruled - Iraq and Syria - became the most vulnerable.

Let's be clear. The Iraq war was the crucial trigger, and the U.S. occupation
needlessly exacerbated sectarian identities rather than building national ones.
But once the old order broke, Iraq's Shiites, who had been suppressed for
decades, in some cases brutally, were not likely to sign up to share power
easily with their former tormentors.

During and immediately after the surge - 2007-08 - Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki behaved differently. But if it took the danger of civil war, the
presence of about 200,000 foreign troops, a particularly skilled American
general (David Petraeus) and billions of dollars to force him to make nice for a
brief while, it was unlikely to be a long-term arrangement.

It is doubtful that a Shiite government in Baghdad - using an increasingly
Shiite army to defend itself - will ever fully regain the allegiance of the
Sunnis. The Sunnis have done enough killing to keep the Shiites wary for
decades. Washington has urged the Baghdad government to be inclusive. It has
hinted that the best outcome would be a new Iraqi government with a broad
coalition. That's true, but it's also unlikely. Washington needs a Plan B.

Plan B should be an enclave strategy. The United States should recognize that
Iraq is turning into a country of enclaves and work to ensure that these regions
stay as stable, terrorism-free and open as possible. The Kurdish enclave,
bolstered by having captured the vital city of Kirkuk, is already a success
story. The Shiite region of the south can be stable. It will be possible to work
with countries such as Saudi Arabia and Jordan to influence the Sunni groups in
the middle of the country, purging terrorists and empowering moderate Sunnis.

A comparable strategy in Syria would allow groups such as the Kurds and Sunnis
to protect their own areas from Bashar al-Assad's brutality  but recognize that
they will not be able to topple the regime. There will be places where the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and similar groups gain strength. In
those areas, Washington would have to use drones, counterintelligence and
occasional Special Operations forces strikes - just as it does in Afghanistan,
Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia. The world of enclaves already exists. Washington
simply has to realize that parts of Iraq are now in it.

The polyglot Middle East has been dying for a while, but it is now on its last
legs. Countries rich in minorities, such as Iraq, have seen their Christian
populations flee or be massacred. Where minorities remain, communities are
segregating themselves.

The United States can't stop a tidal trend. What it can do is try to limit the
fallout, bolster stable countries and zones, support those who believe in
reconciliation, and protect itself and its friends.

comments@fareedzakaria.com

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


