                             2274 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 16, 2014 Wednesday 3:04 PM EST

Robotic 'cows' and drone vehicles are patrolling jungles with Marines;
In typically funny and blunt fashion, the Marines in Hawaii have taken to
calling one of them "the cow."

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 382 words


More than a 1,000 U.S. Marines are participating in the Rim of the Pacific
military exercises in and around Hawaii this month as 49 ships and six
submarines from 23 countries test a variety of equipment and work to integrate
it. It's the robot on shore, however, that is getting an inordinate amount of
buzz because of its funny looks and potential utility to U.S. troops pulling
foot patrols.

Meet the Legged Squad Support System, or LS3. Developed by Boston Dynamics -
which was bought out by Google late last year - it can carry as much as 400
pounds of equipment and enough fuel to walk 20 miles over 24 hours, the company
says. It began a two-year testing phase in 2012 and is getting some serious work
at RIMPAC under the supervision of the Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory.
Check it out in action:

The LS3 is constantly checking its footing, making it useful in uneven terrain
where a vehicle might not be. In typically funny and blunt fashion, the Marines
using it in Hawaii have taken to calling it "the cow," said Lt. Col. Charles
Berry, who is leading the experiment. Three of them are on hand, allowing the
troops to use at least one of them at most times. Popular Mechanics has a lot
more on it here.

The "cows" aren't the only robots getting use right now, however. The Marines
also are testing a new "internally transportable vehicle" about the size of a
small Jeep that can drive itself. Known as the "Ground Unmanned Support
Surrogate," or GUSS, it comes in  handy carrying water and other equipment, but
isn't able to maneuver quite as much terrain as the LS3. On the flip side,
Marines are able to hop in and drive it whenever they want, or if the sensors
that allow it to drive itself aren't working. I imagine attempting to ride a
robotic cow wouldn't be nearly as enjoyable

Here's the GUSS in action:

Berry said there are ongoing conversations about how the two robots can best be
used. There also are concerns about relying on them too heavily - if they were
to break down in a combat zone, they'd likely need to be pulled out, pushed or
carried.

For now, though, the Marines are content to gather information and see what the
two robotic haulers can too. And yes: That cow might not be mooing, but it is
pretty loud. A unit with it won't be sneaking up on anyone anytime soon.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


