                             2259 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 10, 2014 Thursday 4:23 PM EST

Videos: Behold, the new 'Transformer' military jet - and other future wonders;
Defense contractor BAE Systems says the aircraft would split apart in the air
into three jets, then come back together.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 274 words


Picture this: a single large, soaring jet is roaring over the countryside,
heading into an uncertain situation in which targets must be bombed, supplies
must be dropped and reconnaissance photographs must also be gathered. How does
it happen quickly?

If the defense contractor BAE Systems has its way, it sends in a single
"Transformer" jet that splits apart in the air, and then merges back together
when the work is done. Check out this new video, released July 6:

That's only one of the new, futuristic concepts that BAE Systems is promoting
ahead of the massive Farnborough International Air Show in Great Britain, which
begins July 19. The company also released video of a conceptual aircraft it
calls "The Survivor," which BAE officials say will use lightweight adhesive
fluid inside a network of nanotubes to "heal" an aircraft mid-flight. The video
shows a plane's wing bursting into flames, and then patching itself up:

In another new video, the company promotes the possibilities of 3-D printing,
which it says will be able to design drone aircraft that can be suited for the
mission at hand. In this case, one is rescuing a man while a volcano erupts
nearby:

And finally, there's a new video of a notional aircraft outfitted with a
directed-energy weapon capable of taking out an enemy missile in flight over a
city:

These concepts aren't all new. The Navy, for example, has been interested in
using directed-energy weapons for years, and plans to deploy one for the first
time on a ship this summer. Still, videos like these always jump-start the
imagination. We'll be watching for more of them that companies release as the
air show nears.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


