                             2223 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 3:31 PM EST

Foreign policy meltdown creates a whole new ballgame for 2016

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 908 words


A smart Republican consultant who has worked on several presidential campaigns
remarked to me recently, "There are only three ways Hillary doesn't run - her
health, Bill's health or the bottom falls out of the Obama presidency." We may
be getting close to the third.

At the time Hillary Clinton and her hangers-on decided she was the inevitable
nominee and the heavy favorite to win the White House, President Obama's
approval wasn't dangerously close to 40 percent. We did not face the imminent
collapse of Iraq, the emergence of an al-Qaeda state, the invasion of Ukraine
and the collapse of U.S. credibility around the world. It was plausible that
Obama's dutiful secretary of state could become his successor. Now? Not so much.

The question now becomes whether the change in international events is
determinative or at least critical to the Democrats' nomination process. To the
extent that Clinton shaped the failed policies, she is in trouble. And to the
extent she just carried out dangerous policies because she was simply being a
loyalist, that's a problem, too. And the notion that 2016 won't be about foreign
policy or a referendum on the Obama presidency now seems far-fetched.

I assume Hillaryland for now is spinning a rationalization for her continued
candidacy, and it will be quite some time, if ever, before any real
consideration is given to reversing the enormous operation that is rolling
across the Democratic landscape crushing anything and anyone in its way. Too
many people have too much riding on a Clinton presidential run for her to cast
it aside at this point. Besides, for a woman obsessed with making money, an
early decision not to run would send her speaking fees plummeting. She might
once again be "broke."

On the GOP side, the foreign policy collapse would seem to help some and hurt
others.  Those governors who have made little effort to get up to speed on
foreign policy might be wise to pass on 2016. This isn't just a matter of
getting through a few debates; it is about taking on the job of commander in
chief at a time of international threats that are unmatched in their variety,
seriousness and complexity. It would be an act of pure recklessness to seek the
job as commander in chief unless you have exceptional confidence in your ability
to diagnose the international scene and craft a new foreign policy.

In particular, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, who has both an interest in and
experience in foreign policy but who has avoided the tea party vs. establishment
wars, gets a boost - if he is actually interested in running. If Texas Gov. Rick
Perry - the only likely contender with military experience - can, as he told me,
use the time to develop a sophisticated understanding of our foreign policy
threats, he, too, could benefit.

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.), in making the decision to align himself with the hawks
and not with the libertarian isolationists, seems to have chosen wisely. His
grasp of the dangers we face and his critique of the Obama/Clinton/John Kerry
policy fiasco put him in a good position to run as the anti-Obama Republican
determined to stop Iran, reverse al-Qaeda's gains, push back Russian President
Putin and protect the homeland. The same is largely true of Sen. Marco Rubio
(R-Fla.), who has given a clear-headed description of the situation in Iraq,
opposed the president's approach to Iran and Russia and voted against the Budget
Control Act largely because of cuts to defense. And finally, Rep. Paul Ryan
(R-Wis.), who has kept the lowest profile of the potential top-tier candidates,
also gets a lift on the basis of his recent budget to increase defense spending,
his preparation on foreign policy in 2012, his generally Reagan-like view of
national security and his sober and serious demeanor.

What about Jeb Bush? You can make an argument that the foreign policy meltdown
hurts him in the same way Clinton is harmed. It forces him into a defense of the
past. If Clinton doesn't run and the Democrats get a fresh face, the dynasty
problem shifts back to him and the demand for a fresh face for the GOP
increases. Conversely, Jeb Bush might appear more experienced and trustworthy to
voters in a time when fiery speech-making is going to be insufficient to solve
our problems. If nothing else, he is a grown-up, an internationalist and
extremely well-versed on issues involving this hemisphere. He is a plausible
commander in chief.

The risk for candidates such as Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and others whose views
substantially overlap with the president's is obvious. His position on drones,
the National Security Agency, Iraq, Iran sanctions and more look far more
problematic as the threats magnify. At a time the public wants more, not less,
presidential assertiveness in foreign policy and sees real threats from abroad
(not from NSA data mining), Paul becomes the odd man out.

The folly of early polls and prognostication comes fully to light at times like
this. Who knew the world was going to spin out of control this quickly? Who
thought Clinton would have so little to say and be so tone-deaf? Who imagined
her greatest experience would become her greatest liability?

As world events shift dramatically, it may affect the decision of every
potential participant in the race. It may be a good long time before this all
shakes out. Nothing that came before the foreign policy meltdown matters as much
as what happens from here on out. It is in that respect a whole new ballgame.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


