                             2225 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 5:20 PM EST

Why is Obama's foreign policy now polling like Obamacare?;
The difference between intentions and outcomes.

BYLINE: Daniel W. Drezner

LENGTH: 724 words


One of the mantras that many foreign affairs watchers have uttered over the past
few years is that the Obama administration's shifts in foreign policy simply
mirror the shifts in U.S. public opinion.  As Americans grow increasingly averse
to expensive and risky actions overseas, so has President Obama.

So it's pretty odd that two polls out in the past day suggest that  Obama's
foreign policy is increasingly unpopular.  The Washington Post/ABC News poll is
pretty clear:

President Obama receives his worst marks yet for handling the situation in Iraq,
with 52 percent disapproving and strong negative sentiment now outpacing strong
approval by 2 to 1 (34 to 17 percent). ...

And the New York Times/CBS News poll is even more damning:

Dissatisfaction with President Obama's conduct of foreign policy has shot up
among both Republicans and Democrats in the past month, even though a slim
majority supports his recent decision to send military advisers to Iraq to
confront the growing threat from militants there, according to the latest New
York Times/CBS News poll.

Indeed, if one digs into the NYT/CBS poll, one finds that majorities of
Americans support the specific steps that the Obama administration is proposing
on Iraq.  Fifty-one percent support sending in advisers to the Iraqi military,
56 percent support the greater use of drones, and 77 percent do not support
sending in ground troops.  Nevertheless, 52 percent of Americans disapprove of
the overall Iraq policy.  Indeed, the striking pattern is that when Americans
are asked about concrete policies, majorities tend to support the
administration's position. When asked about overarching policy towards Iraq, or
towards the rest of the world more generally, majorities now tend to dislike
what the administration is doing.  In other words, foreign policy is the new
Obamacare when it comes to polling.

So what's going on?  It's not rocket science - it's the difference between
policy outputs and policy outcomes.  A policy output is, say, the decision to
send military advisers into Iraq, or the decision to rule out the use of combat
troops there.  A policy outcome is what actually happens on the ground - in the
case of Iraq, a worsening sectarian war.  The thing about American foreign
policy is that even the best foreign policy outputs do not necessarily translate
into the best outcome, because the United States, for all its superpowery-ness,
is not actually an omnipotent deity.  In the case of Iraq, there are a lot of
other variables at play besides U.S. foreign policy outputs:  Maliki's poor
leadership, the neighboring situation in Syria, the Kurdish desire for an
independent state, Gulf funding of ISIS and Iran's sway over the Maliki regime.

When Americans are asked about specific foreign policies, they tend to support
the administration, because they're assessing concrete policy outputs.  When
asked a more general question about foreign policy, or even foreign policy
towards Iraq, they're likely assessing the policy outcomes. And while Americans
are reluctant to intervene overseas, they're also not keen on Iraq falling
apart, ISIS  acquiring a statelet, Russia annexing parts of Ukraine, or China
bullying its neighbors in the South China Sea, etc.  Americans want the free
pony - they want the U.S. to not expend blood and treasure overseas, but they
also want the liberal order not to fray.

This is a bad beat for the administration, because it's really far from obvious
that its critics have any better foreign policy ideas.  Furthermore, the
administration lacks a compelling narrative to explain to the American people
why it's pursuing the right course of action.  Obama's "don't do stupid s***"
foreign policy doctrine might sound great in the White House mess, and, five
years ago, it probably sounded pretty good to an American public sick of George
W. Bush's galactic foreign policy blunders.  Now it just sounds like a really
low bar that's simultaneously full of arrogance and devoid of any aspirational
desires (even if it might be the right thing to do).

So the administration needs to gin up a better narrative - which, based on Ben
Rhodes' exhaustion recent lackluster foreign policy speeches, is not likely - or
hope for better foreign policy outcomes.  Otherwise, welcome to the new normal
on foreign affairs polling.

Am I missing anything?

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


