                             2203 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                     March 26, 2014 Wednesday 11:15 PM EST

Who likes both Elizabeth Warren and Rand Paul? This Senate candidate.

BYLINE: Sean Sullivan;Jeff Simon

LENGTH: 379 words


Welcome back to Five Questions!

Today, meet Shenna Bellows, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in Maine. The
former executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union is running on a
liberal platform against Sen. Susan Collins (R). Collins is popular in Maine,
making Bellows's bid a long-shot.

The former Peace Corps member, who likes Republican Sen. Rand Paul's record on
civil liberties, landed the endorsement of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign
Committee on Tuesday. And she has raised money at a respectable clip. In short,
Bellows is worth keeping an eye on, even as she faces a steep uphill climb
against Collins.

We sat down with Bellows Tuesday. Below is a video of her "Five Questions"
segment followed by a transcript edited for brevity.

1. Are there any similarities between serving in the Peace Corps and running for
office?

It's exactly the same. In the Peace Corps, I did a lot of getting to know my
community, going door to door. And in Maine, I'm traveling all across the state,
going door to door and hearing people's stories.

2. Maine grows lots and lots of blueberries. Better breakfast: blueberry
pancakes or blueberry muffins?

Blueberry pie. Or, blueberry pancakes with maple syrup.

3. How do you assess Rand Paul's record on civil rights and civil liberties?

On civil liberties, he's been terrific. On issues like the USA Patriot Act, NSA
surveillance, the National Defense Authorization Act, domestic drone
surveillance, he's been terrific. On civil rights, I'm waiting for him to
support same-sex marriage.

4. What about President Obama's record on civil rights and civil liberties?

They are like mirror opposites. President Obama has been terrific on voting
rights, LGBT rights, women's rights. On NSA spying, he and this administration
have absolutely gone too far.

5. Who would you like to see the Democrats nominate for president in 2016?

Former senator George Mitchell, from Maine? (Laughs.) I think there are a lot of
good candidates on the bench. Hillary Clinton, Elizabeth Warren are two terrific
women. I would love to see the Democrats nominate a very strong woman.

Theresa Poulson contributed to this post.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


