                             2295 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                        July 25, 2014 Friday 2:03 PM EST

Now that Obama's foreign policy has flopped, what can the Democrats do?;
President Obama has killed McGovernite foreign policy.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 662 words


Some savvier observers of the Republican national security debate are beginning
to note that it's a liability, not an asset, to be associated with a foreign
policy of retrenchment and detachment. You don't have to be a defender of the
Iraq war to know that the current foreign policy has resulted in worse results
in more places than at any time in recent memory.

President Obama, as most academic leftists do, came into office believing that
the United States was responsible for many of the world's ills and that by
knocking ourselves down, engaging with foes and deferring to others, we and the
world would be better off. That turned out to be dangerously wrongheaded. NATO
and the United Nations don't really operate unless the United States leads. We
don't get to "pivot" away from problematic regions. Bad actors are opportunistic
and rush to fill the void left by U.S. leadership. As his foreign policy comes
apart at the seams and his foreign policy views turn out to be entirely
unworkable, the president is now paralyzed or confused or depressed, or
something.

The media have made much of the GOP debate about foreign policy, but that debate
is giving forth to consensus that a more engaged, stronger robust policy that
confronts and checks our foes must replace the reactive one we now have. (Obama
can barely keep up with the nonstop flow of crisis. Perhaps a daily generic
statement would suffice: "We are very disturbed. We will investigate and consult
with our allies. All civilized countries have an interest in resolving this.
This will have serious consequences.") I suspect not a single GOP presidential
candidate will join Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) in arguing that we need fewer
overseas troops and bases, a smaller military, a ban on the use of drones
against American jihadists and trials in the United States for suspected
terrorists. Even Paul is unlikely to keep arguing that we have no dog in the
fight between Iraq and the Islamic State or that we should stop "tweaking"
Russian President Vladimir Putin.

But what about the Democrats? They finally got their McGovernite foreign policy
and it flopped miserably. Hillary Clinton can say a thousand times over that
"reset worked," but it didn't, as the people of Ukraine, Syria (where Russian
weapons flow to Bashar al-Assad) and Russia itself can attest. Obama and John
Kerry can swear that "gaps are narrowing" between Iran and the P5+1, but without
actual dismantling of Iran's nuclear program - something Iran's supreme leader
refuses to contemplate - those gaps will be as wide as ever. What do Hillary
Clinton or liberal challengers or left-leaning think tanks propose we should do
instead

Clinton tried to be the sensible one on foreign policy in 2008 and got beaten.
She might try again, but her career is not studded with acts of political
courage or efforts to go against the grain of her base. The party could double
down on defeatism and unilateral disarmament, but in a general election with
Russia on the march, the Middle East in flames and Iran emerging as a threshold
nuclear state, that might be enough to send the voters running.

It would seem that it is up to the Democratic grown-ups in the Senate and
center-left think tanks to give some honest critiques as to what went wrong and
provide some constructive advice to recalibrate the party. Negotiation without
leverage is an invitation for further aggression by our foes. To be indifferent
to repression abroad is morally abhorrent and self-defeating. Sometimes the only
path to peace is defeating decisively an implacable enemy. (Michael Oren puts it
brilliantly: "To guarantee peace, this war must be given a chance.")

These are basic, inescapable propositions confirmed by 5 1/2 years of foreign
policy mismanagement and foolishness. Unless the Democratic Party undergoes some
self-reflection, it is likely to find itself back in the political wilderness.
Obama has firmly and finally discredited McGovernism, and there is no going
back.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


