                             2256 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 10, 2014 Thursday 12:09 AM EST

'Roof knocking': The Israeli military's tactic of phoning Palestinians it is
about to bomb;
'You have women and children in the house. Get out. You have five minutes before
the rockets come.'

BYLINE: Adam Taylor

LENGTH: 590 words


What happens before the Israeli military bombs your house? For many Gaza Strip
residents, it's a phone call. Sawsan Kawarea, a resident of Khan Younis, said
she was in the house Tuesday when the phone rang. She answered, and on the other
side was "David," who claimed he was with the Israeli military.

"He asked for me by name. He said: 'You have women and children in the house.
Get out. You have five minutes before the rockets come,' " Kawarea said in an
interview with The Post's William Booth.

She took her children and ran outside. A small rocket hit the house soon after,
Kawarea said. It was apparently the final warning. Five minutes later, a larger
missile hit, and the house was destroyed. According to Hamas, seven people,
including three minors, were killed in the Israeli airstrike. The man the
Israelis were aiming for was apparently not among those killed.

The phone call warning is part of a broader strategy. For years, the Israeli
military has been using cellphone calls and small "warning rockets" - usually
sent from drones - to tell people which buildings it is targeting and give them
time to get out. It's a time-tested strategy for the Israeli military, and it
even has a name: "roof knocking." Even if its intentions are good, however, it
is a controversial tactic.

The practice dates to at least 2006. "Hi, my name is Danny. I'm an officer in
Israeli military intelligence. In one hour we will blow up your house" was the
call that Mohammed Deeb got shortly before his home was destroyed that year,
according to Britain's Guardian newspaper. During Operation Cast Lead in 2008,
the tactic was used again, with phone calls and small missiles used to warn
those in buildings being targeted: The Israel Defense Forces blog later said
that the airstrikes that year had adhered to the "innovative 'roof-knocking'
procedure," and in 2009, Israel's Foreign Ministry said that more than 165,000
phone calls had been made to warn civilians to stay away from targets.

The logic of the tactic is obvious. Israel has long been criticized for the
civilian death tolls associated with its military actions in the Palestinian
territories. In theory, "roof knocking" gives civilians, and in particular women
and children, a chance to escape the buildings being targeted. At worst, Israel
can say justifiably say that it tried. But it's also a remarkable display of
power. Both the missiles and even the telephone calls show the ease of Israel's
reach, as Eyal Weizman explained in a 2012 London Review of Books article:

Israel can penetrate Gaza's communication networks so easily because its
telephone networks and internet infrastructure are routed through Israeli
servers, which has advantages both for the gathering of intelligence and the
delivery of propaganda.

Some critics say the tactic amounts to psychological warfare. There are reports
of "warnings" that are given but no bombing following. There are also instances
in which a bombing is not preceded by a warning, or, worse still, the attack may
mistakenly destroy the wrong target or produce wider collateral damage - always
a risk in cramped areas such as Khan Younis. Human rights groups have argued
that targeting the homes of militia members violates international humanitarian
law, whether warnings are made or not.

Either way, the warnings are not always heeded. According to Kawarea, after the
"warning rocket" hit her house, a group of young men ran inside. It was unclear
whether they thought their presence would stop the bombing or whether they
wanted to be martyrs.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


