                             2290 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 23, 2014 Wednesday 1:36 AM EST

Montgomery Council nears final approval of major plan for White Oak;
The plan would eventually create a 300-acre town center and hub for medical and
life-sciences firms.

BYLINE: Bill Turque

LENGTH: 528 words


The Montgomery County Council cleared the way Tuesday for final approval of the
White Oak Science Gateway Master Plan next week, deciding that the potential
economic benefits for a long-neglected region of the county overrode concerns
about traffic.

In a series of straw votes, the council approved the major elements of a
land-use plan that would allow Montgomery and Percontee, a private developer, to
eventually create a 300-acre town center and hub for medical and life-sciences
businesses near Route 29 and Industrial Parkway.

Officials envision an employment center that could generate as many as 10,000
new jobs over the next quarter-century, spurred by the presence of the Food and
Drug Administration headquarters nearby. Zoning on the properties could
ultimately allow 5,300 units of housing and 7 million square feet of commercial
space.

The plan also changes zoning and land-use regulations designed to energize new
residential construction and commercial renewal in the White Oak and Hillandale
communities.

The council gave tentative approval to the plan over the objections of some
Silver Spring-area community groups. They contended that an overemphasis on
housing and insufficient attention to "staging"-- county policies that require
new construction and adequate public facilities to go forward together - will
overwhelm an already congested Route 29 and the surrounding road network.

The council did trim proposed residential densities in some parts of the plan.
But most  members said they had an overriding obligation to create an investment
climate that might bring jobs and commerce to the eastern sector of Montgomery.
They described the region as isolated by a series of poor planning decisions
over the last three decades.

"Today we've made a statement saying that we're righting a wrong," said Council
President Craig Rice (D-Upcounty).

"The fact of the matter is that there is traffic in White Oak and there will
continue to be traffic ... unless people start driving drones," said Council
member Nancy Floreen (D-At-Large), chair of the council's planning committee.

The council did approve an amendment, offered by Council member George Leventhal
(D-At-Large) that calls for County Executive Isiah Leggett to have a financing
plan in place for a bus rapid-transit line for Route 29 within the next two
years.

The council's planning staff  had expressed misgivings about the overall size of
the plan, and suggested that construction be allowed to progress only if  it
meets specific benchmarks demonstrating that a certain percentage of people will
be traveling by some means other than private cars (public transit, bicycles, on
foot).

But the county government and Percontee contend that too many requirements in
the plan will make it more difficult to obtain favorable financing. The council
accepted recommendations by Floreen for a set of conditions that would treat the
"Life Sciences/FDA Village" not as a suburban area but as potential urban
center, with allowances for higher volumes of vehicle traffic at lower speeds.
It would also require a "non auto driver mode share" of 30 percent for new
development.

bill.turque@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


