                             2260 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                       July 10, 2014 Thursday 7:17 PM EST

Guns, normcore and bitcoins - a guide to the hottest campaign accessories this
season

BYLINE: Jaime Fuller

LENGTH: 768 words


When constituents are thinking of reasons to vote for candidates, "They wear
great shirts," is not among the top answers. However, style trends -- like LBDs
(loveable background dads), guns and smartphones -- are easy to spot on the
campaign trail. Here's a look at some of the top campaign accessories of 2014 --
and the candidates who sport them best.

Here is Will Brooke, who improbably lost a Republican congressional primary in
Alabama after shooting at the Obamacare bill with multiple guns.

Montana state Sen. Matt Rosendale made sure his love of the 2nd Amendment and
good ol' Western libertarianism were very clear in his House campaign ad. He is
aiming at a drone.

Bob Quast, who is running as an Independent in an Iowa Senate race, also sported
a gun in an ad.

Col. Rob Maness, who is running in Louisiana's Republican Senate primary, also
shot some stuff.

Guns aren't the sole province of Republican candidates. Democratic candidates
have sported firearms too. Here's Kentucky Senate candidate Alison Lundergan
Grimes.

You don't need to use the gun, either. It also makes good decor. Especially when
propped against your pickup truck.

If you decide to use a fake gun, you better throw Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) in
there too, just to be safe. Yeah, just like that Nebraska Senate candidate Ben
Sasse (R)!

Mississippi Senate candidate Chris McDaniel, who hasn't conceded to Republican
primary winner Sen. Thad Cochran quite yet, is the king of competitive normcore.
The New York Times defined normcore as "a supposed style trend where dressing
like a tourist - non-ironic sweatshirts, white sneakers and Jerry Seinfeld-like
dad jeans." McDaniel's sartorial choices are a variation on the theme:  he's
adapted the trend into the campaign-appropriate business-casual normcore.

Business casual normcore was first popularized in 2012 by presidential candidate
Rick Santorum, the first politician to fundraise off being normcore.

Here's Iowa's trendy Bob Quast again, who also gave normcore fashion a try.

Voters also love dads. At least candidates think so, because they are everywhere
this year.

Michelle Nunn is running as a Democrat in this year's Georgia senate race. Her
dad, former senator Sam Nunn, is kind of a big deal in Georgia politics.

Rep. Tom Cotton, who is running against Democratic incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor in
Arkansas, joined the fad by featuring his sad dad in an ad.

Sen. Mark Begich's father, Nick Begich, served as a Democratic representative in
Alaska before disappearing on a flight with House Majority Leader Hale Boggs.
The plane was never found. Mark Begich built an entire campaign ad around his
dad this year.

Extra credit for candidates who share #tbt photos of their dads, like Grimes --
who also has a father who's a former well-known Democratic politician.

Rep. Jack Kingston, vying for the Republican senate nomination in a Georgia
run-off, took the trend to the next level, by starring in an ad as a dad.

... as did Wisconsin Rep Reid Ribble (R).

Bitcoins are like tech cupcakes. Politicians love seeming hip with the times.
Thus, many candidates have jumped onto the bitcoin bandwagon, despite the fact
that no one knows if they will suffer the same fate as their sugary forebears.

There's Mark Warden, who's running for state representative in New Hampshire,
and Bryan Parker, who wants to be mayor of Oakland, California.

There's Blaine Richardson, who is running as an Independent in a Maine House
race.

Darryl W. Perry, the first libertarian to declare his candidacy for the 2016
presidential election, is only accepting donations in "bitcoin, litecoin, gold,
silver and copper."

Rep. Steve Stockman (R-Tex.) didn't win the Senate primary in his state, but he
was one of the first adopters of the bitcoin donation.

Colorado Rep. Jared Polis also accepts bitcoins.

Tom Cotton didn't only feature his dad in an ad. He also made sure his mom got a
shoutout too. And he reminded everyone how great his mom ad was by showing it on
YouTube on his smartphone in a later ad. Showing YouTube videos on his phone to
friends -- just like us!

Out campaigning in Mississippi, Sen. Thad Cochran let constituents snap photos
of his dapper suits.

Some candidates have tried to make iPad photography a thing. They are doing it
wrong.

Most of the time, however, it's not how you wear the smartphone. It's which
filter you use when you take photos with your smartphone. If you don't take a
photo of yourself campaigning, it basically didn't happen, which Mississippi
senate candidate Travis Childers (D) knows very well.

Meeting some great Natchezians Under the Hill tonight. #NatchezMS
pic.twitter.com/7TkGOP1uYI

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


