                             2244 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 2, 2014 Wednesday 6:52 PM EST

The Insiders: It's time for soccer to yield to proper American football;
Enough with soccer. Let the real sport take over.

BYLINE: Ed Rogers

LENGTH: 410 words


Okay, I watched the World Cup. And as readers know, I am a fair-minded sort of
guy.

Now that the United States is out of the competition, I think we can rightfully
assume it's all over. There's nothing left to see; it's time to move on.

But it is right to ask ourselves what lessons have been learned.

My conclusion, after giving soccer a fair shot on the global stage, is that it's
time for the entire world to yield to American football. Yes, there is a place
for soccer and children should continue to play in their spare time. However,
henceforth the worldwide name for "soccer" should be "soccer." When "football"
is spoken of, it should be in the reverent, respectful tone and vocabulary of
American football.  Otherwise it just creates unnecessary international
confusion.

But I digress. The fact is that football is an infinitely better game than
soccer. Period. Football requires a much wider range of physical talent and a
broader variety of athletic skills and capabilities. Soccer is too monolithic.
Also, football has much cooler uniforms and equipment. And we have cheerleaders
who make a meaningful contribution to the football experience. Plus, football
offers the satisfaction that comes from watching fun beer and car commercials
and provides needed interludes to retrieve more liquor and food during the game.

Think about it: When every other country in the world starts playing real
football, we could hold a really spectacular World Bowl in a few years, complete
with a great halftime show and the best commercials ever. And the United States
almost certainly would win.

So I think this settles it. President Obama should use the remainder of his term
and his love of ruling by fiat to produce the international protocols, treaties
or whatever else (short of drone strikes) would ensure the dominance of football
around the world. The president undoubtedly would have huge congressional
support, and the American people would be with him. And if handled correctly,
who knows? President Obama could finally get what he has always wanted, and the
rise of the oceans would begin to slow and the planet would begin to heal. Just
as he promised.

If the installation of football is managed well and insurgent deadender soccer
fans are adequately suppressed, as a famous Republican almost once said in an
analogous situation, "our coaches and players will be greeted as liberators."

Follow Ed on Twitter: @EdRogersDC

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


