                             2289 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 22, 2014 Tuesday 9:22 PM EST

Washington starts hunt for a 'model city' for wireless experimentation;
Washington starts hunt for a 'model city' for wireless experimentation

BYLINE: Nancy Scola

LENGTH: 763 words


No, the federal government isn't whipping up a new American city from scratch to
test out its ideas about the wireless Internet. Can you imagine getting budget
approval for that? But it is doing something new and provocative: searching for
an urban area in the United States willing to host experiments on how the
private sector can tap the limited and valuable radio spectrum that the federal
government, by general consensus, currently hogs.

Last week, two federal telecommunications agencies put out a call for such a
spectrum-sharing "model city."

Radio spectrum is the oxygen that gives life to mobile technologies like
smartphones and tablets, and the U.S. government has been nudged by many to
figure out how the country can wring more use out of the frequencies it
controls; as of 2012, according to the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration, federal agencies dominated some 43 percent of the
best radio frequencies.

But tests on so-called smart radio or cognitive radio (think "radio" as in radio
waves, not the music and chatter you might listen to in the car) have been
generally limited to military bases, computer labs or rural areas. "Small-scale
settings" is how one NTIA official describes them, "where nobody is going to get
hurt."

Those locations can fall short as testing grounds for dynamic sharing. For one
thing, government frequencies are used on Army and Navy bases for everything
from training to communications to air traffic safety, skewing research toward
believing that federal spectrum is more crowded than it generally is in the
outside world.

And they can lack a large diverse user base needed to put sharing schemes
through their paces. More broadly, those often homogeneous environments fail to
mimic what spectrum has to stand up to in day-to-day use.

"As systems grow in complexity, interconnectedness, and geographic
distribution," reads a 2012 report from the President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology that floated the "model city" plan, "they increasingly
experience emergent behavior." In other words, the unpredictable messiness of
city living is what is needed to demonstrate whether dynamic sharing can ever
evolve from a promising technology of the future to a viable solution for the
federal government's spectrum management challenges.

The ideal test city? According to NTIA, which is leading the project along with
the Federal Communications Commission, it will be an urban area with a large,
diverse pool of possible users and possibly an academic or research community
willing to roll up its sleeves and try spectrum sharing on for size.

The test city would, in the best case, offer up for telecommunications purposes
its resources, including its roadways and utility poles, in much the same way
has happened with Google Fiber in Kansas City and elsewhere. Landlocked Chicago
is one possibility, as it is outside the range of naval radar. Wilmington, N.C.,
is another, as it has served as a testing ground on unlicensed, empty spectrum
"white spaces" in the past. But NTIA cautions that no decisions have been made.

Part of what is driving the "model city" concept, whose cost has been pegged at
$60 million for the first three years of operation, is the notion that
commercial users have been reluctant to try sharing spectrum with the federal
government, even given its considerable potential for wireless broadband and
other technologies, out of a lack of certainty and transparency over how such
public-private slicing up of a shared resource would work.

A particular worry: that despite a stated interest from the federal government
in exploring a "lights and sirens" approach -- that is, only using the available
spectrum for public safety reasons during emergencies -- they might in practice
become more skittish about possible radio interference. The test city would give
all parties a chance to test out working relationships as much as new
technologies.

Brent Skorup is a research fellow with Mercatus Center's Technology Policy
Program at George Mason University. "Dynamic spectrum sharing is still fairly
theoretical at this point," he cautions, "and it could be decades before it
becomes widespread." But the federal government, he says, doesn't have many
other good, obvious options for upgrading its spectrum management.

The potential is big. More spectrum, say many, means the possibility of more
wireless innovation in the United States, with increased space on the radio
waves freeing experimentation on everything from remote-controlled drones to new
ways of delivering mobile broadband.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


