                             2286 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 21, 2014 Monday 6:06 PM EST

We're heading into a jobless future, no matter what the government does;
Robots will drive our cars, manufacture our goods, and do our chores.

BYLINE: Vivek Wadhwa

LENGTH: 1115 words


In an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal, former Treasury Secretary Lawrence
Summers revived a debate I'd had with futurist Ray Kurzweil in 2012 about the
jobless future.

He echoed the words of Peter Diamandis, who says that we are moving from a
history of scarcity to an era of abundance. Then he noted that the technologies
that make such abundance possible are allowing production of far more output
using far fewer people.

On all this, Summers is right. Within two decades, we will have almost unlimited
energy, food, and clean water; advances in medicine will allow us to live longer
and healthier lives; robots will drive our cars, manufacture our goods, and do
our chores.

There won't be much work for human beings. Self-driving cars will be
commercially available by the end of this decade and will eventually displace
human drivers-just as automobiles displaced the horse and buggy-and will
eliminate the jobs of taxi, bus, and truck drivers. Drones will take the jobs of
postmen and delivery people.

The debates of the next decade will be about whether we should allow human
beings to drive at all on public roads. The pesky humans crash into each other,
suffer from road rage, rush headlong into traffic jams, and need to be monitored
by traffic police. Yes, we won't need traffic cops either.

Robots are already replacing manufacturing workers. Industrial robots have
advanced to the point at which they can do the same physical work as human
beings. The operating cost of some robots is now less than the salary of an
average Chinese worker. And, unlike human beings, robots don't complain, join
labor unions, or get distracted. They readily work 24 hours a day and require
minimal maintenance. Robots will also take the jobs of farmers, pharmacists, and
grocery clerks.

Medical sensors in our smartphones, clothing, and bathrooms will soon be
monitoring our health on a minute-to-minute basis. Combined with electronic
medical records and genetic and lifestyle data, these will provide enough
information for physicians to focus on preventing disease rather than on curing
it.

If medications are needed, they can be prescribed based on a person's genome
rather than a one-size-fits-all basis as they are today. The problem is that
there is now so much information that humans cannot effectively analyze it. But
artificial intelligence-based physicians such as IBM Watson can. The role of the
doctor becomes to provide comfort and compassion-not to diagnose disease or to
prescribe medications. In other words, computers will be also taking over some
of the jobs of our doctors, and we won't need as many human doctors as we have
today.

It will be like the future that Autodesk CEO Carl Bass once described to me:
"The factory of the future will have only two employees, a man and a dog. The
man will be there to feed the dog. The dog will be there to keep the man from
touching the equipment."

Summers is wrong, however, in his belief that governments can do as they did in
the industrial age: create "enough work for all who need work for income,
purchasing power and dignity." They can barely keep up with the advances that
are happening in technology, let alone develop economic policies for employment.
Even the courts are struggling to understand the legal and ethical issues of
advancing technologies.

Neither they nor our policy makers have come to grips with how to protect our
data and personal information, control cable and Internet monopolies, regulate
advances in genetics and medicine, and tax the sharing economy that companies
such as Uber and AirBnb inhabit. How are policy makers going to grapple with
entire industries' disruptions in periods that are shorter than election cycles?
The industrial age lasted a century, and its consequent changes have happened
over generations. Now we have startups in Silicon Valley shaking up bedrock
industries such as cable and broadcasting, hotels, and transportation.

The writing is clearly on the wall about what lies ahead. Yet even the most
brilliant economists-and futurists-don't know what to do about it.

In his debate with me, Kurzweil said: "Automation always eliminates more jobs
than it creates if you only look at the circumstances narrowly surrounding the
automation. That's what the Luddites saw in the early 19th century in the
textile industry in England. The new jobs came from increased prosperity and new
industries that were not seen." Kurzweil's key argument was that just as we
could not predict that types of jobs that were created, we can't predict what is
to come.

Kurzweil is right, but the problem is that no matter what the jobs of the future
are, they will surely require greater skill and education-robots can do all the
grunt work. Manufacturers who want to bring production back already complain
that they can't find enough skilled workers in the U.S. for their automated
factories. Technology companies that write the software also complain about
shortages of workers with the skills that they need. We won't be able to retrain
the majority of the workforce fast enough to take the new jobs in emerging
industries. During the industrial revolution, it was the younger generations who
were trained-not the older workers.

The only solution that I see is a shrinking work week. We may perhaps be working
for 10 to 20 hours a week instead of the 40 for which we do today. And with the
prices of necessities and of what we today consider luxury goods dropping
exponentially, we may not need the entire population to be working. There is
surely a possibility for social unrest because of this; but we could also create
the utopian future we have long dreamed of, with a large part of humanity
focused on creativity and enlightenment.

Regardless, at best we have another 10 to 15 years in which there is a role for
humans. The number of available jobs will actually increase in the U.S. and
Europe before it decreases. China is out of time because it has a
manufacturing-based economy, and those jobs are already disappearing.
Ironically, China is accelerating this demise by embracing robotics and 3D
printing. As manufacturing comes back to the U.S., new factories need to be
built, robots need to be programmed, and new infrastructure needs to be
developed. To install new hardware and software on existing cars to make them
self-driving, we will need many new auto mechanics. We need to manufacture the
new medical sensors, install increasingly efficient solar panels, and write new
automation software.

So the future is very bright for some countries in the short term, and in the
long term is uncertain for all. The only certainty is that much change lies
ahead that no one really knows how to prepare for.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


