                             2280 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 18, 2014 Friday 7:36 PM EST

Five myths about Hamas;
What the Palestinian movement is really capable of.

BYLINE: Nathan J. Brown

LENGTH: 1091 words


1Hamas poses no meaningful threat to Israel.

As a movement, Hamas offers resistance - attacking civilians, launching rockets
and ransoming captives - but it cannot field a military force that could face
Israel on the battlefield. Indeed, all the ground combat is happening in Gaza;
Israeli territory remains relatively unscathed. As of Friday, two Israelis had
been killed in the latest round of fighting, while Israel's actions had led to
more than 260 Palestinian deaths. So it is absolutely true that Hamas does not
pose an existential threat to Israel.

However, more than Israel's existence is being threatened. The abduction and
murder of three Israeli teens  last month may or may not have been a Hamas
operation - but the event captured the attention of the Israeli public, and the
Israeli government reacted as if Hamas were responsible. While the effectiveness
of Israel's Iron Dome antimissile system is debated - officials boast that it
intercepts 90 percent  of Hamas's missiles - large parts of the Israeli
population now feel within Hamas's reach as the range of its rockets creeps
higher. Some have relocated farther away from Gaza, and those who remain show
signs of stress. Israel's political, military and security leaders are focused
on deterring the rocket attacks.

Hamas may never come close to vanquishing Israel on the battlefield, but changes
in its capabilities - tunnels, abductions, missiles and even a drone - continue
to make Israelis nervous and force them to react.

2Hamas's popularity stems from the social services it provides.

Outsiders sometimes see Hamas as something like an American big-city machine
that trades jobs and welfare benefits in return for political loyalty and votes
- though a machine with an armed wing.

Hamas does have an armed wing, and other parts of the organization attempt to
provide some social services, but the number of Palestinians who benefit from
those services is small. And it's dwarfed by those who get assistance from the
Palestinian government, international aid bodies and nongovernmental
organizations. This fact is missed by outsiders who often mistake anything
Islamic for Hamas.

Hamas's support from Palestinian civilians, when it comes, stems from other
things. For example, the movement poses as uncompromising on Palestinian rights
and uncorrupted by money and power. The political and diplomatic solutions, such
as the Oslo peace process, offered by other factions such as Fatah seem
meaningless to most Palestinians, who have grown cynical about their leaders'
ability to deliver.

The image of Hamas as an uncorrupt movement unconcerned with the trappings of
power grew outdated once the group stepped into power after its 2006 election
victory. But earlier this year, Hamas resigned all its cabinet positions and
agreed to surrender political leadership of the Gaza Strip. With the decision to
stop being a government as well as a movement, Hamas's reputation may begin to
recover. And some of its leaders may be saying now: What better way to start the
effort than to return to the movement's roots in armed resistance?

3Hamas has lost popularity.

In all kinds of ways, recent opinion polling shows that the majority of
Palestinians back positions that Hamas rejects regarding diplomacy and
resistance. Hamas remains more hard-line than the public it seeks to lead, and
surveys also show that the group would have tremendous trouble repeating its
2006 election win.

But right now, Hamas's leaders aren't concerned about whether they could obtain
a majority of the vote. Elections are unlikely any time soon. And the despair
among Palestinians is so deep, the numbers do not look much better for any
leader or faction; at this point Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is seen as
isolated, aloof and having spent all his political capital on a failed peace
process.

What concerns Hamas's leaders is their relevance, their ability to articulate
the deep senses of frustration and injustice that most Palestinians feel - and
whether their rhetoric will resonate with the public. The current path of the
conflict, and its fiery rhetoric, offer Hamas opportunities to present itself as
more in line with the times.

Yes, Hamas surrendered its cabinet positions to people appointed by Abbas. And
yes, Hamas is taking a beating and its activists are being driven underground.
But its credentials as the movement that does not bend and dares to take on
Israel are being burnished among much of the audience it cares about.

4Hamas's loss of regional allies has tied its hands.

Hamas's base in Syria was shut down  two years ago. Its Iranian allies have
greatly reduced their support. Its big brothers in Egypt, Mohamed Morsi  and the
Muslim Brotherhood, can do little for the movement now that they are out of
power. In the last round of fighting, in 2012, Egypt helped broker a cease-fire;
now its position seems as hard-line on Hamas as Israel's. Internationally
isolated and strapped for cash, Hamas is in crisis.

But by jettisoning its governing role  , Hamas is no longer saddled with the
responsibilities that had made it more circumspect for many years. Israel and
Hamas both realized back in 2007 that holing the movement up in Gaza was a bit
of a trap, forcing Hamas to take on responsibility for sewage, schooling and
zoning. Hamas has many headaches to deal with now but also a bit more freedom to
maneuver.

5Hamas has a strategy.

Hamas presents itself as the un-Fatah: Rather than grow fat and comfortable in
government or become distracted by international diplomacy, it keeps its eye on
the prize of the liberation of Palestine.

But the secret it does not want to share is that it has no idea how to get
there. The movement is resilient, cagey and, in a perverse way, principled in
its dedication to armed resistance. But it has no map, and all its actions to
date - targeting civilians, capturing Israeli soldiers, running in elections,
passing laws and caring for the sick - have brought Palestinians no closer to
any kind of national goal.

In its failure to develop long-term answers, Hamas is hardly alone. With the
collapse of the two-state solution, Israelis and Palestinians are learning a
twist on Jean-Paul Sartre's famous line: Hell is other peoples.

outlook@washpost.com

Five myths is a weekly feature challenging everything you think you know. You
can check out previous myths, read more from Outlook or follow our updates on
Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


