                             2279 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 18, 2014 Friday 11:14 AM EST

Netanyahu tells Israeli military to prepare for 'broadening' of Gaza invasion;
A new phase of the military operation began soon after a five-hour humanitarian
truce ended.

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan;William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1793 words


JERUSALEM - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Friday that he has
ordered Israel's military to prepare for "a substantive broadening" of its
ground offensive into the Gaza Strip, declaring that tunnels built by Hamas
could not be destroyed solely through airstrikes.

Speaking at the opening of a specially convened cabinet meeting, Netanyahu said
Israel chose to launch a ground offensive after exhausting other options and
realizing that "we could pay a higher price without it."

His comments came a few hours after Israel announced that a 20-year-old Israeli
soldier was killed in the northern Gaza Strip overnight.

Health officials in Gaza said 28 Palestinians were killed since the ground
offensive began late Thursday, bringing the total Palestinian death toll to more
than 260, with the injured topping 2,000, since the conflict erupted 11 days
ago. The most recent fatalities included three children who perished in an
airstrike on a residential tower in Beit Lahiya in northern Gaza, according to
the Gaza Health Ministry.

Israeli forces, backed by artillery shells and airstrikes, launched a major
ground offensive into Gaza, marking a dramatic escalation in the conflict with
the Palestinian militant group Hamas. Declaring a new phase in their operation,
Israel's military said it was entering the coastal strip to wipe out Hamas's
rocket capabilities and to dismantle what is believed to be an extensive network
of tunnels used by the militants to infiltrate Israel.

"We have hit Hamas hard, and we will continue to hit Hamas hard," said Israel's
military in a Twitter feed shortly after thousands of Israeli soldiers entered
Gaza.

Israel's military identified the soldier who was killed as Sgt. Eitan Barak from
the central Israeli city of Herzliya and said he died fighting "Hamas
terrorists." But the military provided no further details on the circumstances
surrounding his death. Israeli news reports suggested that he may have died from
friendly fire.

Troops clashed with Hamas "in several exchanges of fire" in which 14 militants
were killed, Israel's military added. At least two Israeli soldiers were injured
in combat, according to Israeli news reports. Israeli forces also destroyed some
20 concealed rocket launchers and carried out assaults on nine tunnels, the
military said.

Hamas continued to fire rockets into Israel throughout the night, 25 of which
hit Israeli soil, the military said. Another 20 were intercepted by Israel's
Iron Dome missile defense system. Residents in southern Israel were hunkered
inside their homes or in bomb shelters, as the military advised them to stay
within 30 seconds' travel time to protected areas.

"Initial indication suggests that the results thus far fall in line with
expectations," Israel's military said in a statement. It said Israeli troops
"are advancing in their respective missions, including identifying and combating
the terror-tunnel threats." In all, more than 100 targets were attacked, it
added.

On Friday morning, large clouds of dust could be seen rising from the buffer
zone, stirred up by Israeli vehicles. Rockets fired by Hamas and another
militant group, Islamic Jihad, continued to streak toward Israel. By the morning
hours, the heavy salvoes from Israeli artillery and warships off the
Mediterranean coast that marked the start of the ground offensive had tapered
off. But they picked up again by midday.

One journalist was injured when an Israeli Apache helicopter hit the al-Jawhara
tower in Gaza City, damaging 10 apartments in the building, which houses several
Palestinian media outlets, according to the Palestinian Maan news agency.
Photojournalist Muhammad Shabab was transferred to the central city hospital for
treatment.

South of Gaza, a significant numbers of Palestinians were displaced by the
fighting, especially in the eastern area of Khan Younis, said the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA). It said the situation north of Gaza appeared
relatively stable following the overnight  combat. The agency assists
Palestinian refugees, who comprise more than half of Gaza's 1.7 million
population, and operates 23 shelters in Gaza.

"UNRWA again appeals to all sides to exercise maximum restraint and to respect
obligations under international humanitarian law to protect civilians," agency
spokesman Christopher Gunness said Friday morning.

On the ground, a Hamas antitank missile struck an Israeli military bulldozer in
southern Gaza but caused no injuries, the military said.

It was Israel's first ground incursion into Gaza since January 2009, when it
engaged in a three-week battle with Hamas that killed more than 1,400
Palestinians and 13 Israelis. Thursday's operation came hours after diplomatic
efforts in Cairo to negotiate a long-term truce between Israel and Hamas failed.

The assault creates significant challenges and risks for Israel. Casualties
could soar in a conflict that, as of Thursday, had claimed more than 200
Palestinian lives and left one Israeli dead. Israeli soldiers also face the
prospect of a guerrilla war in Gaza's densely populated territory.

Hamas has bolstered its arsenal since seizing control of Gaza in 2007. Over the
past 10 days, it has shown a capability to target Israeli towns with
longer-range rockets even as it faces heavy air bombardments by Israel. On
Thursday evening, Hamas spokesman Fawzi Barhom warned that the Israelis "have
taken a dangerous step."

"They did not study the consequences," he added. "The occupation forces will pay
a high price, and Hamas is ready for this confrontation."

The ground offensive began at 10 p.m. local time and involved dozens of infantry
and artillery units, as well as air and naval support, said an Israel Defense
Forces spokesman, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner. The military, he added, plans to call
up 18,000 reserve troops in addition to the 50,000 reservists activated so far.

Lerner said the military's activities along the southern part of the Gaza Strip
were carried out in coordination with Egypt but did not elaborate.

In Gaza City, from a high floor in an apartment building, reporters watched
heavy fire along the eastern and northern borders of the Gaza Strip.

The sky was lit as if by lightning strikes. There were sustained barrages of
artillery, flares shooting through the night and drones flying overhead. Israeli
warships fired from the Mediterranean Sea.

Hamas's military wing, the al-Qassam Brigades, reported fighting with Israeli
troops near the Erez crossing, the only passage for people traveling between
Israel and Gaza.

Electricity was out across Gaza City, and local residents poured into the
al-Deira Hotel, where many foreign journalists are staying.

Ambulance drivers could be heard on police scanners saying they could not reach
neighborhoods because of the shelling. Families who remained behind in areas
that the Israelis warned should be cleared were calling relatives in Gaza City
to say that the bombardment had trapped them.

It was unclear what triggered the ground invasion, although it had been under
discussion in Israeli political and military circles for days. One possibility
was an attempt by Hamas militants to infiltrate into Israel early Thursday
morning.

The Israeli air force hit the opening of a tunnel used by the militants to sneak
under the Gaza border fence. The opening was about 250 yards inside Israel and a
little more than a mile from a kibbutz.

The ground assault came hours after a short break in the fighting. Residents
rushed outside their homes to take advantage of a five-hour "humanitarian truce"
between Israel and Hamas requested by the United Nations. It was a brief respite
on a day that began with mortar fire from Gaza and ended with the ground
assault.

During the lull, a group of men at a mosque in northern Gaza said they had
returned to clean up the green glass from windows shattered in the previous
day's bombardment. But they could be seen moving small rockets into the mosque.

"We want a cease-fire, but not a cease-fire at any cost. We're not animals,"
said Moufeed al-Hasainah, the Hamas housing minister, who was visiting a
hospital in Gaza City. "What is a cease-fire without an open border crossing?
Without salaries? Without jobs?" he said.

Khalid al-Batish, a political leader of Islamic Jihad, another militant group,
said the armed factions were prepared to keep fighting until their cease-fire
conditions were met.

"A truce should include a reward for the Palestinian people," he said.

Despite their determination to destroy Hamas's military infrastructure, Israeli
military officials have said in recent days that they don't seek to reoccupy
Gaza, seeing that as creating a host of new problems. Nor are they interested in
overthrowing the Hamas government in Gaza, fearing that a power vacuum could
result, with dozens of militant factions vying for control.

Analysts expect the Israeli ground forces to focus on destroying the tunnels and
trying to avoid engaging Hamas fighters as much as possible.

"If all that will stop the shooting from Gaza into Israel, I believe that after
a few days they will go back [home]," said Itamar Yaar, a former top official at
Israel's National Security Council. But he added that if Hamas attacks Israeli
soldiers, the "Israeli cabinet will not have any other choice other than to give
orders to the armed forces to go deeper."

Israel's housing minister, Uri Ariel, a hard-liner, said in an interview with
Israel's Channel 2 News that Israeli troops had to "finish the work."

"We will not reach a cease-fire in the next few days; it will take longer," he
said. "I believe it will not end with just destroying the tunnels."

Just as the temporary cease-fire ended at 3 p.m. local time Thursday,
Palestinian militants in the coastal enclave fired a rocket at the Israeli city
of Ashkelon, about eight miles north of the Gaza border, but no injuries were
reported, the Israeli military said. Three mortar rounds were also fired toward
Israel after the truce took effect at 10 a.m.

Lerner said at least 13 militants were believed to have been killed in the early
morning air strike on the tunnel, and that any remaining fighters apparently
returned to Gaza. He said the militants were armed with "extensive weapons,"
including rocket-propelled grenades, the Associated Press reported.

The al-Qassam Brigades claimed responsibility for the infiltration, asserting
that the airstrike came after the fighters had successfully completed their
mission. Hamas denied that any of its members were killed.

"All our mujahideen came back safely," the group said in a statement.

william.booth@washpost.com

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Booth reported from Gaza City. Karen DeYoung in Washington and Islam Abdel Karim
in Gaza City contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


