                             2242 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 1, 2014 Tuesday 8:01 PM EST

Some of the thousands of state laws taking effect today, part two

BYLINE: Reid Wilson

LENGTH: 514 words


More new state laws taking effect Tuesday:

- Iowa: Residents diagnosed with epilepsy will be able to seek treatment with
cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive medicine derived from marijuana. E-cigarette
regulations take effect today, and state and local officials can no longer use
drones to enforce traffic laws. Another new law allows gift certificates to be
used indefinitely, and protective orders can now extend to household pets. One
more requires the Iowa National Guard to begin filing annual reports with the
governor and the legislature detailing incidents of sexual assault.

- Kansas: Any local measures placing new restrictions on guns are void as of
Tuesday, under a new law that makes state rules supersede local ordinances. Gun
owners will be able to openly carry in a number of public places. Meanwhile,
pharmacists will be allowed to work in conjunction with physicians to improve
patient access to care.

- Kentucky: Kentucky residents have to wait an extra two weeks for about 100 new
state laws to take effect. As of July 15, anyone who receives an emergency
protective order will be able to receive a temporary concealed-carry permit
without normal safety training. Businesses that collect personal information
about their consumers will be required to let those consumers know if their data
has been breached. And nurses with advanced licenses will be able to prescribe
low-level medications without a physician's help. General Electric is a big
winner in Kentucky, too: The company is getting a $15 million tax break in
exchange for a plant in Louisville.

- Maryland: Sales of 190-proof grain alcohol are prohibited starting Tuesday, a
measure lawmakers hope will stem sexual assaults on college campuses. The earned
income tax credit will increase by half a percentage point, saving about 250,000
Marylanders money on their state taxes. And the first step toward a $10.10
minimum wage takes effect Tuesday, though most businesses won't have to begin
paying higher wages until January.

- Minnesota: E-cigarettes will be banned in day care centers, hospitals and
other health care facilities. Dealers who sell used cell phones must keep
detailed records of their sales. Anyone who seeks help for a heroin user will be
immune from drug possession charges, and the University of Minnesota will get
more than $1.1 million to study bees and pesticides that impact them.

- Mississippi: Abortions after 20 weeks are illegal under a new law taking
effect Tuesday, with exceptions for severe fetal abnormality or if the health of
the mother is at risk. The state seal will include "In God We Trust" beginning
Tuesday, and teachers get a $1,500 raise. A law that would require drug tests
for TANF recipients was supposed to take effect Tuesday, but it's been delayed
under an agreement with the state ACLU.

- Nebraska: School districts in Nebraska will be required to post superintendent
employment contracts beginning Tuesday. And the state is getting ready for its
sesquicentennial - its 150th birthday - in 2017. A new commission to prepare
celebrations gets formally established today.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


