                             2240 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 30, 2014 Monday 7:20 PM EST

Wonkbook: Previewing a huge day of Supreme Court decisions

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 5133 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: Nearly 90,000. That's roughly how many foreign
persons or organizations the U.S. government said in a new report it had
targeted through surveillance last year.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: The shrinking congressional battleground, in one
map.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) The last Supreme Court cases of the term; (2)
migrant-crisis policy dilemmas; (3) the DOMA ruling anniversary; (4) the GOP
schism, explained; and (5) VA care.

1. Top story: The Supreme Court moments you've all been waiting for...

...the much-awaited Hobby Lobby and public-sector union decisions. "The Supreme
Court is poised to deliver its verdict in a case that weighs the religious
rights of employers and the right of women to the birth control of their choice.
The court meets for a final time Monday to release decisions in its two
remaining cases before the justices take off for the summer. The cases involve
birth control coverage under President Barack Obama's health law and fees paid
to labor unions representing government employees by workers who object to being
affiliated with a union. Two years after Chief Justice John Roberts cast the
pivotal vote that saved the health care law in the midst of Obama's campaign for
re-election, the justices are considering a sliver of the law." Mark Sherman in
the Associated Press.

Public-sector unions brace for big SCOTUS ruling. "Public-sector unions are
bracing for a Supreme Court decision Monday that could deal a major blow to
their wealth and political clout. Union leaders fear that conservative justices
will use the case, Harris v. Quinn, to strike down laws in 26 states requiring
teachers, police officers, firefighters and other public-sector employees to pay
dues to the unions that negotiate contracts on their behalf, even if the workers
don't want to become union members. A sweeping decision could decimate union
membership and finances - and would come at a time when unions already are
besieged and struggling to keep up their numbers." Stephanie Simon in Politico.

How the ruling could affect those unions. "In oral arguments...NRWC's lawyer
maintained that compulsory dues violated [Harris'] free speech, since the state
could force her to support an organization with which she might
disagree....Public employee unions have remained relatively strong, even as
those in the private sector weakened in the face of right-to-work laws....If the
justices agree with Harris' lawyers, they could effectively make the entire
private sector right-to-work....It's particularly important for SEIU, which has
made huge gains in the home care worker industry, which is expected to grow by
70 percent over the next decade. On the flip side, the court could do SEIU and
others a favor by affirming that collective bargaining is protected by the first
amendment." Lydia DePillis in The Washington Post.

Explainer: Every way that the Supreme Court could rule in the Hobby Lobby case.
Irin Carmon in MSNBC.

Background reading: What is and isn't at stake for Obamacare in the Hobby Lobby
ruling. Puneet Kollipara in The Washington Post.

A Round 2 in the Obamacare contraception-mandate dispute? "It is now nearly a
certainty that a second round...involving non-profits, will reach the Court...in
October. Already, Justice Elena Kagan has given the University of Notre Dame
additional time to file an appeal in a case from the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Seventh Circuit. Appeals also were promised in both of the applications
filed Friday. The charities in those cases face Tuesday deadlines to take action
to obey the mandate....Non-profit groups that are directly affiliated with
churches, synagogues, and mosques were granted a religious exemption by the
federal government, but not all non-profits with religious objections qualify.
That includes many Roman Catholic colleges, hospitals, and other charities."
Lyle Denniston in SCOTUSblog.

Hobby Lobby isn't the end. Other anti-ACA cases loom. "Nearly two years after
the Supreme Court's ruling on the Affordable Care Act captivated the nation,
another major ACA decision - Burwell v. Hobby Lobby - is expected....If it seems
like déjà vu - well, it kind of is. The same lawyers on the floor; the same
justices on the bench....On the other hand, the Hobby Lobby decision will be
much more narrowly defined than NFIB v. Sebelius, the signature anti-ACA lawsuit
of two years ago. That case called into question whether all of Obamacare was
legal. This year's ruling will turn on just an aspect of the law: whether
for-profit companies like Hobby Lobby must offer contraception as part of
employees' health coverage." Dan Diamond in Advisory Board Daily Briefing.

Explainer: On anniversary, four big ways Obamacare has changed. Dan Diamond in
Forbes.

Prescriptions for contraceptives skyrocket under ACA. "A new report from the
Obama administration finds that women saved more than $483 million on
prescriptions for oral contraceptives last year, thanks to an Affordable Care
Act provision that requires certain medications to be covered at no cost to plan
members....Friday's report from HHS shows that the number of prescriptions for
oral contraceptives with no co-pays increased by 24.4 million from 2012 to 2013,
due mainly to the health law's zero-cost sharing provisions for certain
preventative services....The HHS report also estimated that 76 million Americans
benefitted from new coverage for expanded preventative services under the health
law." Tony Pugh              in McClatchy Newspapers.

Primary source:The HHS report.

Supreme irony? High court has its own protest-free zone. "The U.S. Supreme
Court, which Thursday struck down a Massachusetts law that established a 35-foot
buffer around abortion clinics, enjoys its own protest-free zone. A federal law
bars protests from the white marble plaza of the U.S. Supreme Court building, an
irony that was not lost on supporters of abortion rights. In a press call,
Martha Walz, chief executive officer at Planned Parenthood League of
Massachusetts, said the court's decision also raises questions about the buffer
zone at the Supreme Court....Court rules, drawn from the law, ban assemblies,
processions and displays on court property." Stephanie Armour in The Wall Street
Journal.

After ruling and Aereo's hiatus, company's TV-streaming rivals seize opening.
"Traditional broadcasters still must find ways to defend themselves against an
array of companies...that want to give viewers an alternative to the their
model....Dozens of companies are offering options for the growing number of
viewers known as cord cutters, who are canceling their traditional
pay-television subscriptions. The providers range from Hulu, which the
broadcasters own, to bigger services like Amazon, Google and Netflix, all of
which offer cheaper streaming alternatives. Other companies, including Roku,
Sling Media, TiVo, Simple.TV and Mohu, sell hardware that allows viewers to
stream television to digital devices or watch web video on television sets. And
Aereo may yet stick around." Emily Steel in The New York Times.

Other legal reads:

Our tech-savvy Supreme Court? Farhad Manjoo in The New York Times.

Tech industry nervous that others will suffer Aereo's fate. Brendan Sasso in
National Journal.

Police ready to abide by court's cell-phone privacy ruling. Tami Abdollah in the
Associated Press.

Experts say law enforcement's use of cellphone records can be inaccurate. Tom
Jackman in The Washington Post.

What does the Supreme Court's NLRB ruling mean for hundreds of labor cases?
Michael A. Fletcher in The Washington Post.

Top opinion

STIGLITZ: Inequality is not inevitable. "One stream of the extraordinary
discussion set in motion by Thomas Piketty's timely, important book, 'Capital in
the Twenty-First Century,' has settled on the idea that violent extremes of
wealth and income are inherent to capitalism. In this scheme, we should view the
decades after World War II - a period of rapidly falling inequality - as an
aberration. This is actually a superficial reading of Mr. Piketty's work, which
provides an institutional context for understanding the deepening of inequality
over time. Unfortunately, that part of his analysis received somewhat less
attention ....The dynamics of the imperial capitalism of the 19th century
needn't apply in the democracies of the 21st. We don't need to have this much
inequality in America." Joseph E. Stiglitz in The New York Times.

PETHOKOUKIS: Rubio's ideas - a challenge and opportunity for GOP. "Obamanomics
has been an expensive effort in economic nostalgia to recreate the supposedly
prosperous, egalitarian 1950s....But the right has also been
backward-looking....Marco Rubio is one of the few national Republicans, Mike Lee
is another, offering a path out of that ideological cul-de-sac. Not by
abandoning conservative principles - but by applying them in a modern, relevant
way. Rubio's big economic speech last week tied together several earlier
speeches outlining new approaches to reforming key American institutions such as
higher education and the welfare state and addressing problems such as wage
stagnation and retirement security in a historic time of globalization and
automation." James Pethokoukis in AEIdeas.

KRUGMAN: Charlatans, cranks and Kansas. "Two years ago Kansas embarked on a
remarkable fiscal experiment: It sharply slashed income taxes without any clear
idea of what would replace the lost revenue....But Kansas isn't booming - in
fact, its economy is lagging both neighboring states and America as a whole.
Meanwhile, the state's budget has plunged deep into deficit, provoking a Moody's
downgrade of its debt....Yes, the Kansas debacle shows that tax cuts don't have
magical powers, but we already knew that. The real lesson from Kansas is the
enduring power of bad ideas, as long as those ideas serve the interests of the
right people. Why, after all, should anyone believe at this late date in
supply-side economics...? The doctrine crashed and burned two decades ago." Paul
Krugman in The New York Times.

BERNSTEIN: A minimum wage that makes more sense. "Travel around this country a
bit and...you will find that prices vary a great deal....These estimates arrive
courtesy of the Bureau of Economic Analysis' regional price parities, or
R.P.P.s....The R.P.P.s tell us how prices differ at a particular time across the
country. I've been thinking about these R.P.P.s since I read a new paper by the
economist Arindrajit Dube, an associate professor of economics at the University
of Massachusetts, Amherst, on ways to incorporate price differences across
states when setting state or local minimum wages. It's a worthy idea: Just a
quick look at an R.P.P. chart suggests that the buying power of a uniform
federal minimum wage varies greatly across the land." Jared Bernstein in The New
York Times.

ANTLE III: The tea party is winning the GOP war on corporate welfare. "The
political punditocracy just can't seem to settle on the conventional wisdom
about the Tea Party....It really does seem like one week we get a series of
articles proclaiming that the Tea Party is toast, and the very next week there
are equally confident assurances that the Tea Partiers are ready to storm the
Capitol, wielding flaming torches and pitchforks. Is it time to raise the
drawbridge or conduct an autopsy? The truth is, neither sweeping narrative is
completely accurate. But they both tell part of the story....Helping business -
even if it involves a little largesse - is a quintessentially Republican thing
to do. That's why many Republicans have supported the Export-Import Bank in the
past....Not anymore." W. James Antle III in The Week.

DAYEN: How to stop the epidemic of student-loan defaults. "This week, while
analysts debated the seriousness of the student debt crisis, one statistic went
unchallenged: Student loan defaults are at their highest rate in 20 years,
affecting over 7 million borrowers....Private student loan servicing disproves
the myth that private enterprises automatically perform tasks more efficiently
and effectively than the federal bureaucracy. This study shows conclusively that
injecting the profit motive into student loan servicing has distorted it, and
that a public model would achieve the government's stated goal of helping
student borrowers avoid default. Simply put, private student loan servicers
should not exist." David Dayen in The Fiscal Times.

Animals interlude: The 50 happiest animals of all time.

2. The policy dilemmas surrounding the migrant crisis

Obama's immigration dilemmas: One short-term, one long-term. "President Obama
faces a wrenching dilemma over immigration that has significant implications for
the 2014 midterm election and his legacy. Should he use his executive powers to
stop most deportations? He is under heavy pressure from pro-immigrant groups to
do so. Democratic strategists say such a move would spur turnout among Latino
voters. But such a dramatic gambit could also destroy any chance of legislative
compromise with Republicans in 2015. The president must wrestle with a
longer-term question, as well. If he takes only limited executive action this
year, he then must decide how much ground he is willing to cede to Republicans
next year in order to get legislation to his desk." Alexander Bolton in The
Hill.

Why immigration reform is stalled one year after the Senate passed a bill.
"Republicans have spent the last few months arguing that they won't pass
immigration reform because they can't trust the president to enforce the laws
already on the books. There's little chance that that criticism will go away,
given that the House is preparing to sue the president over his use of executive
actions....An immigration-related one - Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals -
has often been the target of Republican criticism. And then there's the crisis
stemming from thousands of unaccompanied children from Central America crossing
the U.S.-Mexico border in record numbers." Elahe Izadi in National Journal.

Another dilemma: Migrants complicate Obama's decision-making on curbing
deportations. "Such a move may be difficult in light of the increase in border
crossings, because it could send a message to potential migrants that they
wouldn't be deported if they reached the U.S....Republicans appear to be taking
an increasingly hard line on how to treat young illegal immigrants. A string of
GOP members of Congress has denounced the president's leniency toward those
already in the U.S. and said the policy should be rescinded. Some in the party
are backtracking from legislation that would give legal status to young people
brought to the U.S. illegally as children." Laura Meckler in The Wall Street
Journal.

Explainer: Five key questions about the border crisis, answered. Peter Sullivan
in The Hill.

Obama's latest move: Ask Congress for $2 billion, more authority to return
children home. "The White House says it will ask for authority to return
children to their native countries faster. This will apply to nations that
aren't contiguous to the U.S., as a law already allows for a quick return to
Mexico, given the shared border. The administration also has asked for a
'sustained border security surge,' a request likely to be welcomed by
congressional Republicans....Moreover, the president will ask for a 'significant
increase' in immigration judges in an effort to clear court backlogs....The
request also will include increased penalties for those who smuggle migrants and
'the resources necessary' to detain, process and care for children and adults
who cross illegally." Laura Meckler in The Wall Street Journal.

Some lawmakers want refugee status for the kids. "Republican Senator John McCain
of Arizona, told Reuters on Thursday that establishing refugee application
programs in Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala, where domestic abuse, gang
violence and poverty are rampant, is the 'key' to defusing the growing U.S.
border crisis. McCain and other members of Congress - both Republicans and
Democrats - say that a refugee program could help discourage minors from making
the perilous journey north alone. At the same time, it would give some of them a
legal way to flee the three nations, which rank among the top five countries
with the highest murder rates in the world." Richard Cowan in Reuters.

Border Patrol is using video interviews to process migrants. "The long-distance
interviews...are a response to the dramatic increase of Central Americans
crossing the border in Texas that has flooded immigration facilities with
hundreds of women and children. The Border Patrol does not have the staff to
process all the immigrants crossing in the Rio Grande Valley, but faraway
colleagues have time to spare. The remote video processing highlights a
predicament that has bedeviled the Border Patrol as it struggles to keep up with
constantly-shifting migration patterns: Many agents wind up stationed in places
where crossing activity is slowest." Elliot Spagat in the Associated Press.

How tactical shift by cartels could be fueling migrant surge. "Recent arrests of
the leadership of the Zetas and Gulf cartels, which control much of the illicit
human transit just south of McAllen, Texas, has dismantled the groups' hierarchy
and led to splinter groups that are shifting away from drug trafficking and
getting increasingly involved in human smuggling, said Tony Payan,director of
the Mexico Center at Rice University's Baker Institute for Public Policy....As
the U.S. has beefed up its border with Mexico, adding 21,000 agents, drones and
new checkpoints, these criminal rings avoid venturing into the U.S., Payan said.
Instead, they take their human cargo as far as the Rio Grande and tell the
families to turn themselves in on the other side." Rick Jervis in USA Today.

BURKHALTER: Sex abuse - an overlooked aspect of the migrant crisis. "It is not
news to Guatemalan, Salvadoran and Honduran children that they are at high risk
of violent abuse and have nowhere to turn for protection. But now that they are
fleeing across our border by the tens of thousands, it is apparently news to
U.S. policymakers. The drug trade that is destroying Central American societies
is clearly part of the problem. But kids aren't only fleeing narco-violence and
gangs; they are also trying to escape sexual abuse. The United States should
commit significant foreign assistance to address this overlooked aspect of the
child migration crisis." Holly Burkhalter in The Washington Post.

Other immigration reads:

Trade dispute hangs over the child-migrant crisis. David Rogers in Politico.

Like a girl interlude: This video seeks to make doing things "like a girl" cool.

3. How the gay-rights movement has changed, one year after the DOMA ruling

Video: The Defense of Marriage Act ruling, one year later.Time Magazine.

What have same-sex marriage advocates achieved since? "As The Washington Post's
Philip Bump points out, nearly half of all gay Americans now live in states
where same-sex marriage is legal. On Wednesday, Indiana joined the 18 other
states where gay marriage is legal by striking down its state ban. All told,
seven states have successfully legalized same-sex marriage in the past year: New
Jersey, Hawaii, Illinois, New Mexico, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and now Indiana. In
states like Wisconsin, the status of gay couples' right to marry is tied up in
the courts. Utah's decision may go all the way to the Supreme Court. Other
states have passed milder laws, like recent decisions by Kentucky, Tennessee,
and Ohio to recognize out-of-state marriages." Emma Roller in National Journal.

Explainer: An update on the status of challenges to same-sex marriage bans.
Associated Press.

Is the Supreme Court ready to tackle same-sex marriage head-on? "Now that a
federal appeals panel has struck down one state's ban on gay marriage, the stage
is set for the U.S. Supreme Court to weigh in and decide the matter for the
entire country....Many experts believe the wave of lower-court rulings makes it
all but certain the justices will tackle it. Less clear is the timeline for
action and, of course, the outcome of a case that would decide whether states
can block gays and lesbians from tying the knot....The justices wouldn't
announce until the fall whether they will hear the case, and then they would
have until next June to issue a decision. And that's only if they decide to hear
the Utah case right off the bat." Tracy Connor in NBC News.

Explainer: And here's what have advocates of same-sex couples' benefits have
achieved. Jonnelle Marte in The Washington Post.

Obama takes the gay-rights push abroad. "Former President George W. Bush
supported AIDS prevention efforts globally, but it was the Obama administration
that launched the push to make lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights an
international issue. The watershed moment came in December 2011, when
then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton went to the United Nations in Geneva and
proclaimed LGBT rights 'one of the remaining human rights challenges of our
time.' Since then, embassies have been opening their doors to gay rights
activists, hosting events and supporting local advocacy work....Just weeks after
the Supreme Court struck down parts of [DOMA]...consular posts also began
issuing immigrant visas to the same-sex spouses of gay Americans." Vanessa Gera
in the Associated Press.

The latest Republican to back gay marriage: Sen. Susan Collins. "Maine Sen.
Susan Collins announced her support for same-sex marriage...hours after the
nation's largest gay-rights group endorsed her for re-election this year over
Democrat Shenna Bellows, a longtime advocate of gay couples' right to marry.
Collins had previously declined to reveal where she stood personally, saying the
issue was best handled at the state level....Many observers expected Collins to
endorse it last year as other members of Congress, including a few Republicans,
announced their support amid shifting public attitudes. But Collins steadfastly
remained silent on the issue, or said she believed that states should make the
call, whether through referendums or legislation." Kevin Miller in Portland
Press Herald.

Background reading: Republicans who back same-sex marriage are still an
endangered species. Aaron Blake in The Washington Post.

St. Louis, Mo., is taking an unconventional approach to fighting its state's
same-sex marriage ban. "Missouri was the first state in the country to pass a
constitutional ban on gay marriage 10 years ago, and it's now the latest to see
its ban come under fire amid rapidly changing public opinion. The challenge came
as officials in St. Louis, the state's most prominent city, issued marriage
licenses to four same-sex couples Wednesday evening, just hours after federal
judges struck down similar same-sex marriage bans in Utah and Indiana as
unconstitutional. St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay said city officials knew going in
that defying the marriage ban would probably trigger a court showdown, and he
welcomes that." Nicholas P. Fandos in Politico.

Coffee in space interlude: Astronauts get an espresso machine for their space
station.

4. What Pew's new political survey tells us about the GOP's split

What divides Republicans? "Republicans broadly share a belief in smaller
government, but they are sharply divided over issues including perceptions of
Wall Street, the power of big corporations, the value of immigration and free
trade....The findings provide timely insight into the political battle that
unfolded this week in Mississippi...that exposed the broader tensions within the
GOP coalition. That election pitted the business and establishment wing of the
Republican Party against the populist-conservative wing....The new
study...suggests that the GOP faces continued instability because of profoundly
different views on some issues held by those who identify with the party." Dan
Balz in The Washington Post.

Exhibit A today: The Ex-Im Bank battle. Marcy Kreiter in International Business
Times.

Chart: One graph that explains the Republican schism. Ezra Klein in Vox.

Two swing groups hold the key to the GOP's future. "The 'Hard-Pressed Skeptics'
may hold the key to the short-term fortunes of the Republican Party....They are
neither affluent nor well educated....Mr. Obama won these voters by a 40-point
margin in 2012, but they have soured on his presidency....But these voters are
not easy converts....The Republican challenge is likely to get worse, since the
two Republican groups, 'Steadfast Conservatives' and 'Business Conservatives,'
are virtually nonexistent among young voters....To compensate, Republicans will
need to consolidate their support among...the 'Young Outsiders.'...These voters
are conservative when it comes to the role of government....but...are liberal on
cultural issues....They are deeply skeptical of an assertive foreign policy...As
a result, these voters merely tilt Republican." Nate Cohn in The New York Times.

More from the survey:

6 charts that show Republican vs. Democrat wildly oversimplifies American
politics. Andrew Prokop in Vox.

More than three-quarters of conservatives say the poor "have it easy."
Christopher Ingraham in The Washington Post.

'Game of Thrones' interlude: A 1980s pop rendition of the show's intro theme.

5. The problems with veterans health care aren't confined to the VA...

...they plague military hospitals, too. "Since 2001, the Defense Department has
required military hospitals to conduct safety investigations when patients
unexpectedly die or suffer severe injury. The object is to expose and fix
systemic errors...that can have disastrous consequences....Yet there is no
evidence of such an inquiry into Mrs. Zeppa's death. The Zeppa case is
emblematic of persistent lapses in protecting patients that emerged from an
examination by The New York Times of the nation's military hospitals, the hub of
a sprawling medical network...that cares for the 1.6 million active-duty service
members and their families. Internal documents obtained by The Times depict a
system in which scrutiny is sporadic and avoidable errors are chronic." Sharon
LaFraniere and Andrew W. Lehren in The New York Times.

White House report finds 'corrosive' culture in VA care. "The Department of
Veterans Affairs' health network lacks accountability and suffers from a host of
other problems, including a 'corrosive culture' of employee discontent and
management retaliation, according to the two men President Obama appointed to
fix the system. White House adviser Rob Nabors and acting VA Secretary Sloan
Gibson said in briefing to Obama on Friday that the Veterans Health
Administration 'needs to be restructured and reformed.'...Among their other
conclusions, the officials determined that the VA's goal of scheduling patients
within 14 days is 'arbitrary, ill-defined and misunderstood,' and that it may
have 'incentivized inappropriate actions.'" Josh Hicks in The Washington Post.

Primary source: The White House report. German Lopez in Vox.

Maybe that explains Obama's unconventional pick for VA chief. "President Obama
on Monday will nominate Bob McDonald, a West Point graduate who served as chief
executive of Procter & Gamble, to take over as head of the troubled Department
of Veterans Affairs....The un­or­tho­dox pick of a retired corporate
executive...rrather than a former military general - underscores the serious
management problems facing the agency....In recent years, the job of VA
secretary has been filled by retired generals, medical professionals or
politicians. McDonald's background is a significant departure, though he and his
wife have deep family ties to the military." Juliet Eilperin in The Washington
Post.

Other health care reads:

Supply won't meet growing demand for health care. Kaitlyn Krasselt and Jayne
O'Donnell in USA Today.

Astronomy interlude: Flying saucers are no longer the stuff of sci-fi movies;
NASA tests out one of its very own.

Wonkblog roundup

Public sector unions could radically change this week. Lydia DePillis.

Tax cuts in Kansas have cost the state money - and job creation's been terrible.

 Christopher Ingraham.

The banking industry wants to be just like Amazon. Danielle Douglas.

How states are still limiting Obamacare's outreach program. Jason Millman.

Here's how you spend your days, America - in 10 charts. Christopher Ingraham.

The Ex-Im Bank battle is personal for these small business owners. Rebecca
Robbins.

Where binge drinking is deadliest in the U.S. Roberto A. Ferdman.

This new mapping technology will show whether global warming could drown your
town. Lori Montgomery.

He's allocated money to victims of 9/11 and the BP oil spill. Can Ken Feinberg
handle GM?. Michael A. Fletcher.

Et Cetera

Advice for state-of-the-art central banker from BIS. Simon Kennedy in Bloomberg.

Jobs, cars seen cementing spring rebound in U.S. Philip Blenkinsop in Reuters.

How colleges vary in reports of sex assault and other sex offenses. Nick
Anderson in The Washington Post.

Loophole for condensate exports may apply to other crudes. Timothy Gardner and
Kristen Hays in Reuters.

Efforts grow to take the sting out of bee die-off. Jo Craven McGinty in The Wall
Street Journal.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


