                             2288 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 22, 2014 Tuesday 1:04 PM EST

Wonkbook: How the border crisis has drastically shifted the immigration debate

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 5670 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: 23 percent. That's the percentage of kids living
in families under the poverty line in 2012, a new analysis shows.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: This chart shows how the world has just set a new
June temperature record.

Wonkbook's Top 4 Stories: (1) The immigration-turned-border security debate; (2)
do Americans even want to fix Congress?; (3) Obama expands My Brother's Keeper;
(4) local energy battles.

Republicans press on border security as Perry vows to send troops. "Republicans
grappling with the surge of Central American migrants entering the country this
year have lined up behind a common goal: ratcheting up security along the
Southern border. Both on and off Capitol Hill, Republicans have called for a
more muscular approach to border security in response to the recent influx of
migrants, returning to a top priority during the broader debate about rewriting
immigration laws. On Monday, Texas Gov. Rick Perry said he would deploy as many
as 1,000 state National Guard troops to try to deter criminal activity by
Mexican drug cartels and human smugglers in South Texas." Kristina Peterson,
Laura Meckler and Ana Campoy in The Wall Street Journal.

The National Guard troops will work with state troopers but won't arrest anyone.

 "The governor's aides said the National Guard will work with state troopers at
observation posts. The guardsmen will not be empowered to apprehend anyone but
rather will help identify potential criminal activity and alert law enforcement
officers. Perry did not outline any role for them in dealing with the
unaccompanied children at the border; more than 57,000 of them have been
apprehended by federal agents since October. The Department of Health and Human
Services is responsible for caring for the children. Illegal immigrants arrested
by state troopers will be turned over to the Border Patrol, the governor's aides
said." David Nakamura and Karen Tumulty in The Washington Post.

Promising sign? Fewer children are arriving at the border. "The number of
unaccompanied minors picked up by Border Patrol agents in the first two weeks
fell to about 150 per day, down from an average of 355 per day in June, White
House spokesman Josh Earnest said Monday. Earnest said White House officials
believe the decline in the number of young migrants was the result of several
factors, including a typical seasonal drop in border crossing during harsh
summer conditions....Government officials have said they believe the vast
majority of unaccompanied minors are already being picked up by Border Patrol
agents, so sending more security forces to the border would accomplish little."
Kathleen Hennessey in the Los Angeles Times.

Still, anti-illegal immigration protests rage on. "The Los Angeles protest was
among 40 in southern California and hundreds held in the U.S., part of a
national call for a crackdown on illegal immigration....Some rallies, including
those in Little Rock, Ark., Dallas and Philadelphia, drew counter
protesters....The flow slowed this week, but reports of migrants swarming the
border and being transported to towns in the country's interior have attracted
new supporters of grass-roots organizations that fight illegal
immigration....Experts predict that the number of illegal entries this year will
be small compared with...the heyday of illegal immigration more than a decade
ago, when about 900,000 people were caught trying to sneak in." Miriam Jordan in
The Wall Street Journal.

Explainer: How a flood of kids upended the immigration debate. "The sudden rise
in the number of families and unaccompanied minors from Central America crossing
the border has refocused attention on immigration, but hardly under the terms
that President Barack Obama and immigrant advocates once envisioned. Obama had
demanded action on a broad change in the law that would have given millions of
immigrants illegally in the United States a way to citizenship while spending
more on border security. When Republicans balked, he threatened to act on his
own. But now the White House says it's focused on addressing the influx of
border-crossers and returning as many as quickly as the government can." Jim
Kuhnhenn in the Associated Press.

Even Republicans who worked on reform legislation are taking hard line. "But as
lawmakers point the critical finger at DACA, they also invite a spotlight on
their own immigration platforms. And the exposure has the potential to create
some political discomfort. Several of the president's most prominent detractors
have also worked on legislation that would give legal status - not just
temporary reprieve - to those same undocumented immigrants. Sen. Marco Rubio
(R-Fla.) and Rep. Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.) both considered, but never introduced,
bills to allow undocumented young people who came to the U.S. as children to
stay. And yet, while both were critical of DACA from the start, recently they
have begun amplifying their complaints." Elise Foley and Marina Fang in The
Huffington Post.

What can the White House do to refocus the debate? "Mr Vargas was released after
several hours with a notice to appear before an immigration judge. But the
episode enabled Republicans to link two issues: what to do with illegal
immigrants who have been in the country just a few days; and what to do with
those who have established lives and families in America over the course of many
years. The White House will need to address such conflation, say analysts on
both sides of the debate, as the Obama administration seeks to make other
changes to immigration policy ahead of midterm elections in November." Barney
Jopson in The Financial Times.

Immigration reform proponent still eye executive actions. "Regardless of how
Congress handles his request for more border resources, President Obama is
moving toward a historic-and explosive-executive order that will provide legal
status to a significant number of the estimated 11.7 million undocumented
immigrants in the U.S. One senior White House official says that while "what's
happening at the border will provide atmospherics for the [president's]
decision," it won't stop him from acting on the undocumented-probably before the
midterm elections. The resulting collision over Obama's expected action could
lastingly define both the Democratic and Republican parties for the burgeoning
Hispanic population." Ronald Brownstein in National Journal.

Long read: Could earlier action have reduced the crisis' severity? "In a 41-page
report to the Department of Homeland Security, the team from the University of
Texas at El Paso (UTEP) raised alarms about the federal government's capacity to
manage a situation that was expected to grow worse. The researchers'
observations were among the warning signs conveyed to the Obama administration
over the past two years as a surge of Central American minors has crossed into
south Texas illegally....The administration did too little to heed those
warnings, according to interviews with former government officials, outside
experts and immigrant advocates." David Nakamura, Jerry Markon and Manuel
Roig-Franzia in The Washington Post.

The crisis is straining immigration courts. "As of the end of June, the 59
immigration courts across the USA, run by 243 judges, had a record backlog of
375,503 pending cases, according to...a data research group at Syracuse
University. Wait times for hearings are averaging about a year-and-a-half, some
much longer. The crush of immigrant youths could further strain that
workload....The Justice Department has announced plans to dispatch judges to the
border to speed up proceedings....But immigration advocates warn that the
overtaxed immigration court system already leaves thousands of children
unrepresented at deportation hearings and the push to speed up deportations
could leave more without legal counsel." Rick Jervis in USA Today.

House GOP on collision course with Senate on Obama's border funding request. "A
special House 'working group' led by Rep. Kay Granger has finalized a draft of
its 'set of principles' for GOP legislation dealing with the border crisis -
including a call for putting an end to the 'catch-and-release' system for
unaccompanied minors. Several of the proposals clash dramatically with what
House and Senate Democrats say they will go along with. And the two chambers
also appear to be on a collision course for how much funding an emergency bill
will contain. Senate Democrats say they will go along with President Obama's
request for $3.7 billion, but House Republicans are looking at less than half of
that amount." Billy House and Rachel Roubein in National Journal.

Mark your calendars, wonks: Obama to hold high-level talks. "Central American
leaders will ask U.S. President Barack Obama to support a regional development
and security plan to stem the tide of illegal child migrants to the United
States at a meeting next week....Presidents of Guatemala, El Salvador and
Honduras will meet with Obama on Friday to look for ways to curb a
record-breaking exodus of Central American children." Gustavo Palencia in
Reuters.

Wanted: Empty big-box stores to house children. "In a coordinated effort between
FEMA and the Department of Health and Human Services, the government is
scrambling to find adequate facilities wherever it can....In recent weeks, FEMA
representatives have sent mass emails to advocacy networks throughout the
country soliciting potential detention facilities and offering guidelines for
acceptable spaces....Since the failures of Hurricane Katrina, faith in FEMA to
adequately respond to large-scale crisis situations has remained shaky at best.
These pleas for empty big box stores do not restore much confidence." Lauren
Markham in The New Republic.

CALDWELL: Trouble at the borders adds to Obama's woes. "Mr Obama has thus laid
out a request for $3.7bn to pay for personnel and facilities, from judges to
jail cells to surveillance drones. The proposal does not include an amendment to
the 2008 law. It may have to. The administration has warned that the country
could face 150,000 refugees from Central America if Republicans do not agree to
'comprehensive immigration reform'. In its present mood, though, the public does
not want comprehensive immigration reform. It wants less immigration. The
fortunes of Mr Obama's party depend on his offering it." Christopher Caldwell in

 The Financial Times.

BAZELON: Blue-state disgrace. "Where should the 57,000 children who are already
here go? The answer is: Every state should be raising its hand and offering to
take some of them. This is not a border-state problem. It is not up to Texas and
Arizona to carry this load just because they're the first places the children
land. States in the Northeast and the Midwest can take some of these kids too.
Yet some states are looking only for excuses to say no. Their leaders-including
in my own state of Connecticut - are behaving shamefully. This NIMBY response is
the worst kind of hypocrisy, especially coming from supposedly liberal blue
states. Got a star on the flag? That means you have to pitch in right now."
Emily Bazelon in Slate.

WADHWA: A jobless future, no matter what the government does. "On all this,
Summers is right. Within two decades, we will have almost unlimited energy,
food, and clean water; advances in medicine will allow us to live longer and
healthier lives; robots will drive our cars, manufacture our goods, and do our
chores....Summers is wrong, however, in his belief that governments can do as
they did in the industrial age: create 'enough work for all who need work for
income, purchasing power and dignity.' They can barely keep up with the advances
that are happening in technology, let alone develop economic policies for
employment. Even the courts are struggling to understand the legal and ethical
issues of advancing technologies." Vivek Wadhwa in The Washington Post.

KLEINBARD: Stop the inversions. "Fundamental corporate tax reform is urgently
needed, but the path forward has two prongs. First, Congress should enact a
temporary law to preserve the status quo, and thereby the corporate tax base, by
treating inversions according to their economic substance, and by foreclosing
the 'hopscotch' strategies described above. Without this, there will be no
corporate tax base left to reform. Then both parties need to get serious about
substantive reform, lowering the rate to say, 25%, and imposing a stable
international regime that works well with territorial systems in other
countries. The work Congress's tax-writing committees did last year shows that
reform is possible. Now congressional leadership needs to make it a priority."
Edward D. Kleinbard in The Wall Street Journal.

GABLE: Ending narrow-network plans may not be a good thing. "Nearly half of all
plans offered on the exchanges are narrow network options, so this could mean
higher premiums in the future...for millions of Americans. So it's quite
possible, in many cases, wider networks might not actually increase access to
care. While access is important, better (or just more convenient) access could
come at the cost of potentially unaffordable premiums, it seems unlikely that
access will be meaningfully improved. It's a shame that higher premiums forced
consumers into narrow-network plans they may not have wanted, but complaints
about those plans could backfire if it just leads to more costly regulations."
Callie Gable in National Review.

BUCHANAN: The downside of efficiency. "Consider, for example, the constant
improvement of crop yields. On the surface, it's a classic illustration of Adam
Smith's assertion that society benefits from individuals' desire to enrich
themselves....This relentless pursuit of efficiency, though, has repercussions
that humans are only beginning to understand....Better environmental stewardship
won't always improve a farmer's bottom line. Sometimes the benefit will go to
society as a whole. Which is why, despite Adam Smith's insights, we can't always
count on self-interest to realize socially desirable ends." Mark Buchanan in
Bloomberg View.

McGEE: Don't devalue what Yellen says on stocks. "Clearly, Yellen's Fed wants to
do what it can to keep bubbles from forming while waiting on monetary policy
changes...that could undercut some of the economic momentum that may be
building. But just because we don't need to fear that Yellen will quickly follow
up her words with interest rate changes just yet doesn't mean we shouldn't pay
attention to what she is saying. More than any other single individual in the
U.S. financial system, Janet Yellen is in a position to see what is taking place
in the economy and its financial markets, and to spot pockets of risk or
overvaluation as soon as they appear. Sure, she may be early, and she's unlikely
to be an expert on specific stocks...but that doesn't devalue her perspective."
Suzanne McGee in The Fiscal Times.

FLAVELLE: A carbon tax even Republicans could support? "So the challenge remains
convincing voters why a carbon tax is worthwhile even though energy costs
increase. Optimists will say that's just a marketing problem; maybe they're
right. But this latest survey suggests that, at a minimum, the policy most
likely to gain support, even in the face of opposition to higher energy costs,
isn't necessarily the one that puts money back in people's pockets. And maybe
Republicans aren't as averse to government spending as everyone thought. Amdur
died before the results of this survey were published. His research suggests,
however, that the path to a carbon tax with bipartisan appeal isn't hopeless
after all." Christopher Flavelle in Bloomberg View.

'Star Wars' interlude: Abrams teases "Star Wars Episode VII" X-Wing fighter.

Issues pile up in Congress. "Tens of thousands of migrants are streaming across
the Texas border, and President Barack Obama is asking Congress for nearly $4
billion in aid. A commercial airliner was shot down over Ukraine, escalating
long-simmering tensions between Russia and the United States. Another war is
breaking out in the Middle East....On Capitol Hill, federally backed terrorism
insurance expires at the end of the year, and everyone from construction
companies to insurance agencies are scrambling. And the government-backed
Export-Import Bank also is set to end, leaving U.S. corporations that do
business overseas potentially facing a jolt if some conservative Republicans
succeed in their bid to prevent reauthorization." Jake Sherman in Politico.

...And Congress punts. "Senate leaders are set to join the Republican House soon
to replenish the ailing Highway Trust Fund for just a few months. When lawmakers
return to Washington in September...they'll very likely have to come together on
a short-term funding bill to keep the government open....And when kicking the
can won't work, lawmakers may simply avoid any decision at all. A deal to reform
the Department of Veterans Affairs is faltering in the final stages while
Congress is nowhere near an agreement to address the surge of children crossing
the southern border. And forget any talk of a grand bargain on issues like
immigration reform or a tax and budget package....The stagnation in this
Congress...only bolsters the perception that this is really the least productive
in history. And a thaw doesn't appear to be in the offing." Burgess Everett in
Politico.

Chart: Congress does get things done - in the lame-duck session. Chris Cillizza
in The Washington Post.

'I'm mad as hell, and I'm not gonna turn out to vote anymore!' "Americans are
angry at Congress....So it's time to throw the bums out, right? Well, not
really. In fact, Americans appear prepared to deal with their historic
unhappiness using perhaps the least-productive response: Staying home. A new
study shows that Americans are on-track to set a new low for turnout in a
midterm election, and a record number of states could set their own new
records....The poll reinforces that, no matter how upset people are with
Congress, they still aren't really feeling the need to do much of anything about
it. Some might argue that they feel powerless...but failure to even vote
suggests they're not really interested in trying - or maybe they're not really
all that mad." Aaron Blake in The Washington Post.

Term limits, marijuana and dynamite: How Americans say they would fix Congress.
"Some variation of 'fire them all' was the most popular response, which is
hilarious and tragic considering the incumbency advantage appears to be just as
strong as ever this year. Fourteen percent of respondents formed a 'can't we all
just get along' caucus, saying that bipartisan cooperation is the key....Term
limits were another popular solution, favored by 11 percent of Americans. But a
full 10 percent of responses that didn't fit anywhere else were packed into a
mysterious 'other' category - what could they be? Fortunately for us, Gallup
recently posted a document with the full verbatim responses." Christopher
Ingraham in The Washington Post.

Executive nominees start to pile up. "There are 224 executive and 29 judicial
nominations awaiting Senate action, according to the White House, including many
whose lives have been on hold for a year or more. The Senate last year used the
'nuclear option' to change the rules so a simple majority can confirm most
nominations - and that move has shrunk the judicial backlog. But a backlog has
built up in executive branch nominees, including 56 ambassadors....After the
rules change, Republicans retaliated by slow-walking numerous nominees; the
rules change allowed a simple majority to advance nominees but kept in place
time limits that allow Republicans to force Democrats to burn days of floor time
to get to a final vote." Niels Lesniewski and Humberto Sanchez in Roll Call.

9/11 panel chairs slam Hill 'dysfunction.' "Congressional 'dysfunction' on
counterterrorism and national security makes the United States less safe, the
heads of the former 9/11 Commission charge in a new report. Former New Jersey
Gov. Tom Kean, a Republican, and former Indiana Rep. Lee Hamilton, a Democrat,
slam Congress' bureaucracy and intransigence in a new report out Tuesday,
marking 10 years since their first one. The 9/11 Commission chairmen and their
former panel members found the U.S. as a whole has made progress since then -
but Congress has not." Philip Ewing in Politico.

It's virtually impossible to be a successful modern president. "The arc of
Clinton's presidency is the most different from the other two but that's largely
because of the attempt to impeach him, a move that fundamentally re-shaped his
presidency. The similarities between the Bush presidency and Obama's tenure are
striking in that the trends - rank partisanship, the decline of the bully pulpit
- that Clinton had only to grapple with toward the end of his time in office
have accelerated exponentially over the past 14 years. And the result has been
the same in both cases: A president who a majority of the country disapproves of
and a country even more split along ideological lines on, well, everything."
Chris Cillizza in The Washington Post.

LaRAJA AND SCHAFFNER: Want to reduce polarization? Give parties more money. "In
a recently released Brookings Institution report, Tom Mann and Anthony Corrado
aim to set the record straight about the impact of campaign finance reform on
political parties. First, they say that reforms...have not weakened the parties.
Second, they brush aside arguments that making campaign finance laws more
party-friendly would reduce ideological polarization between the two sides. Our
new research suggests that they could be wrong. In our forthcoming book, we show
that campaign finance laws that empower parties do lead to less polarization.
Party organizations do, in fact, behave differently than other partisan groups
by mediating ideological sources of money and funneling it to moderate
candidates." Ray LaRaja and Brian Schaffner in The Washington Post.

Kim Jong Un interlude: North Korea is not amused by this video.

Obama to expand 'My Brother's Keeper.' "President Obama on Monday announced an
additional $100 million in funding for his racial justice initiative 'My
Brother's Keeper,' a public-private program that focuses on the unique
challenges faced by young men of color. In all, the program has attracted $300
million in funding for an effort that the president has said will continue long
after he has left the White House and will make up much of his post-presidential
work....But MBK is not without its critics, who on the one hand applaud the
President and his administration for recognizing the need to develop targeted
approaches for young men of color, but also argue that young women and girls of
color are in similarly dire straights." Nia-Malika Henderson in The Washington
Post.

The numbers on black males' struggles. "By the ninth grade, 42% of black male
students have been suspended or expelled, according to White House data. That
compares with 14% of white males of the same age. And though blacks make up 16%
of the youth population, they represent 28% of juvenile arrests. Nearly twice as
many young black men are not working or enrolled in school compared with their
white counterparts, the data say. Because of that disparity, those men are not
building the skills they need to succeed later in life, Obama said." Rebecca
Bratek in the Los Angeles Times.

Silicon Valley's diversity problem. "Technology companies have a problem when it
comes to employee diversity. The workforce at places like Google and Facebook is
overwhelmingly white and male. To counter that, a growing number of nonprofits
are popping up in Oakland to help young blacks and Latinos break into the
industry." Aarti Shahani in NPR.

Youth unemployment crisis hits African Americans hardest. "Young people are
being chased out of the labor market. Though the national unemployment rate has
fallen steadily in recent months, youth unemployment remains stubbornly high,
and the jobless rate is even higher among young minorities. For young people
between the ages of 16 and 24, unemployment is more than twice the national
rate, at 14.2 percent. For African-Americans, that rate jumps to 21.4 percent.
Of course, discrimination could be a factor. But according to William Spriggs,
an economist at Howard University, the trend is also being driven by a sluggish
economy." NPR.

Recent college grads are seeing sluggish wage growth. "Recent college graduates
are paying a price for entering the workforce in the shadow of a deep recession:
Their wages are growing far more slowly than the U.S. average....College
graduates typically earn more and enjoy more job security than workers without a
degree. The unemployment rate in June for workers over the age of 25 with a
bachelor's degree or higher was 3.3%, compared with 5% for all workers 25 years
and older and 6.1% for all workers 16 and older, according to the Labor
Department. But economists know that having the bad luck to graduate during a
recession can have long-lasting consequences, including lower earnings for years
to come." Ben Leubsdorf in The Wall Street Journal.

Child poverty rates are on the rise. "The 25th edition of the KIDS COUNT Data
Book found that about 23% of children in 2012 are living in families below the
poverty line. The KIDS COUNT Data Book takes into account four factors to judge
children's well-being - economic status, education, health and family and
community....Poverty rates, which dropped from 1990 to 2000, saw an increase in
the early 2000s - reaching 22% in 2010, and remaining at roughly the same level
since....These low-income families are still struggling to recover from the
recession. With fewer resources being available from government programs like
Medicaid or Medicare, and higher costs for housing and transportation, poorer
families are staying poor." Hoai-Tran Bui in USA Today.

Related: Improved parenting may shield low-income kids from effect of poverty.
Melissa Healy in the Los Angeles Times.

Chart: Has the food stamp wave crested? Philip Bump in The Washington Post.

Science interlude:We only use 10 percent of our brains? Sorry, that's a myth.

Colorado Democrats have a fracking problem. "The ferocious battle over fracking
- the method used to extract natural gas - is being fought across the country,
bolstered by the movie 'Gasland,' which portrays the industry in an unflattering
light, and the sight of drilling rigs across the fence from school grounds. But
the skirmish in Colorado is unique on several fronts and brings with it the
potential for enormous political consequences. For example, Gov. John
Hickenlooper - though a Democrat, the party most seen as being friendly to
environmental causes - cannot count on fracktivists' support." Lynn Bartels in
The Denver Post.

North Dakota has a natural gas-flaring problem. "The rapid escalation of energy
production in shale formations across the U.S. has produced a bonanza of oil,
but it has left many states scrambling to handle the natural gas that often
flows in large volumes along with the crude. Gas pipeline construction often
lags behind the development of new wells, and the result is that billions of
dollars' worth of gas that might be warming homes or fueling power plants is
going up in smoke. The issue is at its most severe in North Dakota, where the
amount of gas flared in the Bakken oil field has nearly tripled since 2011,
sending gas worth more than $1 billion a year into the sky." Paresh Dave in the
Los Angeles Times.

And the Obama administration may have just created a new area of conflict with
environmentalist allies. "The department's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
finalized a plan that lays out a series of environmental restrictions - aimed at
protecting marine life, such as whales, dolphins, and sea turtles - for
companies seeking to look for oil in mid- and South Atlantic waters. A number of
companies have applied for permits for testing that would update old estimates
of oil and gas underlying the waters that have long been off-limits to drilling.
The plan is a blow to environmentalists who say that the underwater blasts will
wreak havoc." Ben Geman in National Journal.

Maine town aims to stop flow of Canadian oil-sands crude. "On Monday night,
South Portland's city council is expected to approve a ban on the export of
crude oil from the local waterfront. The ordinance would effectively close off
the possibility of using an existing Maine-to-Montreal pipeline to ship Canadian
crude through the U.S. Northeast for export. The vote follows a
year-and-a-half-long campaign by residents, city officials and local
environmental groups who say they are worried that piping tar sands crude - a
particularly heavy and carbon-intensive form of oil - into South Portland would
dirty the local air and water and increase global emissions of heat-trapping
greenhouse gases." Maria Gallucci in International Business Times.

Ban on most crude-oil exports seen dying one ruling at a time. "As much as 1.2
million barrels a day may be freed for export on the recent rulings alone. The
ban was passed by Congress in 1975 in response to the Arab oil embargo that cut
global supplies, quadrupled crude prices and created gasoline shortages in the
U.S. at a time when the country's own crude production was shrinking. Now that
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing are unleashing record volumes of
light oil from U.S. shale formations and a glut of crude is pooling along the
Gulf Coast, federal policy makers are facing increasing pressure to ease the
restriction." Lynn Doan in Bloomberg.

A battle is brewing, meanwhile, on LNG exports. "While some lawmakers have
embraced export policy changes for liquefied natural gas that the Energy
Department announced in May, industry groups voiced clear opposition Monday, the
last day to file comments on the proposal....The Energy Department is
responsible for evaluating the potential national effects of LNG exports, which
it previously authorized on a case-by-case basis with a conditional approval
based on the order applications were received. Following industry pressure to
expedite the process, the department proposed doing away with the conditional
approval and instead issue only a final approval once a project had completed
required environmental reviews." Randy Leonard in Roll Call.

Strange birdfellows: Plight of sage grouse brings together odd coalition. "The
greater sage grouse...has seen its numbers plunge far and fast. Now, federal
officials are weighing putting it on the endangered species list - setting off a
mad scramble among the unlikeliest of allies to save the bird and avoid
disrupting the nation's enormous growth in energy production....The grouse is at
the center of one of the country's most important struggles: to balance the
demand for energy against the needs of nature. And in the process, it has put
two environmental priorities - preserving species and fostering renewable energy
- on a collision course." Diane Cardwell and Clifford Krauss in The New York
Times.

Other energy/environmental reads:

What does the Foxx say? Oil train rules will be comprehensive. Jennifer A.
Dlouhy in the Houston Chronicle.

How should we teach climate change in schools? Clare Foran in National Journal.

Biotech interlude: The milk of the future?

Chart: Americans can't stop eating Chipotle's burritos. Roberto A. Ferdman.

Uber is tapping into the too-drunk-to-drive market, user data suggest. Emily
Badger.

Why more companies want pensions off their books. Michael A. Fletcher.

Term limits, marijuana and dynamite: How Americans say they would fix Congress.
Christopher Ingraham.

There's little evidence that fewer prisoners means more crime. Emily Badger.

A quarter of McDonald's restaurants in China may have been serving expired meat.

 Roberto A. Ferdman and Jiaxi Lu.

Obama's LGBT order is both narrower and more sweeping than the Employee
Non-Discrimination Act. Christopher Ingraham.

We asked you to Name That Data, and you did. Christopher Ingraham.

Inequality in life expectancy has widened in America. But at least we're
narrowing inequality at birth. Zachary A. Goldfarb.

Obamacare premiums aren't living up to doomsday predictions. Sam Baker in
National Journal.

Online sales tax is back - and this time, it might actually have a shot at
passing. J.D. Harrison in The Washington Post.

Detroit workers vote for benefit-cutting bankruptcy plan. Steven Church in
Bloomberg.

Air insurers worry after Malaysia Airlines' latest crash. Keith Bradsher in The
New York Times.

9/11 Commission report authors warn nation of cyberattack threats. Adam Goldman
in The Washington Post.

Senate report: Barclays and Deutsche Bank helped hedge funds skirt $6 billion in
taxes. Danielle Douglas in The Washington Post.

Study finds elementary children like new healthier lunches. Caroline Porter and
Stephanie Armour in The Wall Street Journal.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


