                             2238 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 30, 2014 Monday 11:39 AM EST

Robin Thicke ignites discussion with 'Paula,' but these songs aren't worth
talking about;
R&B singer's new album is an uncomfortable, gross and boring attempt at
reconciliation.

BYLINE: Chris Richards

LENGTH: 817 words


There's at least one Remy Martin delivery truck that rolls through the streets
of the District displaying Robin Thicke's handsome face, blown up 15 times
larger than real life, a static photograph that winks. On the side of the truck
is the cognac company's slogan: "Things are getting interesting."

That's true. Things are constantly getting interesting for Thicke, but never for
his music, which is both incredibly dull and incredibly popular. The disparity
might make him the leading hack of his generation, but if he stays on course,
Thicke won't be remembered for his songs. He'll be remembered for all of those
interesting things.

Such as: the hard-to-explain popularity of his just-okay mega-hit "Blurred
Lines." Such as: the controversy over whether the lyrics to "Blurred Lines" were
about non-consensual sex. Such as: that time Miley Cyrus danced a little too
close to Thicke's pants on MTV. Such as: a snapshot that surfaced of Thicke
grabbing a body part that did not belong to Paula Patton, his wife of nine
years. Such as: the couple's galactically publicized separation this year. Such
as: Thicke's attempt to win her back by naming his new album "Paula."

So here comes the grown-up Lloyd Dobler in his rumpled Rat Pack tux, not
crawling so much as sauntering. (Things are getting interesting.) As far as mea
culpas go, this one is inexplicably smug, bawdy and incoherent - as if Thicke
figured out how to transpose an Anthony Weiner selfie into R&B.

The latent desire for self-humiliation lurks in the heart of every performer,
but the 37-year-old Thicke is taking it into new terrain. And whether he's doing
it out of complete obliviousness or pure opportunism, he's also humiliating
Patton. That's just one of the reasons that the singer's critics took to their
laptops when the track list to "Paula" was announced, asserting that songs
titled "Lock the Door" and "Still Madly Crazy" were romanticizing stalking.

Few had heard the album, but that didn't slow the conversation. In
thesocial-media age, pop culture has become a safe place to talk about the most
difficult subjects. We might flinch at reading about rape on our college
campuses or in our military, but we're eager to talk about it through the lens
of "Game of Thrones" or a Lady Gaga video.

In pop music, those tough discussions seem to take place more frequently around
race  -   such as when country alpha-male Brad Paisley pens a song called
"Accidental Racist," or when rapper Kanye West puts a Confederate flag on a
T-shirt, or when pop singer Lily Allen makes a feminist music video that viewers
deem racist. The messages sent out can end up mutating into very different
conversations.

Artists are struggling to catch up to this reality, often flustered by their
inability to control the debate while frequently failing to grasp the tremendous
impact their work has on shaping our collective cultural life. When the
entertainment industry douses the world with your art, it's the world that gets
to sort out what your art means.

Thicke's new album seems to have been made with only a half awareness of this.
It asks to be taken seriously, but exclusively as a plea to "get her back," as
Thicke croons on the album's tepid first single. And while his lyrics feel as
lazy and careless as ever, Thicke is also shrewd enough to defuse his most
provocative lines with silliness.

"Lock the Door" is the biggesteyebrow-raiser, a gospel-ish tune about being
locked out of the house in which Thicke eventually pleads, "At least open the
doggie door, throw a friend a juicy bone!" On the minimal funk of "Black Tar
Cloud," he blames himself for his broken home with quirky metaphors: "I was
licking your wounds/I thought we were straight/I thought everyone was gonna eat
the chips/Turns out I'm the only one who double dipped."

But there's little humor to be found in the piano-driven blues of "Love Can Grow
Back," which opens with a skeevy line - "You're way too young to dance like that
in front of a man like me" - then devolves into come-ons that feel baffling and
gross.

Just plain baffling is the peppy bravado of "Time of Your Life," "Tippy Toes"
and "Living in New York City," three ditties that may or may not be catering to
the "Jersey Boys" demographic.

Throughout, Thicke fails to sell whatever it is he's trying to sell. And because
this album's production is so tame and thin, he often sounds like a man
finessing his Marvin Gaye impression while the Weather Channel drones in the
next room.

And while the guy obviously knows how to push buttons, it seems that because of
the mediocrity of his music, Thicke will eventually escape the controversies
that have followed him. He's inviting us to gawk at a spectacular celebrity
split, but he doesn't have a "Blurred Lines 2" in his back pocket.

If he isn't on the radio, he isn't in the discussion. That's when things finally
stop getting interesting.

chris.richards@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


