                             2219 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                       June 23, 2014 Monday 10:42 PM EST

Happy Hour Roundup

BYLINE: Paul Waldman

LENGTH: 640 words


* Today the White House held a summit on family-friendly policies like paid
family leave, which every industrialized country except the United States
offers. But Zachary Goldfarb makes the key point: There was something noticeably
absent, i.e., any specific legislation that the President is getting behind, and
that may be because it would cost money.

* Thousands of families caught coming over the border have been released and
then told to report for a deportation hearing, but the Obama administration
won't say how many, even though it appears to have the numbers. This is not
going to go away, and the administration will need an answer.

* The Obama administration today released its memo laying out the legal
justification for drone strikes, and civil libertarians warn it leaves many
questions unanswered and could allow future presidential activity that we
really, really would not be prepared to accept. - gs

* Harry Reid is warning Republicans not to try to shut down the government over
the EPA regulations. Given how much they hate him, that may just be enough to
make them do it.

* Reid is also offering Republicans a deal, telling them that he'll give them an
up-or-down, 51-votes-wins vote on Mitch McConnell's effort to block EPA regs, if
they will do the same on Democratic priorities like universal gun background
checks. Well trolled!

* The Supreme Court handed down a decision today on the EPA's authority that
Republicans widely touted for striking down one specific EPA interpretation of a
statute. Meanwhile, it left in place their ability to undertake almost all the
carbon regulation the administration is planning.

* In tomorrow's Senate GOP primary, Thad Cochran has been reaching out to Dems,
which in Mississippi means black people. So naturally, Tea Partiers backing
Chris McDaniel are mobilizing an army of poll-watchers, just to ensure the
integrity of the ballot.

* Jonathan Bernstein makes a good point about the resurfacing of all the
Republican neocons who brought us the Iraq War resurfacing:

The real problem, then, isn't that the media is featuring former Vice President
Dick Cheney, former Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, and the rest of the
2002 gang. The problem is that, for the most part, the Republican Party still
hasn't moved past "dead enders" and "they're probably in Syria" and other
2003-2004 greatest hits. Or, to be more precise, the Republican foreign-policy
debate these days is between the people who basically continue to believe the
Iraq War was both a good idea and ultimately successful, and a minority Paulite
isolationist faction.

So if you're a TV booker, you aren't going to have an easy time finding
Republicans who agree with the rest of America that the Iraq War was a fiasco
from the start and should never have been waged.

* Looking for a comprehensive roundup of resources to help you understand the
issue of all those Central American kids coming to our southern border? Alex
Hagermoser has you covered.

* Philip Klein compares Hillary's wealth gaffes to the deftness with which Bill
handled questions about wealth, and reminds us she just isn't that great a
politician. I'd agree she tends to need time to get the hang of it - recall that
by the end of the 2008 nomination battle she'd become a Blue Collar Heroine -
and my guess is she's rusty right now.

* Over the weekend, the South Dakota GOP passed a resolution calling for
President Obama's impeachment. Jaime Fuller has a handy roundup recapping the
many, many people who have demanded the same over the past five years.

* Thomas Mann makes a good case that the IRS tale shows GOP scandal-mania is
damaging government's ability to manage effectively.

* And finally, Barack Obama went to Chipotle's for lunch today. The Wire does a
careful analysis of the meaning of the Burrito Bowl he ordered.

What else?

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


