                             2329 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 7:21 PM EST

DARPA-funded IBM chip inspired by synapses in the human brain;
The project was funded by $53 million from DARPA - chips could soon be used in
unmanned aerial vehicles.

BYLINE: Mohana Ravindranath

LENGTH: 374 words


IBM on Thursday unveiled a new computer chip designed to emulate the computing
process and energy efficiency of the human brain.

The size of a postage stamp, the chip uses the energy equivalent of a
hearing-aid battery, according to IBM. IBM says its "neurosynaptic chips" can be
tiled together to make a larger computing system.

The project - called Systems of Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable
Electronics (SyNAPSE) - is fueled by about $53 million from the Defense Advanced
Research Project Agency. (DARPA works closely with IBM on other projects; in
February, for instance, the agency selected IBM for a $3.4 million contract to
design chips for electronics that can self-destruct when triggered.)

Eventually, the chips could be used in robots that roam around disaster regions
and communicate with people, or in eyeglasses that process video and auditory
input to help the wearer navigate a busy road, among other conceptual ideas,
according to IBM.

The computing system could be used for unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, said
Gill Pratt, a program manager in DARPA's defense sciences office.

Robot systems that analyze input in real-time - comparing images from a camera
to images stored in a database, for instance - typically use large amounts of
power, Pratt said in an interview, noting that "warfighters and UAVs all have
very limited amounts of power they can use . . . we are trying to improve the
power efficiency of the computation as much as possible".

The neurosynaptic chips are mean to complement IBM's other so-called cognitive
computing technologies such as Watson, the system that won "Jeopardy!" in 2011.
Watson uses natural language processing skills to interpret human speech
queries, and mines large volumes of data to find the answer. Where as Watson
represents humans' "left-brain" - associated with analytical thinking - the
neurosynaptic chips are meant to simulate pattern recognition and process
sensory input, according to IBM.

IBM is still working out how to commercialize the chips, lead research scientist
Dharmendra Modha said in an interview.

"This is really a research project. My job was to make impossible possible. .
.now the possible has to become real," he said.

mohana.ravindranath@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


