                             2304 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 30, 2014 Wednesday 11:00 PM EST

Why aren't more American celebrities like Russell Brand?;
Why can't more American celebrities be like Russel Brand?

BYLINE: Kiratiana Freelon

LENGTH: 398 words


Most American celebrities aren't jumping at the chance to take on the media
these days.

Russell Brand has made it a part of his identity.

The British comedian, who used to be married to pop star Katy Perry, has his own

 YouTube  show called "The Trews," (a blend of the words "true" and news") in
which he spouts his opinions on the major news of the day and takes on the
media-apparently his favorite past time.

"This YouTube channel is going to analyze media; it's going to dismantle media,"
Brand said in the debut video of the channel. "It's going to create a new
frequency of truth."

This shouldn't be a surprise to anyone.

Brand famously hijacked the "Morning Joe" show (in the absence of Joe
Scarborough) by doing everything except being a proper television show guest:
flirting with the female host, talking about the media, messing up the furniture
and mentioning Edward Snowden. We're pretty sure MSNBC won't be inviting him
back any time soon.

Now he does all that and more on his own YouTube channel - albeit in his house
or wherever he is in the world.

Brand has posted more than 100 homemade YouTube videos since debuting "The
Trews" in February, each getting tens of thousands of views.. He isn't afraid to
take on those difficult topics that American celebrities do their best to avoid.
Recent episodes, which typically last 10 minutes, have taken on Fox News, the
Hobby Lobby decision and the conflict in the Middle East.

Just check out these titles:

Does Fox News Want Us to Be Racist?

Middle East Conflict. What should we think?

Can You Trust Rupert Murdoch?

Is it wrong to pay for sex?

Can you imagine Kevin Hart talking about such topics?

Every few episodes he'll take on something a little lighter like the boy band
One Direction, or celebrities and weight gain.

In a strange reflection of media today, websites are beginning to cover the
series. The Huffington Post recently talked about Brand's takedown of Fox's Sean
Hannity. And then of course, there's this post.

More from The Reliable Source:

Martha Stewart on why she loves her drone

Morgan Freeman arrived in D.C. for an awards dinner without anyone noticing

Michelle Obama is becoming a Solidcore regular

E                ven more surreal estate, BOLO and Love, etc: Sign up for
The Reliable Source newsletter. And follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


