                             2346 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       August 11, 2014 Monday 8:22 PM EST

Forget Benghazi: We need a select committee on the Middle East meltdown

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 822 words


It is unclear when and if the House select committee's Benghazi hearings will
begin. Frankly, the probe into whether the White House tried to spin the attack
as a fluke prompted by an anti-Muslim video is such small beans in the scheme of
things it hardly merits a hearing. Yes, Ben Rhodes and the White House crew -
surprise, surprise - were obsessed with deflecting blame rather than responding
to a growing national security problem, but then we know that has been their
modus operandi all along. Did Hillary Clinton lose sight of the post-civil war
Libyan security situation? Obviously, or the ambassador and three other
Americans wouldn't have been killed.

Benghazi was (and, to a limited extent, still is) important because of what it
tells us about the Obama-Clinton foreign policy. However, there is much more
dramatic evidence of their failure to recognize that al-Qaeda was on the march,
not in retreat. We know that Iraq could not be abandoned with no ill effects,
hence the need for the Obama and Clinton to claim they really didn't decide to
do what the president promised to do and later bragged he had done. We know it
was a fateful error to ignore the opportunity for a  swift ouster of Bashar
al-Assad in Syria - a move that would have nipped the Islamic State in the bud
(Clinton admits) and saved a couple hundred thousand lives.

So rather than Benghazi, the select committee should restyle and expand its
investigation and include the Senate if the GOP takes the majority. Like the
9/11 Commission that looked at how we lost sight of a threat to the homeland
from al-Qaeda and the intelligence and military mistakes that led to the result,
it seems a committee investigating what went wrong in the Middle East and what
we need to do to fix it is again in order. Benghazi was a symptom and a hint of
what would come; now we have the full-blown epidemic of violence, genocide and
instability throughout the region. It would be a good idea to start the
investigation and take remedial steps this time before the homeland is hit
again, as the administration's own officials predict will be a real possibility
if the Islamic State secures its own swath of Middle East territory.

As I see it, there are three components essential to a useful investigation of
the Middle East meltdown:

First, how did the administration miss the al-Qaeda comeback? The intelligence
committee denies it was an intelligence failure. Was this, then, a refusal to
accept inconvenient truths that conflicted with an ideological predisposition?
Why did the president falsely believe al-Qaeda was on its heels? And did we make
the problem worse by setting a withdrawal date for troops from Iraq and
Afghanistan? It's worth looking at hysterical, hypothetical scenarios like the
ones spun by Obama's chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to justify not acting
in Syria. Were they the result of White House pressure, military careerism by
those wanting to ingratiate themselves with the president or sheer incompetence?

Second, it's important to understand the scope and depth of the problem. We have
failed or failing nation states in Libya, Syria, Lebanon and Iraq. We have
al-Qaeda and the Islamic State on the one hand and Iran's terror network on the
other. What do we need to accomplish and what steps will lead us to that end?
This is basic policy definition that more than five years into his presidency
Obama never did. Staying out of things is not a strategy; indeed, it's a recipe
for total chaos.

And finally, just as the 9/11 Commission made recommendations about the
military, intelligence and diplomatic aspects of the problem, a helpful
committee would do the same for the Middle East meltdown. This is supposed to be
done by the administration in the quadrennial defense review, but experts from
Democratic and Republican administrations know this was not done in a serious
way. We've already had an esteemed bipartisan board reach findings on defense
spending, and its co-chairs should testify before the committee. Likewise, it's
essential to have a top-to-bottom review of our policy toward Iran. Whatever it
is, the administration has not managed to halt Iran's quest for nuclear weapons
or check its aggression against neighbors (which includes state sponsorship of
Hamas and Hezbollah). What leverage do we need and how can we deploy this? Given
the threats we face, what National Security Agency programs, drone policy and
enemy-combatant arrangements do we need?

A committee like this would provide an immense service. We have more than two
years left in the Obama presidency and it's critical to help his administration,
to the extent possible, reverse course. Second, it's an essential learning
opportunity for pols and the public alike. How are we going to summon the
political support to do what is necessary to protect the country? Start with a
top-to-bottom investigation of what went wrong and what we need to do to fix it.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


