                             2387 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 1:42 AM EST

The libertarian moment that never was

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 692 words


Along with several conservative commentators, we have suggested that the
"libertarian moment" in the GOP is a canard. If libertarians are inherently
skeptical to the point of hostile toward even core government powers, including
law enforcement and foreign policy, there is a whole lot of evidence that the
Republican Party is less entranced with the libertarian philosophy than it was
just a few years ago. And if libertarians pride themselves on indifference as a
matter of public policy to issues such as poverty, income inequality and
maintenance of a safety net, then, again, the GOP seems to be rejecting
essential elements of libertarian doctrine. There are plenty of examples.

For starters, YouGov's recent polling shows that the country as a whole is more
supportive of the police and more critical of the protesters in Ferguson, Mo.,
than they had been initially. Among Republicans, 61 percent think the police
have acted reasonably while only 12 percent think they haven't. As for the
behavior of the residents, 74 percent of Republicans think that it has been
unreasonable while only 10 percent think that it has been reasonable.

On foreign policy, there appears to be no one among the crop of potential 2016
GOP presidential contenders other than Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) who thinks that
the Islamic State threat is overblown or that the United States should sit on
the sidelines while the burgeoning terrorist state takes hold in Syria and Iraq.
To the contrary, the candidates seem to be competing to be the most hawkish and
most critical of President Obama's do-nothing foreign policy. Indiana Gov. Mike
Pence's recent observation is typical of the prevailing sentiment: "It is a
consequence of the policies of this administration that have made withdrawal
from Afghanistan and Iraq the primary objective of American foreign policy. I
think that has sent the wrong message to the wrong elements in that part of the
world and to others that are looking on."

Coupled with the House budget to increase defense spending, these voices reflect
a determination to exercise U.S. power and influence in the world. The Obama era
seems to have frightened Republicans (not to mention the rest of the country and
our allies) into a new appreciation for a forward-leaning foreign policy. With
the Islamic State on the loose and American and European jihadists sprouting up
in the Middle East, the idea of dismantling anti-terror surveillance or
forswearing use of drones seems downright dangerous.

On the domestic front, the most creative voices on the right - from the reform
conservatives to Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah) to Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) - are looking
at new ways to fight poverty, improve education, replace Obamacare and address
other concerns of middle-class and poorer Americans. Gone is the obsessive focus
on budget-cutting, although many of the reforms will have the effect of reducing
the scope of the federal government.

Meanwhile, on the revenue side, cutting tax rates and scrubbing the tax code of
any policy preferences have given way to a new interest in an expanded child tax
credit and payroll reform. Instead of making the tax code policy-neutral through
devices such as a flat tax, conservative lawmakers and reformers are looking at
ways to ease individual purchase of health care through a refundable credit,
make child-rearing more affordable by means of an expanded tax credit and fight
poverty with an expanded Earned Income Tax Credit.

The libertarian impulse - restricting law enforcement, shrinking from
international challenges, removing government from societal problem-solving and
favoring government indifference to poverty-fighting at home and abroad (in the
form of eliminating foreign aid) - has gripped a relatively small segment of
voters and an even smaller segment of elected officials and candidates. Perhaps
Republicans are rediscovering that real-world problems are not amenable to a
largely hands-off government. That does not mean capitulation to a overreaching,
centralized and intrusive liberal welfare state. Rather, it means conservatives
are looking for constructive and vibrant governance, not abdication.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


