                             2335 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 8, 2014 Friday 7:33 PM EST

Here's what I learned about reducing civilian deaths as an Israeli major;
Stop using artillery fire.

BYLINE: Ahron Bregman

LENGTH: 1043 words


In the 1982 Lebanon war I served as an Israeli artillery forward observer, my
task to pinpoint the Palestine Liberation Organization's positions and call in
fire from our artillery units. We stayed in the evacuated Al Jamous School,
overlooking Beirut. The routine was simple enough: I would pop into the
classroom next door from where I would collect the coordinates and descriptions
of my military targets: "a military camp," "a mortar," "an antenna." I would
then return to my room and, looking out of the windows, I would direct our fire
on the targets.

From time to time I would pause to let the air force get in to drop its
munitions; and the navy would fire from the sea. Beirut, in the summer of 1982,
was all burning up - a city on fire.

There was a purpose to this massive bombardment: to hit Yasser Arafat's
guerrilla force and its weapons - and also put pressure on the Lebanese,
particularly those living inside Beirut with no water, food and electricity, so
they demanded that Arafat get out of Beirut, which would then stop our assault.

In the end, a Lebanese military officer by the name of Jonny Abdu confronted
Arafat, who left Lebanon and moved to Tunisa.

Looking back now, I'm appalled by our brutal bombing of Beirut. Was it justified
to turn this beautiful city into a Middle Eastern Dresden and kill hundreds of
innocent civilians in the process?

Now to Gaza, where, like in 1982 Beirut, the Israeli army is using overwhelming
military power to locate and destroy Hamas's tunnels, to stop them firing
rockets into Israel - and also to put pressure on the Gazans (as we had
pressured the Beirutis) so they turn their backs on Hamas as a political force.

In the process, just as in Lebanon, hundreds of innocent Palestinians have been
killed and parts of Gaza, as some sections of 1982 Beirut, have been turned into
wastelands. Even worst, U.N. schools in Gaza which are shelters to more than
250,000 refugees, and their hospitals have also been hit by Israeli artillery
and bombs.

Wayward artillery

Can anything be done so that in the next round between Israel and Hamas, which
is inevitable, there would be fewer innocent civilian casualties?

The answer to this question is yes. It is indeed possible to reduce the number
of casualties on the Palestinian side, but this would require a modification of
the Israeli army's rules of engagement, namely the way it operates, particularly
when in close proximity to schools, hospitals and other shelters.

For example, as an artillery officer, I know that even now - with advanced
technologies - artillery fire is unreliable. As an artillery forward observer, I
always looked up to the sky, praying my shells hit the targets and not land on
my head. Artillery shells have a strange habit of going astray.

In 1996, in southern Lebanon, wayward Israeli artillery shells landed on a U.N.
compound near the village of Qana, killing 106 innocent people. In the current
Gaza war many of the innocent casualties were victims of artillery shells
landing in the wrong place. What's needed here is to ensure that heavy artillery
is not used in Gaza's urban areas - particularly not near schools and hospitals.

As for Israeli attacks from the air, at the moment, Israeli pilots, or those who
dispatch them, can choose from a range of bombs weighing from 250-1,000kg. They
often opt for the latter, as they are big enough to destroy the target
completely - and the pilots are confident they can hit the target accurately, as
they often do.

The problem is that the collateral damage of such big bombs is catastrophic in
densely populated Gaza; it destroys not only the intended targets but also
causes massive damage to nearby structures and kills non-combatants. Such big
bombs must be banned altogether from being used in the vicinity of shelters,
schools and hospitals.

Hannibal Protocol

Finally, certain practices employed by the Israeli army should not be allowed to
be used, most notably the "Hannibal Protocol," which is the IDF's procedure for
preventing soldiers from falling into enemy hands.

The Hannibal Protocol is yet another product of Israel's Lebanon wars: a
procedure to be used in the first minutes and hours after a possible abduction
of an Israeli soldier. It calls on the military to dramatically escalate attacks
in the vicinity of any kidnapping - to strike at bridges, roads, houses, cars -
everything, in fact, to prevent the captors from disappearing with the abducted
soldier.

When the IDF thought - wrongly as it turned out - that one of its officers had
been abducted by Hamas in the southern Gaza Strip, the Hannibal protocol was
activated to a most devastating effect. The army used everything at its disposal
- tanks, artillery, aeroplanes, drones - and pounded vast areas in Rafah,
causing enormous damage, killing and wounding scores of innocent Palestinians.

The brutal Hannibal procedure seems to me to break all rules of war. It should
be thrown out of the window and never used again in Gaza.

What will ultimately stop the death of innocent Palestinians and Israelis is a
peace deal putting an end to the conflict. But in the meantime, a modification
of the Israeli rules of engagement could reduce the number of innocent
casualties.

In 2010, following Israel's Operation Cast Lead in the Gaza Strip which resulted
in hundreds of Palestinian casualties, the IDF produced a document calling on
military commanders, operating in densely populated areas, to "exercise
judgement and use more accurate weapons, or lower-impact weapons."

It seems, judging from the sheer number of Palestinian casualties in the current
Gaza war, that the Israelis are not following their own rules - or the rules
were produced at the time as a PR exercise to silence international criticism.

There's no reason to think the Israelis couldn't change their rules, though. We
have international conventions banning, for instance, the use of chemical
weapons in war, so it is possible, I believe, to also prohibit the use of heavy
artillery, big bombs and cruel procedures in densely populated areas such as the
Gaza Strip. After all, it is also in Israel's interest, as the horrific pictures
coming out of the Gaza Strip ruin the country's already tarnished reputation.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


