                             2305 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 31, 2014 Thursday 1:14 AM EST

The West must prepare for a wounded Putin to become even more aggressive

BYLINE: Editorial Board

LENGTH: 589 words


A MONTH ago, Russian President Vladi­mir Putin appeared to be successfully
executing his campaign to destabilize Ukraine. While Russian-backed insurgents
consolidated a breakaway republic, weak and divided Western governments ignored
their own deadlines for imposing sanctions. Now, suddenly, Mr. Putin faces twin
reversals: relatively tough sanctions from the United States and European Union
on Russian banks and oil companies, and a string of military defeats that have
pushed back his proxy forces. It's a dangerous moment for Mr. Putin - and,
perhaps, an opportunity for Ukraine and its allies.

The Obama administration and European governments deserve credit for agreeing on
joint action against Russia after months of haggling and hesi­ta­tion. But Mr.
Putin is mostly responsible for his own setbacks. Having recklessly supplied his
Ukrainian proxy force with advanced anti-aircraft missiles, he was surprised
when one downed a Malaysian passenger jet, causing a heavy loss of European
lives. Even then he might have avoided significant sanctions, but his response
to the tragedy was to stonewall and deny responsibility even while escalating
his weapons deliveries to the flailing insurgents.

President Obama, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other European leaders have
bent over backward to avoid a full rupture with Mr. Putin over Ukraine. Mr.
Obama said Tuesday that the sanctions did not represent "a new cold war" but
rather was "a very specific issue" related to Ukraine. Yet the combination of
economic losses from the sanctions and Ukraine's potential defeat of the rebels
could pose a threat to Mr. Putin's hold on the Kremlin. Having whipped up
nationalist passions over Ukraine with his state-directed propaganda apparatus,
the Russian ruler might have trouble explaining the rebels' eclipse. While the
effect of sanctions will take time to sink into the economy - the Russian stock
market and ruble rose Wednesday - Mr. Putin has already been on thin ice with
Russia's middle class and its private-sector businessmen.

It's not yet clear how Mr. Putin will react to these reversals. He is capable of
surprising shifts of direction - such as his sudden offer last summer to help
strip his ally Syria of chemical weapons. Ukrainian officials, like some of
their counterparts in the West, worry about a reckless lashing out by a ruler
who feels cornered. Mr. Putin, they counsel, still should be offered a
face-saving way of retreating from Ukraine. President Petro Poroshenko and the
interim government, which have been offering such compromises all along, are set
to renew negotiations with the Russian-backed forces this week.

While such initiatives are worth trying, the reality is that Mr. Putin is more
likely to escalate than back down. Ukraine and the West must be prepared for a
more forceful and overt Russian military intervention. That should mean more
support for the Ukrainian military, which is seeking drones and better
communications equipment from the West, and more economic support for the new
government, which has been forced to spend heavily on the armed forces. Russia
should not be allowed to permanently entrench its proxy forces in eastern
Ukraine, creating a "frozen conflict."

The West also should not shrink from the destabilization of Mr. Putin's regime.
Once considered a partner, this Kremlin ruler has evolved into a dangerous rogue
who threatens the stability and peace of Europe. If he can be undermined through
sanctions and the restoration of order in eastern Ukraine, he should be.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


