                             2367 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 20, 2014 Wednesday 3:26 PM EST

U.S. weighs response to apparent execution of American by Islamic State;
Senior White House officials meeting on purported beheading of American
journalist James Foley.

BYLINE: Greg Miller;Karen DeYoung;Adam Goldman

LENGTH: 1435 words


Senior White House and counter-terrorism officials were meeting early Wednesday
to discuss how to respond to the apparent execution of an American journalist by
Islamist militants and their threat to kill another American reporter in their
custody.

Officials said it was unlikely that the United States would accede to the
Islamic State's demand to end U.S. airstrikes against the group in Iraq. But
President Obama could face pressure to escalate that campaign following the
purported killing of the American, James Foley.

Asked whether the United States might consider suspending strikes, one U.S.
official said the "only question is if we do more."

In Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron cut short a family vacation and
returned to London to chair emergency meetings on Iraq and Syria, amid
indications that a British citizen was involved in Foley's killing. In a video
of the apparent beheading released Tuesday, Foley's masked executioner, speaking
in English with what sounds like a British accent, identified another captive as
Steven Joel Sotloff, and said that "the life of this American citizen, Obama,
depends on your next decision."

Like Foley, Sotloff is an American journalist who disappeared while covering
Syria's civil war.

American intelligence officials believe the video is authentic but are
continuing to evaluate it, senior U.S. officials said Wednesday morning.

President Obama was briefed on the video aboard Air Force One on Tuesday night
as he returned to his Martha's Vineyard vacation and will be updated on further
developments, the White House said.

In an interview with the BBC, British Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond
acknowledged that the apparent executioner spoke with a British accent and said
the video seemed to be genuine. Hundreds of Britons are believed to have
traveled to Syria to fight in the country's civil war, including many who have
joined the Islamic State.

"We're absolutely aware that there are significant numbers of British nationals
involved in terrible crimes, probably in the commission of atrocities," Hammond
said. "Many of these people may seek at some point to return to the U.K., and
they would then pose a direct threat to our domestic security."

A European intelligence official said the British government was examining the
video, and the speech of the purported executioner, to compare it to the speech
of former Guantanamo Bay prisoners and other British residents believed to have
joined the Islamic State.

Both prisoners in the video are wearing orange shirts and pants, similar to
orange jumpsuits worn by detainees at the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba. A similar outfit, believed to be a jihadist symbol of the prison, was
worn by Nicholas Berg, an American businessman kidnapped in Iraq in 2004 whose
execution by an Islamic State precursor organization was recorded on video and
posted online.

Foley, 40, was working in Syria for the Boston-based news Web site Global­Post
when he disappeared on Thanksgiving in 2012.

In a statement Tuesday night on a Facebook page dedicated to his freedom,
Foley's mother appeared to accept that the video was authentic. "We have never
been prouder of our son Jim," Diane Foley wrote. "He gave his life trying to
expose the world to the suffering of the Syrian people.

"We implore the kidnappers to spare the lives of the remaining hostages. Like
Jim, they are innocents. They have no control over American government policy in
Iraq, Syria or anywhere in the world."

Praising James Foley as "an extraordinary son, brother, journalist and person,"
she asked that the family's privacy be respected.

Sotloff, a freelancer who worked for several news organizations, disappeared in
Syria in August 2013.

In addition to Foley and Sotloff, at least three other Americans are believed to
be captives in Syria, including Austin Tice, a freelance journalist whose
articles appeared in McClatchy publications and The Washington Post before his
disappearance in August 2012, according to a 2013 GlobalPost article. No one has
claimed to be holding them.

According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, at least 66 journalists, all
but 10 of them Syrian, have been killed covering the Syrian war. If the video is
authenticated, Foley would be the first American journalist known to be executed
since the conflict began in early 2011. The video evoked the 2002 taped
execution in Pakistan of Wall Street Journal correspondent Daniel Pearl by
al-Qaeda.

The Islamic State, an offshoot of al-Qaeda, is the most powerful among a number
of extremist organizations that have emerged during the Syrian civil war, which
began as a popular uprising against President Bashar al-Assad. Fighting against
both Assad and U.S.-backed rebels, the militants now control much of eastern
Syria and claim to have established an Islamic caliphate spanning Syria and
neighboring Iraq.

As the group has grown, it has merged with the group formerly known as al-Qaeda
in Iraq, under the leadership of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. According to U.S.
intelligence, it numbers in the thousands, including foreign fighters from
Europe and the United States.

In April, Islamic State fighters swept across the border into northern Iraq,
taking over the city of Mosul before moving southward to within 60 miles of
Baghdad. Extensive reports of executions, including beheadings and crucifixions,
have emerged from areas under the group's control.

This month, amid reports of stranded and besieged Iraqi minorities threatened
with execution, the militants advanced eastward toward Irbil, the capital of the
semiautonomous Kurdish region of Iraq.

On Aug. 7, Obama authorized U.S. airstrikes to rescue stranded minorities and
protect U.S. personnel and facilities in Irbil and Baghdad. On Monday, after a
total of 68 strikes from jets, bombers and drones, Obama announced that Iraqi
and Kurdish forces, with U.S. air support, had retaken a strategic dam north of
Mosul from the militants and that they had been pushed back from Irbil.

Within hours of that announcement, the Islamic State posted an online message
warning it would attack Americans "in any place" in response to the airstrikes.
"We will drown all of you in blood," it said.

The title of the video posted Tuesday was "A Message to America" and was
produced by the Islamic State's media arm, according to the Site Intelligence
Group, which monitors extremist Web sites.

A masked man dressed in black is shown standing in an unidentified desert
location beside a prisoner kneeling beside him with his hands behind his back.
"Obama authorized military operations against the Islamic State effectively
placing America upon a slippery slope towards a new war against Muslims," the
masked man says.

The video then shows a clip of Obama's Aug. 7 announcement, followed by a
statement from the prisoner.

"I call on my friends, family and loved ones to rise up against my real killers,
the U.S. government, for what will happen to me is only a result of their
complacent criminality," he says. He asks his parents not to accept "any meager
compensation from the same people who effectively hit the last nail in my coffin
with the recent aerial campaign in Iraq."

The prisoner also appeals to "my brother John, who is a member of the U.S. Air
Force," to "think about what you are doing."

"I wish I had more time," he says. "I wish I could have the hope for freedom to
see my family once again, but that ship has sailed. I guess all in all, I wish I
wasn't an American."

The masked man then identifies the prisoner as "James Wright Foley, an American
citizen of your country." He then reaches down with a large knife and begins the
apparent beheading of the prisoner; the screen fades to black and the next image
is of a body with a head placed upon its chest.

The masked man then appears with another prisoner, identified as Sotloff, in a
similar kneeling position.

Foley reported from some of the most dangerous recent crises and was imprisoned
for 44 days in Libya in 2011 by forces loyal to deposed leader Moammar Gaddafi.
According to Global­Post, two eyewitnesses saw his interception by a group of
armed men in a silver-colored van on a road near the town of Taftanaz in
northern Syria on Nov. 22, 2012.

Since then, Global­Post "has mounted an extensive international investigation .
. . to determine who kidnapped Foley and where he was being held," Global­Post
said in an article on its Web site late Tuesday.

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

adam.goldman@washpost.com

Adam Goldman, Julie Tate, and Dan Lamothe in Washington, Griff Witte in London
and Souad Mekhennet in Frankfurt, Germany, contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


