                             231 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 28, 2014 Friday 3:48 AM EST

Political party ends blockade of NATO routes in Pakistan

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 612 words


Pakistan party drops blockade of NATO supply routes

Decision caps three-month protest against U.S. drone strikes by charismatic
leader Imran Khan.

A major political party in Pakistan announced Thursday that it was ending its
blockade of NATO supply routes through the northern part of the country, capping
a three-month protest over U.S. drone strikes on Pakistani soil.

In a statement, the Movement for Justice party said it was halting the
demonstration in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province out of respect for the country's
judiciary. On Tuesday, the Peshawar High Court ruled that the protest, which
forced the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan to use other transport routes, was
unconstitutional.

The Movement for Justice party, led by former cricket star Imran Khan, began the
protest Nov. 24 after the United States conducted several drone strikes in
northwest Pakistan.

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had objected to the blockade, saying that only the
national government had the authority to take such action. Last year, Pakistan's
government signed an agreement with the United States allowing coalition forces
to use Pakistani highways through 2015.

But Khan used his authority as the chief political figure in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
to rally local opposition to the U.S. drone policy. Movement for Justice party
workers established 24-hour checkpoints on highways that cross the province and
searched for trucks carrying NATO supplies.

In early December, U.S. and coalition officials suspended use of those routes
because they feared for the  safety of drivers who haul NATO supplies in and out
of Afghanistan. The coalition, instead, diverted supplies through southern
Pakistan or through northern Afghanistan into Uzbekistan.

In recent weeks, however, the protests had thinned considerably. And U.S.
officials have repeatedly stressed that there was no major disruption to ongoing
efforts to withdraw most remaining international troops from Afghanistan by the
end of the year.

But the protests helped Khan elevate his profile and sparked considerable debate
inside Pakistan about U.S. drone strikes.

Early this month, The Washington Post reported that the Obama administration was
severely limiting the number of drone strikes inside Pakistan while Sharif's
government attempted to negotiate a peace agreement with the Pakistani Taliban.

There has been no U.S. drone strike inside Pakistan since December, which the
Movement for Justice party also cited as a factor in its decision to end its
protest.

The party "felt that the pressure of the blockade had already resulted in a
shift in the Obama administration's drone policy, and as a result drones had
been stopped for the present" time, the party, also known as Pakistan
Tehreek-e-Insaf, said in its statement.

But  Khan, who had been pushing for a peaceful solution to Pakistan's struggle
against Islamist militancy, also appears to be shifting his views about how best
to combat the Taliban.

Two weeks ago, after the Taliban executed 23 Pakistani soldiers, Sharif's
government broke off preliminary peace talks with the group. Pakistan's military
has launched airstrikes targeting Taliban militants and foreign fighters in
North Waziristan, near the border with Afghanistan.

The Pakistani army also has been preparing for a possible broader ground
offensive targeting Taliban hideouts.

On Monday, Khan's party issued a statement acknowledging that the peace process
was not likely to be successful. It also said it could support military action
against the Taliban as a last resort as long as Sharif could guarantee the
safety of civilians.

tim.craig@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


