                             2315 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       August 1, 2014 Friday 2:23 PM EST

No final peace without defanging Hamas

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 636 words


On Thursday, a three-day truce was announced in the Gaza war. It was quickly
broken by Hamas, which reportedly kidnapped an Israeli soldier. Once again, the
real world will not cooperate with Secretary of State John Kerry.

After getting smacked around by the U.S. and Israeli media, the Palestinian
Authority and Egypt, a chastened Kerry announced yesterday: "So starting later
this morning at 8:00 August 1st, the parties are expected to cease all offensive
military activities, and neither side will advance beyond its current locations.
They will stay where they are in place. Israel will be able to continue its
defensive operations for those tunnels that are behind its lines, and the
Palestinians will be able to receive food, medicine, and additional humanitarian
assistance, as well as to be able to tend to their wounded, bury their dead, be
able to in safe areas travel to their homes, and take advantage of the absence -
hopefully, hopefully - of violence for these 72 hours." Israel was permitted to
continue its critical work in destroying tunnels and rockets in territory in
which it operates. Within 24 hours, all that smart diplomacy was undone by
terrorists, making the argument that much stronger that any lasting truce is
dependent on Gaza's demilitarization.

Kerry, trying to strike a  "balance" between a terrorist group and our closest
ally in the Middle East, declared, "The parties, obviously, need to find a way
to address Israel's security concerns and to ensure that the people of Gaza can
live in safety and in dignity." It's good that he finally understands this. The
solution, however, to both problems is the same - demilitarize Gaza; remove
Hamas so that aid money can be used properly; reestablish a presence for the PA;
and audit and scrap the United Nations Relief and Work Agency in favor of an
impartial entity that does not harbor weapons and ensures that aid is properly
used and that children are not enlisted as tunnel diggers and human shields. The
PA and/or Egypt will need to take greater responsibility for Gaza, both for the
sake of continued peace and for the benefit of Gazans.

This comes at a time when even hyper-partisan Democrats such as Rep. Steve
Israel (N.Y.) publicly criticize Kerry. The Hill reports:

The congressman said he supported Kerry for defending Israel's right to survive
and protect its citizens, but took issue with suggestions that the country was
not doing enough to prevent civilian deaths in an interview with Bloomberg
Television's "Political Capital with Al Hunt" airing Friday.

He might next take on the White House spokesman who blithely announced that a
purported strike on a Gazan school was "totally unacceptable and totally
indefensible." That might have made sense if he was referring to Hamas, which
has embedded children in a war zone and, of course, started the conflict. Alas,
Josh Earnest was thrashing Israel, again. When Earnest says such things and
proclaims that Israel must do more to protect civilians, someone should ask him
what exactly he suggests. What military expertise could he lend to the situation
that would allow Israel to defend itself and its people from war criminals using
civilians to accomplish their aims? Does the president, who has experienced some
collateral damage of his own in the use of drones, have any specific
recommendations to share? If not, they might consider focusing attention on
Hamas's war crimes, which would not only be a truthful exercise but also please
our Arab allies in the region who fear Iran-backed terrorists operating in their
countries.

The Obama administration's moral preening is galling, but ultimately irrelevant.
Israel in its persistence and ferocity has made clear the terms of a deal -
disarm Gaza, or the war continues. You see, that is how one "ends" war - by
winning it.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


