                             2397 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                    September 3, 2014 Wednesday 11:47 AM EST

Morning Bits

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 616 words


While President Obama stalls another American is slaughtered. House Foreign
Affairs chairman Rep. Ed Royce (Calif.): "I am disgusted by what appears to be
another horrendous killing of an American journalist at the hands of ISIS.  My
thoughts and prayers are with Steven Sotloff's family.  Sadly, ISIS is bringing
this barbarity across the region - beheading and crucifying those who don't
share their dark ideology.  The threat from this group seems to grow by the day.

  Working with key allies, the United States needs to be acting urgently to arm
the Kurds on the ground who are fighting them, and targeting ISIS from the air
with drone strikes."

If you want another president to delay and deflect calls for U.S. action, Sen.
Rand Paul (R-Ky.) is your man: "Writing with hindsight in the royal third
person, Paul warned, 'we would caution that arming the Islamic rebels in Syria
created a haven for the Islamic State.'  With his trademark use of mendacity and
false choices, Paul added: 'We should realize that the interventionists are
calling for Islamic rebels to win in Syria and for the same Islamic rebels to
lose in Iraq.' Actually, those who argued for doing something in Syria wanted to
arm secular rebels, not Islamists.  The idea was these non-Islamist rebels could
confront Assad-who has much American blood on his hands-and also keep the
jihadists out.  This fact is something Paul must have known from his position on
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, but chose to forget in this instance.
But more telling is Paul's belief that America is somehow to blame for the
creation of the Islamic State despite having done next to nothing in Syria and
withdrawing from Iraq." Read the whole thing.

Oops, he's changed. Now no more idling while the Middle East burns. "Rand Paul
Supports U.S. War in Middle East to Destroy ISIS" Everyone is a Neocon now. He
and Hillary Clinton are a matched set - give the base whatever it wants.

Even on something relatively simple, Obama defers acting. Where is the State
Department and the White House on this? "More than 80 House lawmakers are
pushing to crack down on rising anti-Semitism across the globe following a sharp
spike in violent attacks on Jews in the wake of Israel's most recent conflict
with Gaza. The bipartisan resolution presents 'clear evidence' that
anti-Semitism is on the rise around the globe and specifically targets Turkish
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan for fostering anti-Semitism." Yes, Erdogan was
Obama's BFF in the first term.

Why is it that he can't get off the dime? "Following the release of a video
purportedly showing the beheading of American journalist Steven Sotloff, Fox
News chief Washington correspondent James Rosen asked State Department Press
Secretary Jen Psaki whether Obama administration would recognize the U.S. was at
war with ISIS, given they are clearly at war with us." No comprehensible answer
was provided.

The whole sordid mess lingers on. "Jenny Sanford is demanding her ex-husband,
Congressman Mark Sanford undergo psychiatric evaluations and complete both an
anger management program and a parenting program as part of their ongoing
divorce proceedings." Good grief.

Kicking the can down the road to avoid an even worse midterm election.
"President Obama may not move on executive actions for immigration reform this
summer, the White House conceded on Tuesday. 'It's hard for me to at least at
this point draw any clear conclusions about what the president's timing will
be,' White House press secretary Josh Earnest said. 'There is the chance that it
could be before the end of the summer. There is the chance that it could be
after the summer.'" Why does he even bother with a "briefing"?

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


