                             232 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       April 15, 2014 Tuesday 2:35 AM EST

Google acquires maker of drones

BYLINE: Hayley Tsukayama

SECTION: A section; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 345 words


Google said Monday that it has bought drone manufacturer Titan Aerospace,
ramping up its efforts to connect parts of the world that do not have Internet
access.

The tech giant said the drones will augment its efforts to use giant helium
balloons armed with networking equipment to bring Internet connectivity to
remote places.

"Titan Aerospace and Google share a profound optimism about the potential for
technology to improve the world," the company said in a statement that was also
posted to Titan Aerospace's Web site. "It's still early days, but atmospheric
satellites could help bring Internet access to millions of people, and help
solve other problems, including disaster relief and environmental damage like
deforestation."

Google declined to disclose an acquisition price.

Google is not the only tech company looking to get users in parts of the world
currently off the network connected to the Web; Facebook has also said it will
employ drones to fix that problem. For both companies, the efforts could pay off
in millions of new customers.

Some of the drones built by Titan Aerospace will be able to stay in the air for
up to five years without refueling or landing, according to the company's Web
site. The drones are in development and, the company has said, are on track to
begin launching in 2015. The two-year-old company has 20 employees, who are
expected to stay as part of the deal.

Media reports had previously indicated that Titan Aerospace, which is based in
New Mexico, was being courted by Facebook. Instead, Facebook announced last
month that it had bought a British drone maker, Ascenta. The social network
plans to use the drones to provide Web access to "the next 5 billion" people.

About two-thirds of the world's population is not connected to the Internet.
Amazon.com also has expressed interest in developing drones - though those would
fly closer to home, as delivery vehicles.

(Amazon.com chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos is the owner of The Washington
Post.)

hayley.tsukayama@washpost.com

Excerpted from www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


