                             235 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 24, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thousands in Pakistan Protest American Drone Strikes

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD and IHSANULLAH TIPU MEHSUD; Salman Masood reported from
Islamabad, and Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud from Peshawar, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 393 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Thousands of people gathered Saturday in the northwestern
city Peshawar to protest American drone strikes inside Pakistani territory and
vowed to stop NATO supply trucks unless the attacks stopped.

The protest rally was organized by Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, the political party
of the opposition leader Imran Khan, an outspoken critic of American drone
strikes and the Pakistani military's presence in the country's border areas,
where Taliban and Al Qaeda militants have long found a haven.

Addressing 10,000 to 13,000 flag-waving party workers and supporters from two
allied political parties, Mr. Khan accused the United States of sabotaging peace
talks with the Taliban. ''There can be no peace unless drones are stopped,'' he
said.

Pakistani politicians denounce the attacks as a violation of the country's
sovereignty. Pakistani officials have regularly condemned the strikes in public
while, in the past, endorsing them in private. But increasingly the drone
campaign has strained relations between Pakistan and the United States.

The opposition against the American drone strikes reached its loudest pitch on
Nov. 1, when a missile strike killed Hakimullah Mehsud, the leader of the
Pakistani Taliban.

Mr. Khan and Nisar Ali Khan, the country's interior minister, contended that the
government had been about to enter into peace talks with the insurgents and that
the killing had jeopardized the nascent peace process.

On Saturday, Mr. Khan challenged Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to stand up to the
United States and vowed to press Washington to change its policy. ''We will put
pressure on America, and our protest will continue if drone attacks are not
stopped,'' he said.

Still, the protest on Saturday was largely symbolic. NATO trucks do not operate
on weekends.

Shireen Mazari, an official in Mr. Khan's party, said workers would begin
stopping the trucks on Sunday in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province. If they do,
supplies will continue through another route in Baluchistan Province.

A spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban praised the protest, but Pervaiz Rashid,
the Pakistani information minister, called it a farce.

At a market near the protest, some merchants said political leaders should focus
on economic issues. ''The provincial government has done nothing so far for the
welfare of common people,'' said Ajmal Khan, a shopkeeper.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/24/world/asia/in-pakistan-rally-protests-
drone-strikes.html

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


