                             2355 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 14, 2014 Thursday 10:27 AM EST

Required reading on race, Michael Brown and Ferguson, Mo.

BYLINE: Soraya Nadia McDonald

LENGTH: 892 words


In a short time, there have been a number of high-profile deaths at the hands of
police officers that, for many African Americans, have raised serious questions
about the nature of American law enforcement.

On July 17, there was Eric Garner, whose death was ruled a homicide after a
police officer put him in a chokehold. On Aug. 5, there was John Crawford, the
man police gunned down in a Wal-Mart while he was holding a BB and pellet gun
that was store merchandise. And Saturday, Michael Brown was killed by a police
officer in Ferguson, Mo. His body lay in the street for four and a half hours
while neighbors and family watched over his corpse.

To say there is an unease with the frequency of these incidents is a gross
understatement; they are what prompted the editor of the Web site Very Smart
Brothas to ask its contributors, "How safe do you feel in America?" Before the
dismay-and-outrage cycle for one killing is completed, another has already taken
place. The Atlanta Daily World reported Tuesday that two married white police
officers are in custody after shooting and killing their daughter's unarmed
black boyfriend. From Twitter to Facebook to Tumblr, it's become de rigueur to
see the oft-quoted James Baldwin aphorism: "To be black and conscious in America
is to be in a constant state of rage."

The pieces below, which we've excerpted, have eloquently illustrated what it
means to be black in America when a killing like that of Michael Brown occurs.
They chronicle the thoughts and fears that run through many minds - from Stacia
L. Brown's open letter to her 4-year-old daughter to Greg Howard's assertion
that America is not for black people. And they offer perspective as journalists
are jailed and tear gas is in the air.

The boys who live are so scarred. I have looked inside more than a few; they are
hiding bullets in each quadrant of heart and brain. There are shells lodged in
their arteries. Memory, not metal, ticks within them. When they laugh you can
hear it rattling like real tin. One false move and their minds or their wills or
their ability to feel at all will be gone.

Stacia L. Brown is the founder of Beyond Baby Mamas and a community engagement
fellow for Colorlines. She has also guest-blogged for Act Four.

The truth is that you've read this story so often that the race-tinged death
story has become a genre itself, the details plugged into a grim template of
social conflict. The genre is defined by its tendency toward an unsatisfactory
resolution of the central problems. Two years ago, I visited St. Louis to give a
talk at a museum. My visit fell in the wake of a rally in which hundreds of
local residents turned out to demand an arrest in [Trayvon] Martin's death.
(Brown's family has now retained Benjamin Crump, the attorney who represented
Martin's family.) Martin was killed nearly a thousand miles away, but when I
spoke to people about the rally they conveyed the sense that what had happened
to him could happen anywhere in the country, even in their own back yards. For
those people in Ferguson pressed against the yellow police tape separating them
from Brown's remains, the overwhelming sentiment is that it already has.

Jelani Cobb is an associate professor of history and director of the Institute
for African American Studies at the University of Connecticut. He also
contributes to the New Yorker.

It seems far easier to focus on the few looters who have reacted unproductively
to this tragedy than to focus on the killing of Michael Brown. Perhaps looting
seems like a thing we can control. I refuse. I refuse to condemn the folks
engaged in these acts, because I respect black rage. I respect black people's
right to cry out, shout and be mad as hell that another one of our kids is dead
at the hands of the police. Moreover I refuse the lie that the opportunism of a
few in any way justifies or excuses the murderous opportunism undertaken by this
as yet anonymous officer. ...

Brittney Cooper is a professor of women's and gender studies and Africana
studies at Rutgers University. She is also a contributor to Salon and a
co-founder of the Crunk Feminist Collective.

Officers have tanks now. They have drones. They have automatic rifles, and
planes, and helicopters, and they go through military-style boot camp training.
It's a constant complaint from what remains of this country's civil liberties
caucus. Just this last June, the ACLU issued a report on how police departments
now possess arsenals in need of a use. Few paid attention, as usually happens.

Greg Howard is a writer for Deadspin.

I contemplated whether our parents and grandparents experienced these types of
moments, this numbness in the face of a seemingly insurmountable force. Assuming
they must have, the only solace I've found is in knowing that despite what must
have looked like a journey into an even darker night, they pressed on. They
fought and prayed until things changed. And this gives me a resolve; reminding
me that I need to work through the numbness and press through that feeling of
helplessness because, well, I have no other choice. I need to do this. There's
work to be done.

Ryan Sides is a contributor for Very Smart Brothas, Ebony and Mused. He also
blogs at The Impeccable Life.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


