                             2391 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 28, 2014 Thursday 4:07 PM EST

Flying cars: Are they coming? Yes. Do we need them? No.

BYLINE: Matt McFarland

LENGTH: 376 words


Outside Boston, a team boasting nine MIT degrees wants to end your terrible
commute. There's no sitting in traffic when you can hit a button, take off
vertically and fly straight to your destination.

Ahh yes, the dream of the Jetsons realized.

Eager investors have poured $10 million into Terrafugia, which thinks it will
improve human freedom thanks to flying cars. The team's intentions appear very
good. They want to do something grand, as we are reminded:

The last generation went to the moon. Their parents started Hoover Dam before
they knew it was even possible to finish it. Why don't we do anything hard these
days?

There are actually quite a few people trying to get to Mars right now, and some
attempting to cure cancer. Others are even trying to cure diseases while in
space. But I digress.

Flying cars - which might generate drone-like excitement from the masses -
appear a misguided solution to humanity's hard problems of today. If flying cars
pass regulatory hurdles, sell at an affordable price and end the era of
congested roads, we will have made long commutes tolerable. Long commutes are
indeed a pain, but climate change is worse. Encouraging more commuters to burn
fuel in their flying cars isn't going to help. If long commutes lose their
drawbacks, we'll encourage more sprawl. Our best hope against climate change is
denser living, public transportation and walkable or bikeable commutes.

Let's check out the flying cars Terrafugia is building, shall we? Here's the
Transition, rumbling down a street with an awkwardness we haven't seen since the
.

The wings fold up for driving, or if you want to store the Transition in a
garage. The expected base price for it is $279,000, and it'll reportedly be
available in mid-2016. It cruises at 100 mph while aloft and burns five gallons
per hour while cruising. For flying car enthusiasts, one drawback is you need a
runway to take off.

The really exciting and appealing offering from Terrafugia is the TF-X, which
will have a top speed of 200 mph. It will take off like a helicopter, meaning
you won't need a runway in your backyard.

It's expected to take eight to 12 years to develop. With all that time, perhaps
we will all be able to realize that buying a flying car is the last thing we
need.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


