                             2348 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                      August 12, 2014 Tuesday 6:51 PM EST

Everyone suddenly remembers that Hillary Clinton is a foreign policy hawk

BYLINE: Paul Waldman

LENGTH: 651 words


There are few things the political press loves more than an intra-party
squabble, so it wasn't surprising that when Hillary Clinton gave an interview to
The Atlantic about foreign policy that offered something less than fulsome
support for everything Barack Obama has done, it got characterized as a stinging
rebuke. The Post's Chris Cillizza described her "slamming" Obama. The New York
Times said the "veneer of unity...shattered." "Hillary slams Obama for 'stupid'
foreign policy," said an absurdly misleading New York Post headline (she never
called anything Obama did "stupid").

If you actually read the interview, you'll see that Clinton actually didn't
"slam" Obama (even Jeffrey Goldberg, who conducted the interview, overstates the
disagreement in his report on it). She was careful not to explicitly criticize
the administration, even when she was articulating positions that differed from
what Barack Obama might believe. But there were clear indications that Clinton
will be staking out a more hawkish foreign policy than the president she served
as Secretary of State, on issues like Iran and Syria.

That isn't because of some cynical calculation, or because she wants to
"distance" herself from a president whose popularity is currently mediocre at
best. It's because that's what she sincerely believes. If people didn't have
such short memories, they wouldn't be surprised by it. Hillary Clinton has
always been a liberal on social and economic issues, but much more of a moderate
(or even a conservative) when it comes to foreign policy.

From the moment Clinton began forging her own distinct political identity in her
run for Senate in 2000, it was clear she was a hawk on foreign affairs and
defense, placing herself in the right-leaning half of the Democratic party. She
wasn't looking to slash military spending or avoid foreign interventions. Look
at how the National Journal ranked her on foreign affairs during her time in the
Senate (the NJ rankings are idiosyncratic, but they have the benefit of
examining foreign affairs distinct from other issues):

When Clinton ran for president in 2008, the primary issue distinction between
her and Barack Obama was that she had supported the Iraq War, while he had
opposed it. There was no issue that made more of a difference in the primaries.
Even as Secretary of State, while carrying out the President's policies, in
private she counseled more aggressive moves. As Michael Crowley wrote in
January, "As Secretary of State, Clinton backed a bold escalation of the
Afghanistan war. She pressed Obama to arm the Syrian rebels, and later endorsed
air strikes against the Assad regime. She backed intervention in Libya, and her
State Department helped enable Obama's expansion of lethal drone strikes. In
fact, Clinton may have been the administration's most reliable advocate for
military action."

As we move toward the campaign, it's likely that liberals are going to start
finding reasons to be displeased with Clinton on foreign policy. In the Atlantic
interview, for instance, they discuss the Gaza situation at some length, and she
practically sounds like a spokesperson for the Netanyahu government, putting all
the blame for the conflict and all the casualties squarely on Hamas, while
refusing repeated opportunities to say Israel has done anything wrong at all.

Over the next two years there will probably be more situations in which Clinton
winds up to the right of the median Democratic voter. That would be more of a
political problem if she had a strong primary opponent positioned to her left
who could provide a vehicle for whatever dissatisfaction the Democratic base
might be feeling. But at the moment, there is no such opponent. Her dominance of
the field may give her more latitude on foreign affairs - not to move to the
right, but to be where she always was. Neither Democrats nor anyone else can say
they didn't see it coming.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


