                             2326 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 2:52 PM EST

Why it's so hard to help the Yazidi dying of thirst on the Iraqi mountaintop;
Children are dying of thirst. But getting them aid is more complicated than it
seems.

BYLINE: Robert Farley

LENGTH: 760 words


The plight of Yazidi refugees in the Sinjar mountains, hemmed in by Islamic
State forces and relying on dwindling supplies of food and water, has brought
renewed international attention to the war in Iraq. Some have suggested that the
United States or United Nations facilitate airdrops to the starving, dehydrated
refugees.

But this is more complicated than it seems.

The first and biggest problem involves securing the authorization of the Iraqi
government and the government of the Kurdish autonomous zone. This shouldn't be
such a problem, except that governments are often loath to admit that they can't
carry out basic humanitarian tasks within their own borders. The Iraqi
government has appealed for support, but reports suggest that it has yet to
establish a basic framework for cooperation, which would include access to
airbases, provision for foreign personnel and authorization to suppress Islamic
State air defenses in the area.

The problems don't end with authorization, however. The refugees do not appear
to control any airfields suitable for the landing of heavy transport aircraft.
Transporting material without the benefit of a landing strip is difficult and
time consuming. The same factors that make it difficult to bomb guerillas in
mountains make it difficult to supply refugees. The rugged terrain makes it hard
to put deliveries precisely where they need to be. In mountainous terrain,
altitudes can differ dramatically across a few hundred meters, making it a
struggle for refugees to find the supplies destined for them unless the drops
are precise. This requires good technology and excellent piloting skills.

Unless the drops are very careful, militants might end up with the food and
water. That's not such a disaster, except that groups searching for aid packages
can come into contact with armed militants searching for the same thing. The
Pentagon has worked hard over the past decade to develop a system that allows
precision delivery of large amounts of material, but the system remains geared
toward getting supplies to experienced soldiers, not to groups of untrained
civilians.

Moreover, airdrops of food, and especially water, are time- and
resource-intensive. One off-the-cuff analysis suggested that 24 C-130 transport
aircraft flying round trips every day would be necessary to keep the Yazidi
supplied with water. Iraqi capacity is limited by the lack of available aircraft
and by the need to devote resources to areas in direct combat. Iraq has a
handful of C-130s, and a handful of smaller Antonov An-32s, but these aren't
nearly enough to meet the needs of such a large population, even under the best
of circumstances. Thus, any operation would require the deployment of American,
Turkish, or NATO transport aircraft to the area.

The ability of Iraqi or U.S. aircraft to operate safely is also in question. The
Islamic State has demonstrated the capability to shoot down aircraft, and if the
Yazidi are closely hemmed in, then relief aircraft could prove easy targets for
Islamic State missiles. The United States would quite likely require
authorization to launch SEAD (suppression of enemy air defense) attacks against
militant positions suspected of having surface-to-air missiles.

What about unmanned aerial vehicles? Our current ability to deliver supplies by
UAV is sharply limited. Most UAVs lack the capacity to deliver more than trivial
loads, and only a very few are sufficiently large and robust for consistent
transport service. Moreover, UAVs are even more vulnerable to ground fire than
manned aircraft

Some people are crowdsourcing solutions to these problems. U.S. Air Force Maj.
Mark Jacobsen has been working on a project to develop a swarm of small, cheap
UAVs that could deliver humanitarian aid into conflict zones. So cheap that they
aren't worth shooting down, the drones would also be simple enough for
relatively inexperienced maintainers (with some expert advice) to load, launch
and target effectively. However, the system cannot as of yet deliver the
magnitude of supplies needed by the Yazidi.

Delivering supplies to the Yazidi isn't impossible, but it does require a degree
of effort and coordination that we haven't yet seen in the regional response to
the Islamic State. Even the limited efforts undertaken thus far can save some
lives, but the best chance to resolve this crisis is probably with a Kurdish
ground offensive that opens up a corridor for supply. Supporting such an advance
with air power, either Iraqi or other, is probably less demanding than a
sustained resupply operation.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


