                             2392 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 1:33 AM EST

A thriller writer's challenge: Make U.S. policy in Africa into a page turner;
Todd Moss's new book draws on his experience in the State Dept. to make
interagency squabbles thrilling.

BYLINE: Richard Leiby

LENGTH: 1404 words


As he began writing his third book on U.S.-Africa policy and development, Todd
Moss, a former State Department official, realized something. It would be
boring. Just another text for the shelves of foreign-policy wonks, PhDs and
think tank denizens like himself.

"I decided, 'Let me try a novel,' " Moss recalls. "I did it for fun. . . . I
really did it with very low expectations."

After three years, Moss, 44, birthed "The Golden Hour," a thriller partly
informed by his 18 months in the George W. Bush administration as the deputy
assistant secretary of state and chief U.S. diplomat in West Africa. Moss packed
his novel with episodes of bureaucratic squabbling among the CIA, the Department
of Defense and various fiefs within the State Department.

Thrilled yet?

But Moss also had the good narrative sense to throw in rampaging Islamic
radicals, a military coup in Mali (a vital U.S. counterterrorism ally) and a
damsel in distress - specifically a U.S. senator's daughter kidnapped from her
Mali posting as a Peace Corps volunteer. The interagency intrigues actually end
up heightening the stakes as the clock ticks down.

"It is just about impossible to stop reading this book," raved best-selling
thriller writer Douglas Preston, one of the titans of the genre who blurbed the
novel, which comes out Thursday.

His timing as an author was exquisite: Moss was able to get the manuscript in
front of a receptive agent who read it in the spring of 2013, while following TV
reports of French troops battling jihadis in northern Mali. The French went in
to restore stability in their former colony after Mali's military toppled the
country's democratic government in 2012.

The fabled city of Timbuktu also reentered the public consciousness, coming
under the control of Islamist extremists who destroyed ancient shrines and
libraries.

"Fiction became true," says Moss, a modest sort who still marvels at the
coincidences. "For my book I picked Timbuktu deliberately. It's like the place
everybody's heard of, even if they don't know where it is or if it's real."

Moss's fiction debut also arrives at a propitious time for writers who plot
their espionage and action stories in Africa. "Right now, books set in Africa
are hot," says Neil Nyren, editor in chief of G.P. Putnam's Sons, and a man with
a legendary reputation for cultivating thriller writers.

Besides "The Golden Hour," Putnam's has recently issued three other action
novels set in Africa: Tom Young's "Sand and Fire" (Libya), Matthew Palmer's "The
American Mission" (Congo), and Alex Berenson's "The Night Ranger" (Somalia).

The hooks into the public imagination come from the headlines: Somali pirates,
assorted terrorists and radical Islamists, including Boko Haram, al-Shabab and
al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.

"It feels like mass chaos, which makes fertile territory for thrillers,'' say
Nyren, who is Moss's editor.

"He's tapping into the way we've gotten absolutely transfixed by the war on
terrorism," says Chester Crocker, who oversaw African diplomacy in the Reagan
administration and has known Moss for a decade.

Moss put it in marketing terms: "Africa is sort of sexy now."

More often, though, he sounds like a policy analyst, a sharp and serious one.
You can imagine him briefing the nation's topmost leaders and impressing them.
But he has a welcoming, unshowy demeanor that complements his youthful looks.

We meet at the Willard Intercontinental,  a favorite hotel, he notes, among
African leaders. "Imagine how many shady deals were negotiated here with
businessmen and lobbyists," he muses.

But for Moss, the continent's notorious corruption and new terrorist scourge is
just one side of the story. Now, he says, Africa doesn't want handouts, it wants
private investment, and it wants be a U.S. security partner.

For nearly his entire adult life, Moss has immersed himself in the continent's
cultures, struggles and successes, beginning with a stint living with a family
in Harare, Zimbabwe, as a Tufts student in 1990.

In the early '90s, he and his future wife, Donna, spent eight months
backpacking, hitchhiking and traveling by bus and train through Botswana,
Zambia, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania - including, he says, a 52-hour train
journey.

Moss ultimately became a doctorate-holding expert in decidedly unsexy topics
such as debt restructuring, capital markets and finance. Today, as a senior
fellow and chief operating officer at the Washington-based Center for Global
Development, he promotes programs to spur African economic growth.

His academic works, with such titles as "African Development: Making Sense of
the Issues and Actors," would no doubt seem impenetrable to laymen. But Moss's
colleagues in the field laud his nonfiction writing as direct and clear - and
were not surprised that he pulled off an accessible novel.

'The Golden Hour" pivots on a permutation of the lifesaving approach that aims
to get a trauma victim treatment within 60 minutes. Moss learned its medical
utility as an emergency medical technician and ambulance driver in Boston during
college in 1989 to 1990.

The book's hero, Judd Ryker, an official in charge of the State Department's
"crisis reaction unit," applies the principle to diplomatic response: The faster
the United States acts, the more likely a coup can be reversed, he believes.
This propels the hero from his family vacation on the Outer Banks to Bamako, the
capital of Mali, and eventually to Timbuktu.

Moss gained his experience in diplomatic triage during a 2008 coup in
Mauritania, where he was dispatched by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to
express the U.S. government's severe displeasure to a military general who had
overthrown the elected government. At the time, Moss called the coup by Gen.
Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz "illegal and illegitimate" and warned that the United
States would pull its military support if Aziz did not step down.

But the junta leader stayed in power and later won what Moss calls a "rigged"
election to become president. Last month, Abdel Aziz was sworn in for a second
term in another disputed election.

Moss sees that as a classic example of the United States tolerating dictators
and unreliable allies for the sake of expediency: Mauritania remains a U.S.
counterterrorism partner that allows the United States to situate facilities
there. Drones also fly over its territory from Burkina Faso, where the United
States has established a spy-plane base.

"Anyone wonder why few people take US seriously on democracy?" Moss tweeted
during the African leaders summit here this summer, over a photo of himself
trying to "talk down" Aziz in 2008, juxtaposed with one of Secretary of State
John F. Kerry opening the summit with the general.

"I thought it was funny," Moss says with a small chuckle, one of few that he
allows himself in the interview.

As much as the opaque, grasping nature of African players comes under
examination in "The Golden Hour," so do Washington's jumbled agendas - "how
crazy it is, the sausage machine in the U.S. government," he says. "That
interagency mess was one of the stories that I thought was interesting to
people."

You could be forgiven if you think the character who has to cut through all the
lies, egos and infighting, one Judd Ryker, is based on a certain former State
Department official who parachuted into the Mauritanian crisis.

"There is no character based on a real person," the author demurs. "They are all
drawn from people I know."

But still: Just like Ryker, Moss is foreign policy scholar who found himself
abruptly thrust into a top government post. Moss was offered his State job after
just one meeting, and so,  too, was our hero. Both are family men who fret about
the job's toll on their spouses and kids. (Moss and his wife, Donna Moss, a
writer, live in Maryland with their three sons, ages 15, 13 and 9.)

He has already finished his second novel, also set in Africa, to be published
next year.  Judd Ryker is again the protagonist. Moss recently signed on with
Putnam's and Nyren to write two more books in the Ryker series.

Producers have expressed interest in "The Golden Hour" although no option has
been sold. "I can see it really as a kind of 'Homeland' crossed with 'West
Wing'-type TV series," Moss says.

Challenge to Hollywood: Make the innermost warrens of the State Department throb
with excitement. Make sexy the dim hallways of the Truman Building. Sounds like
another job for Judd Ryker.

richard.leiby@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


