                             239 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

At Air Force base in Nevada, drones land, protesters chant

BYLINE: Dan Zak

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: INDIAN SPRINGS, NEV.


INDIAN SPRINGS, Nev. - The peace walkers arrived sweaty and gross, feet
blistered and knees creaking, and Phil was waiting for them. Phil had his signs
up, his American flags out, his star-spangled cap on. He extended a tight-fisted
thumbs-up toward the cars exiting Creech Air Force Base. A couple hundred yards
away, every couple of minutes, a drone glided earthward with a baleful elegance.

Predator. Reaper. Reaper. Predator.

"Thanks for keeping us safe," Phil said toward the driver of a white Ford F-150.
If the driver had looked to the right, he or she would've seen Phil in his
tinted glasses standing in front of homemade signs with red and blue lettering,
offering drive-through reassurance:

HOME OF THE FREE

BECAUSE OF YOU

If the driver looked straight, he or she would've seen two dozen peace walkers,
on mile 40 of their 56-mile journey to protest nuclear weapons and armed RPA
(remotely piloted aircraft, or drones). The driver would've seen signs that
said:

DRONES:

STATE-SPONSORED

TERRORISM

At quitting time at Creech last week, a line of cars snaked through the desert
from an artificial oasis of squat, beige buildings near the brown foothills of
the mountains of the Cactus Range. Phil knew the peace walkers would be at the
base with their signs and accusatory chants, so he would be there with his words
of thanks and encouragement - until some of the peace walkers started to meander
across Route 95 to his territory, on a gravelly median between the highway and
the base's entrance. Phil didn't like this.

"Two opposing views aren't supposed to intermingle," he said as they came over
with drums and paper cranes. A couple minutes later a voice came from the
bullhorn of a nearby police vehicle.

"Hey guys, the man with the flag was there," the unseen officer said. "Plenty of
room. Spread out."

The man with the flag is nearly 70. Phil Frank served six years in the Navy, he
says, and retired from construction to live here in Indian Springs, population
900-something, a 40-minute drive north of Vegas. There's one casino, with its
$6.99 steak-and-eggs special, and one motel, whose rooms are $19.99 a night, and
one Air Force base, from which RPA are piloted overseas. Some of these RPA are
armed with Hellfire missiles. Some of these missiles reportedly kill confirmed
or suspected terrorists. Some of these missiles reportedly kill civilians.

People who object to the U.S. drone policy show up at Creech now and then. When
Code Pink started trotting out fabricated child-sized coffins several years ago,
Phil began his occasional vigil to offer a counterweight.

"It's a show of support for our military men and women, for the sacrifices they
make to help our country be a safer country," Phil said later that evening in
the sleepy casino restaurant, which is just down the road from a nuclear test
site, Area 51 and a pagan-wiccan peace temple - dedicated to an Egyptian goddess
of fertility - where the peace walkers were staying for two nights.

It's a strange stretch of Nevada in a strange stretch of America.

The next morning at 6:30, when the walkers reached Creech to face the commuters,
Phil was already there with his signs, his flag, his camping chair.

We are a part of you, the activists said to him.

"You are not a part of me at all," Phil replied.

Soon surrounded by protestors, the man with the flag huffed and paced and shook
his head. The sun vaulted up from the mountains. Cars streamed into the base
from the highway. The groomed young airmen behind the wheel ignored the
menagerie on the median. Phil traded terse words with protesters but had a
friendly chat with their supporter Johnnie Bobb of the Western Shoshone National
Council. The Western Shoshone tribe laid first claim to much of the surrounding
land.

Just before 8 a.m., nine of the peace walkers crossed the line onto base
property to deliver their war crimes indictment and demand the arrest of Col.
Jim Cluff, commander of air combat units at Creech. They were arrested for
trespassing on federal property but were released in time to rejoin the protest
at quitting time Wednesday.

For the evening commute, Phil had brought his wife, his daughter and his
grandson - three generations waving little flags at departing cars and listening
to Kris Kristofferson twang "Why Me?" on a satellite radio.

"Maybe, Lord, I can show someone else / What I go through myself / On my way
back to You."

The peace walkers unfurled a quilted banner with the names and ages of children
killed by drone strikes, as tallied by the London-based Bureau of Investigative
Journalism's "Covert Drone War" project.

Ayeesha, 3; Abdul, 17; Shafiq, 2.

And out came the cars, some of which presumably contained drone pilots.

"We all have the same idea, just a different philosophy of how to get there,"
Phil said to a Code Pink member named Toby Blome as she passed his set-up.

"Maybe we can talk about that," Toby said.

"Not here," Phil said.

At dusk, after the peace walkers had eaten dinner on the temple grounds, a
visitor arrived in his SUV, with its bumper stickers that say "Don't Forget
Benghazi" and "9-11-01 Never Forget."

Phil took a seat next to one of the leaders of the walk, a man named Marcus
Pegasus, who was wearing a red mystical tunic and a hairstyle that's somewhere
between hippie and punk rocker. Over the course of an hour, Phil and the
activists faded into silhouettes. They talked about the philosophy of
nonviolence, the conundrum of conflict, the guiding principle of religion.

Nearby cottonwood trees murmured in the night breeze as Phil told a story about
a break-in at his home several years ago. He described how the intruder attacked
him. How he readied his gun to shoot the intruder if he didn't relent. How he
broke out in a cold sweat when the intruder let go of him. How he praised God
that he didn't have to do the unthinkable.

"Would it have been better to have a robot then?" Marcus asked. "To have a robot
kill someone who might kill you?"

"Absolutely," Phil said.

"So I understand why you think technology can save us," Marcus said. "You'd save
yourself the suffering of having killed someone."

The conversation meandered and doubled back and tied itself in knots, eventually
arriving at a cordial "good night" instead of a clean resolution.

"I just came by," Phil said as he left, "to let you know who I am."

dan.zak@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


