                             2349 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 12, 2014 Tuesday 7:40 PM EST

'The Giver' movie review: Lois Lowry's award-winning novel comes to life;
The hit YA novel 'The Giver' comes to the big screen in a tasteful production
directed by Phillip Noyce.

BYLINE: Ann Hornaday

LENGTH: 1087 words


"The Giver," an adaptation of Lois Lowry's Newbery Medal-winning young adult
novel, may seem like it's riding on the coattails of such dystopian action hits
as "The Hunger Games" and "Divergent." But in reality, Lowry's book may qualify
as the ur-text of the form, a slim, futuristic allegory that, since it was
published in 1993, has sold more than 10 million copies.

In its own way, the movie version - handsomely directed by Phillip Noyce and
featuring an appealing, sure-footed cast of emerging and veteran actors - aptly
reflects "The Giver's" pride of place as the one that started it all, or at
least the latest wave. Ironically, it wasn't until its imitators became box
office bonanzas that "The Giver" was seen potentially profitable enough to
produce for the big screen. Far less noisy and graphically violent than those
films, this mournful coming-of-age tale feels like their more subdued and
introspective older sibling, even as it trafficks in the self-dramatizing
emotionalism and simplistic philosophizing that are so recognizably symptomatic
of the YA genre.

Set in an indeterminate future long after a vaguely drawn catastrophe called The
Ruin, "The Giver" chronicles the story of Jonas (Brenton Thwaites), a teenager
who has grown up in the Communities, where the all-seeing, all-hearing Council
of Elders controls everything from domestic arrangements and careers to climate
and sexual "stirrings," which are carefully regulated by way of daily morning
injections.

Jonas's world, which he navigates with his best friends, Fiona (the stunning
Israeli actress Odeya Rush) and Asher (Cameron Monaghan), is one in which all
conflict, hatred and distinction has been erased by cultural values of
conformity and obedience. This is a literally color-blind society, its
black-and-white contours reflecting not only the Elders' monotonously
authoritarian sensibility, but Lowry's own conveniently Manichean imagination,
in which emotions and empiricism are at constant zero-sum odds.

As "The Giver" begins, Jonas and his contemporaries are about to find out what
jobs they've been assigned by the chief Elder, played by Meryl Streep in a long
gray wig that recalls Holly Hunter's blunt-spoken separatist leader in the
series "Top of the Lake." It turns out that Jonas - who, unlike his friends and
family, is able to see color - has been chosen to be a Receiver of Memory,
meaning that he will soon learn all that happened before the world became the
reassuringly predictable and consistent bubble in which he grew up.

His guide in this endeavor is the title character of "The Giver," a bearded sage
living in an isolated mountaintop aerie played with shamanic gruffness by Jeff
Bridges. As it happens, Bridges himself was the prime engine in getting "The
Giver" made after a decades-long struggle, during which he intended that his
father, Lloyd, play the part he ultimately took as his own. That commitment and
seriousness of purpose suffuse a production that will surely please the millions
of people who read "The Giver" in middle school, and for whom it became much
more than a good book and more like a potent talisman of their own emerging
notions of individuation, moral choice and transcendent self-sacrifice.

Although Jonas is only 12 in the book, in the filmed version of "The Giver" he
is 16 - and played by an Australian in his mid-20s, a digression from novelistic
detail that has already sent Lowry's partisans into howls of how-dare-they
distress. But Thwaites, who was recently seen as a handsome prince in
"Maleficent," acquits himself well in a role that makes the most of his sober,
Gary Cooper-esque good looks. Filmed in silvery tones of black and white, "The
Giver" gradually gives way to a color scheme that is lurid or muted, depending
on what experiences Jonas is accessing with the help of his grizzled mentor.

Although those memories will eventually send him on a genuine physical
ad­ven­ture, replete with a shattering revelation and high-stakes drone chase,
most of the film traces a young man's dawning awareness that, the ease and
peacefulness of his world notwithstanding, there's something frighteningly toxic
at its core. (One quibble with "The Giver" is that, at a sleek hour-and-a-half,
some of its most dramatically ripe scenes play too quickly and perfunctorily to
convey the impact they're having on Jonas; no sooner has he witnessed an
unspeakable horror than it swiftly disappears, filed away in his burgeoning
internal archive.)

Like its fellow YA movies - which with the current juggernaut of comic-book
adaptations represent the dominant culture in Hollywood - "The Giver"
perceptively caters to its teenaged fans' own cardinal desires and anxieties.
Messy feelings, youthful curiosity and unruly physical impulses are valorized
and elevated, in sharp contrast to the Elders' Stalinistic attempts at social
control. As a Receiver of Memory, and in one of the film's most obvious nods to
teenaged wish fulfillment, Jonas is given permission to ask questions, no matter
how rude, and to lie - and he never has to apologize.

Meanwhile, what he hears from parents and other authority figures is portrayed
as the stuff of dehumanizing soul-murder. "Precision of language!" Jonas's
mother scolds him when he shares his feelings one night over dinner. Mom, by the
way, is played by Katie Holmes in a suitably chilly performance as a
rule-obsessed judge, intimations of the actress's own recent brush with
Scientology hovering over her scenes like a teasing, troubling mist.

Jonas's father, equally skillfully portrayed by Alexander Skarsgard, features
prominently in "The Giver's" most disturbing sequence, in which Jonas witnesses
one of the grisly realities beneath the anodyne double-speak that he's now
beginning to question.

That double-speak, of course, recalls George Orwell at his most
anti-totalitarian, as well as Ray Bradbury's "Fahrenheit 451," which may be "The
Giver's" most direct ancestor. Like "The Fault in Our Stars" earlier this
summer, young people have once again been given their generation's version of a
message that, although not necessarily new, nevertheless may feel urgent and
uniquely timely to its core audience. "The Giver" has been made with deep
respect for that experience, and for the book that so powerfully predicted the
grim universe movie teenagers now inhabit - for worse and, in this case, for
better as well.

ann.hornaday@washpost.com

* * *

PG-13. At area theaters. Contains a mature thematic image and some sci-fi
action/violence. 94 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


