                             2308 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       July 31, 2014 Thursday 8:31 PM EST

Expand the GOP, but how?

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 815 words


There are a few competing theories about how to expand the appeal of the
Republican Party. Aside from radio talk show hosts and right-wing groups that
fundraise off calamities like the government shutdown, there is a general
consensus on the right that the party has to expand to create an electoral
majority if it is going to win back the White House. The question is how, and
who will be part of that new, larger coalition.

Reform conservatives see a center-right coalition of young people, working- and
middle-class voters who don't hate government but want it to function properly
and allow them to attain the American dream. They've realized that within
traditional conservatism there was a tradition of limited but vigorous
government. They know the liberal welfare state had neglected the poor and
dampened opportunities for everyone. They are prepared to take that message
wherever they go, seeing it as a more attractive proposition than minimalist
government or liberalism.

Others in the party, such as Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), see an increasingly
ethnically diverse electorate. They understand the party cannot offend these
people from the get-go with an anti-immigration agenda that consists of
uprooting and deporting millions of people. Immigration reform is a gateway
issue for the fastest-growing segment of electorate, so the strategy makes
electoral sense. Again, it is consistent with core conservative values. Despite
opponents' rhetoric, immigration reform, properly done, is pro-growth,
pro-opportunity and pro-law and order.

There are, of course, Republicans (e.g. Jeb Bush, Rubio) who subscribe to both
approaches, each of which can deliver some new voters.

Sen. Rand Paul, on the other hand, has another vision dictated by his
libertarian sentiments. He's going to lose many conservatives over his foreign
policy and social positions, so he must gain replacement voters plus, like other
Republicans, get even more new voters. He needs a different sort of Republican
coalition.

As Matt Bai put it, "Paul's chief vulnerability as a candidate, despite his
impressive showings in early and meaningless polls, is that, like his father
before him, he's associated with a more fringe kind of conservatism. He's the
guy who publicly doubted the constitutionality of the Civil Right Act. He's the
guy who thinks the federal government should get out of the governing business.
Paul needs to demystify himself a little, to show Republicans that he won't lead
the party off the electoral cliff on which it's already teetering. He needs to
reassure the less ideologically pure in his own party, just as Ronald Reagan
masterfully did in 1980, when a lot of conservatives worried that he was too
extreme for the rest of the country."

Paul therefore has picked up a set of discrete issues (National Security Agency
surveillance, drones, drug reform) and tried to pitch those issues to young,
African American and Hispanic audiences. He doesn't bother selling core
conservatism, in large part because that's not a message that is going to win
over new voters. (A libertarian agenda has flopped spectacularly in attracting
minority voters and women at the state and federal level.) He gets some credit
from the mainstream media and satisfies those in the party who think the only
problem with the GOP is that it doesn't show up in certain communities to ask
for votes.

To my mind, Paul's strategy is mathematically and philosophically flawed.
Pro-choice, pro-welfare state voters aren't going to buy his philosophy as a
whole. There will be plenty on the left catering to them on these issues and
willing to pitch an anti-defense, pro-drug legalization platform. In other
words, it's far from clear that a friendly reception results in new Republican
registrants, let alone GOP primary voters. They don't need an anti-abortion,
anti-government zealot to satisfy their opposition to robustly fighting the war
on terror or pot legalization.

The numbers simply don't add up when one considers the number of
strong-on-defense and social conservatives who will find candidates much more to
their liking than Paul. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.), Texas Gov. Rick Perry and former
Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee will scoop up these voters in batches, leaving
Rand Paul with the same core young white males who voted for his father plus the
hope that kids from U.C. Berkeley and Howard University are going to rush to
support him. It's a questionable proposition.

Whether Republicans can really broaden their appeal is open to debate, but they
won't do so by hiding their true beliefs. They should, however, show up as Rand
Paul has done - but then sell them on an agenda that is going to do more for
them than failed liberalism. That's the approach that worked successfully for
many Republican governors in blue and purple states, so there is some reason for
optimism. We'll be watching to see how they fair.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


