                             2341 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 11, 2014 Monday 11:32 AM EST

Iraq's political situation appears dire as prime minister fiercely digs in;
As U.S. airstrikes continue, the towns of Makhmour and Gweir are cleared of
Islamic State fighters.

BYLINE: Loveday Morris

LENGTH: 1489 words


BAGHDAD - Special forces teams and army tanks surrounded the Green Zone housing
Iraq's government as Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki fiercely clung to power
Sunday, taking the stability of the country to the brink at a moment when it is
already facing a lethal challenge from radical Islamist fighters.

In actions that had all the markings of a political coup, Maliki gave a defiant
late-night speech in Baghdad saying he would lodge a legal case against the
country's president, who has resisted naming him as the candidate for another
term as prime minister.

Tanks rumbled onto major bridges and roads in the capital as security forces
were put on high alert, with militiamen also patrolling Shiite neighborhoods.
The special forces teams surrounding the Green Zone were taking orders directly
from the prime minister, security officials said.

Maliki's critics blame him for overseeing the de facto fragmentation of the
country, with extremists from the Sunni-dominated Islamic State marauding
through territory in the north and west and threatening Baghdad. They say
Maliki, a Shiite, has persecuted and alienated members of the Sunni minority,
driving them into the arms of radical groups.

The United States began airstrikes in northern Iraq on Friday as the
al-Qaeda-inspired Islamic State threatened previously stable Kurdish territory,
sending thousands of minority Christians and Yazidis fleeing for their lives.

But President Obama has established limited goals in the air operation, linking
further assistance to the formation of a new government in Baghdad that is more
inclusive of the country's Sunnis.

The U.S. government indicated Sunday evening that it had broken with Maliki.
State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said in a statement that "the United
States fully supports President Fuad Masum in his role as guarantor of the Iraqi
Constitution. We reaffirm our support for a process to select a Prime Minister
who can represent the aspirations of the Iraqi people by building a national
consensus and governing in an inclusive manner. We reject any effort to achieve
outcomes through coercion or manipulation of the constitutional or judicial
process."

The latest crisis came on a day when Kurdish forces expelled Islamic State
extremists from two northern Iraqi towns, in the first signs of a turnaround for
the embattled Kurds after a week of stunning losses to the militants. Their
success came in the wake of U.S. airstrikes on the towns.

But the political standoff raised the prospect of deeper turmoil and potentially
new violence in Iraq, where Shiite militias that had battled U.S. troops during
the war have reestablished themselves in recent months.

Maliki's political rivals, the country's religious authorities and even parts of
his political bloc have tried unsuccessfully to persuade him to step aside. But
over his eight years in office, the prime minister has consolidated enormous
power in his hands. He is commander in chief of the armed forces, and he holds
the Defense and Interior ministry portfolios.

The prime minister's political bloc won the largest share of seats in April's
parliamentary elections, but not a majority. In his speech, he charged that
Iraq's president, Fouad Massoum, had violated the constitution by not asking
Maliki's political bloc to put forward its candidate before a deadline last
week.

"This act represented a coup against the constitution and the constitutional
process," Maliki said. Violation of the constitution could have serious and
dangerous consequences, he said, taking the political process into a "dark
tunnel."

Special forces also surrounded the presidential palace Sunday, in what appeared
to be an act of intimidation.

Maliki's surprise move came at the end of a day that had offered some hope for
parts of the country besieged by Islamic State warriors.

For the third day, U.S. jets and drones swooped over the militants, launching
five strikes near Irbil, the Kurdish capital, that damaged and destroyed the
group's vehicles and a mortar position, according to the U.S. military.

The airstrikes have given a morale boost to beleaguered Kurdish forces in the
semi-autonomous north. They have been battling Islamic State militants for two
months with outdated weapons, limited ammunition and no salaries. The Kurds'
losses in recent days have included the strategically important Mosul Dam and
ancient settlements inhabited by Christians and other minorities.

Still, the region's president, Massoud Barzani, warned Sunday that the
militants' firepower and determination should not be underestimated.

"We are not only fighting a terrorist group, we are fighting a terrorist state,"
he said. "We would never ask our friends to send their sons to fight on our
behalf; this is our war. What we are asking our friends to do is to provide
support and to cooperate with us in providing the necessary weapons."

The U.S. government relocated a "limited number" of staff members from its
consulate in Irbil to the southern Iraqi city of Basra and to the Jordanian
capital, Amman, the State Department said Sunday.

The move underscored the deterioration in the security situation in Irbil since
two months ago, when the United States relocated staffers from its embassy in
Baghdad to the north.

The Obama administration has said the airstrikes have a limited mission: to
protect U.S. military and diplomatic personnel in Irbil, to prevent the massacre
of religious minorities, and to safeguard critical infrastructure. On Sunday,
thousands of Yazidis, members of a tiny religious sect, fled a barren mountain
where they had been trapped for a week, surrounded by the extremist fighters.
Some Yazidis said the American airstrikes had helped their escape.

The Kurds' reconquest of the two northern towns, Makhmour and Gweir, about 30
miles southwest of Irbil, came two days after the towns were targeted by
American airstrikes.

Rudaw, a Kurdish television channel, showed live footage Sunday of security
forces advancing in Makhmour, where the Kurds had exchanged fire with the
extremists a day earlier. The Kurdish forces, known as pesh merga, crowded
around a government building in the town, where the region's flag was raised
once more.

The oil-rich district of Makhmour was a valuable target for the militants, who
have been pressing to seize resources to fund their self-proclaimed Islamist
state.

"It's thanks to the [American] strikes that we have been able to move forward,"
said Mahmood Haji, an official in the Kurdish Interior Ministry. The Kurdish
advances help shore up the first lines of defense for Irbil, he said.

An international effort to aid the Yazidis stranded on Mount Sinjar in the
country's northwest picked up steam Sunday. French Foreign Minister Laurent
Fabius visited Baghdad and Irbil to oversee the delivery of aid. Britain's air
force dropped tents and water filters overnight Saturday, joining the United
States in parachuting in supplies.

The U.S. military conducted a fourth airdrop of food and water for thousands of
Iraqis on Sunday night, U.S. Central Command said in a news release.

Followers of a secretive sect with roots in Zoroastrianism, the minority is
particularly vulnerable to the Sunni extremists, who have forced Yazidis to
convert or have executed them.

Thousands fled Sinjar when the Islamic State swept into the town a week ago, and
many have had little food or water since then.

Also Sunday, several prominent Republican lawmakers called for an escalation in
U.S. involvement in Iraq.

"We need to go on offense," Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) said on "Fox News
Sunday." "There is no force within the Mideast that can neutralize or contain or
destroy ISIS without at least American air power." The Islamic State was
formerly called the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS.

But Maliki's latest moves made it seem unlikely that the Obama administration
would change course anytime soon.

Maliki has made enemies across the political spectrum - even Iraq's Shiite
leaders have turned against him. The country's top Shiite cleric, Grand
Ayatollah Ali Sistani, has also repeatedly called for a new, inclusive
government, hinting that politicians should not "cling to their positions."

"Sistani is deeply concerned about the situation," said Sheik Haider al Taie,
one of the cleric's representatives.

Iran's ayatollahs came out in public support of Sistani, a sign that Iranian
support for Maliki has also slipped away. As the odds began to stack against the
prime minister, his party indicated that it was prepared to cut him loose last
month.

"There are self-serving people who are trying to get rid of him," said Kadhim
al-Sayadi, a parliamentarian close to the president. He said security forces had
been called out to prevent people from "taking advantage" of the situation.

loveday.morris@washpost.com

Mustafa Salim in Baghdad; Liz Sly in Fishkhabour, Iraq; Anne Gearan in Sydney;
and Hunter Schwarz in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


