                             2394 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 5:52 PM EST

Rand Paul's rotten summer;
The junior Kentucky senator's problems multiply.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 916 words


The only one who had a worse summer than Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) was Hillary
Clinton. Like Clinton, Paul's string of problems largely stem from a problematic
record and/or identification with an Obama-style foreign policy. His past
proposed budget eliminating aid to Israel (and everywhere else) tripped him up
in Iowa, where he was caught fleeing from a pro-immigration reform activist.
(More to the point, why was he palling around with Rep. Steve King, the Iowa
Republican regularly denounced for his bigoted remarks on Hispanics?) His
reaction of indifference to the rise of the Islamic State and assertion that we
have no dog in the fight for domination of Iraq put him at odds with virtually
every elected Republicans, and a great number of  Democrats. As his polls
decline relative to the GOP field, a number of questions about his potential
candidacy remain.

Does Rand Paul have a staff problem? Consider that he brought on the "Southern
Avenger" Jack Hunter to help write his book, defended his hiring of the
pro-Confederate former radio talk show jock and then had to part company with
him. While trying to assure conservatives he was a mainstream Republican on
foreign policy, he tapped for foreign policy advice Richard Burt, co-author of
the Global Zero plan, which features unilateral disarmament. His 2010 campaign
chief Jesse Benton, his father's former 2012 campaign director and expected 2016
campaign chief, was forced to resign from Sen. Mitch McConnell's (R-Ky.)
campaign over controversy swirling in an Iowa bribery scandal. (Also being
mentioned is another familiar face in the Paul family political operation,
Dmitri Kesari.)

Other aides have problems of their own. Longtime confidante Doug Stafford was
allegedly caught on tape directing funds from a 501c(4) group to political
candidates, part of a longstanding issued concerning the Right to Work
organization and affiliated groups. It is hard to find someone in his inner
circle who does not have a nose for trouble. (Rand Paul's communications chief
Brian Darling was forced to resign from former senator Mel Martinez's office in
2005 after being identified as the author of an objectionable memo on the Terry
Schiavo affair and denying his authorship.)

What is with the Paul organization? Whether bad luck, inadequate vetting or an
organizational culture in which aberrant behavior and eccentric views are the
norm, the Paul operation does not seem presidential-campaign ready. Perhaps the
personalities he attracts reflect the libertarian deviance of authority, which
is fine for a gadfly senator but problematic for someone seeking high office.
Ultimately, the responsibility for his staff rests with Rand Paul (and to some
extent his father).

Has Paul given up trying to convince voters he is a mainstream Republican on
national security? Rand Paul's team repeatedly promised a major foreign policy
speech, vowing to prove critics wrong about his views. But the strain between
posing as a mainstream conservative on national security and appealing to
hardcore libertarians (e.g., opposing drone attacks on American jihadists and
aggressive National Security Agency data-gathering, supporting zero troop
options in Iraq and Afghanistan, refusing to recognize U.S. national strategy
interests in Iraq and Syria, supporting reduced military spending and bases
around the world, denigrating critics of Russian President Vladimir Putin,
eliminating all foreign aid) may be too great. He recently announced the speech
would be off the record. His staff dutifully claim this is not a change in
plans, but speaking out of range of the media is both foolhardy (someone surely
will record it) and a sign of weakness. As foreign policy has grown in
importance for the 2016  presidential race, Paul's woes have mounted even before
a head-on attack from opponents.

The upshot of these factors plus his support for the ill-fated shutdown, which
is viewed by establishment Republicans as hugely problematic if not
disqualifying, are decreasing his ability to draw support from big donors and
moderate Republicans. In essence, he may wind up right where his father left off
- beloved by a cadre of staunch libertarian supporters but unable to put
together a big enough coalition to win. It is not merely big donors and
moderates who remain skeptical. Evangelical and other pro-Israel GOP voters, who
put Israel and the jihadist threat high on their list of priorities, will have
many alternatives whose support for Israel and commitment to fighting the
Islamic State is unquestioned. Why would an evangelical pro-Zionist take Paul
when Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) or Texas Gov. Rick Perry or former Arkansas governor
Mike Huckabee are on the ballot?

Paul has not made a definitive decision to run for president, but mounting
issues with his potential 2016 presidential campaign sharpen key questions for
him: If he is not able to change or invalidate Kentucky state law prohibiting
him from running for two offices, would he give up his chance for reelection for
the Senate? Or would he run for Senate in Kentucky and for president everywhere
else, sacrificing Kentucky's delegates for the nomination and potentially the
state's electoral votes in a general election?

Few expect Paul to give up his shot at the presidential nomination, no matter
the odds. The risk, however, is that he and his ideology will get rebuffed by
voters while he loses his perch in the Senate. At least he has a profession to
fall back on.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


