                             2323 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 6, 2014 Wednesday 9:51 PM EST

Watch: Rare videos that actually show Hamas firing rockets into Israel

BYLINE: Swati Sharma

LENGTH: 253 words


We have seen many videos of rockets falling from the sky into Israel. There has
been endless footage of Israeli forces in Gaza. Of Israelis watching airstrikes
hit the Gaza Strip.

What we rarely see is actual Hamas militants in action.

Now that many journalists have left the Gaza Strip and returned home, videos of
militants allegedly assembling rockets are surfacing at international news
outlets. One of India's largest broadcast news channels, NDTV, had this
exclusive from Gaza, filed after the journalist reached home in India:

The video allegedly shows Hamas militants assembling rockets under a tent, and
then dismantling it and setting up the rockets for remote detonation.

France 24 also had this video which claims to show Hamas militants.

Tylor Hicks, the New York Times' photographer who was in Gaza, spoke of the
difficulty of getting Hamas militants on camera.

This is a war fought largely behind the scenes. Hamas fighters are not able to
expose themselves. If they were to even step a foot on the street they would be
spotted by an Israeli drone and immediately blown up. We don't see those
fighters. They are operating out of buildings and homes and at night. They are
moving around very carefully. You don't see any signs of authority on the
streets. If you can imagine every police officer, every person of authority in
America gone, this is what that would look like.

Of seeing Hamas launch pads, he said: "I never saw a single device for launching
the rockets to Israel. It's as if they don't exist."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


