                             2383 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 26, 2014 Tuesday 11:54 AM EST

A "leak" in Hamas's once-tight system yields crucial leadership kills for
Israel;
A "leak" in Hamas's once-tight system yields crucial leadership kills for Israel

BYLINE: Terrence McCoy

LENGTH: 795 words


The alleged money man died in a pile of burnt cash. He was riding in a car in
Gaza City when the Israeli missile struck. The blast tore apart the vehicle,
ripping open bags of American dollars and blowing the bills across the street.
An unidentified witness told the New York Times that security soon collected the
dollars billowing across the road and searched the car for more.

The man behind the bills, Israel says, was a high-level Hamas official named
Muhammad al-Ghoul. He allegedly managed the group's finances - its "terror
funds," as Israel said - and his death this week represents the latest in a
series of Israeli strikes targeting the militant faction's ranking commanders.
Late last week, Israel killed three top Hamas leaders in what Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu characterized as a result of "extraordinary intelligence," a
boast of necessity for him after Israel's failure to detect the many tunnels
Hamas had built between Gaza and Israel over the past year.

Israeli analysts, in interviews with Washington Post reporters, also framed the
strikes as a triumph of intelligence. One said it signaled "a leak in the system
somewhere, a system that until now was tight and compartmentalized." Another
added: "Our firepower, our intelligence and our capability to sustain are bigger
than" Hamas's.

While it's not entirely clear how the Israel military ferreted out the locations
of the militant leaders, Hamas quickly concluded that Israeli spies - or
"collaborators" - were to blame. Late last week, Hamas executed at least 18
Palestinians suspected of collaborating. Their purported confessions, according
to Al-Monitor, involved "delivering information on resistance members who have
been targeted, providing detailed descriptions of the houses of a number of
resistance members that have been destroyed during the war." The Gaza Ministry
of Interior explained further that the executed were "spies" who had funneled to
Israel "important information about the resistance, which led to the
assassination of some figures."

If true, that may be reassuring to some Israeli security experts, who have
worried publicly in recent years that Israel was over-dependent on technology in
intelligence gathering at the expense of human resources.

"The intelligence agencies need to stop and reexamine their quest for the
magical solutions of cyber tools," wrote Gabi Sidoni, of Israel's Institute for
National Security Studies, in a Haaretz opinion piece in July. "The
accomplishments in the war on suicide terror a decade ago were the result of a
balance between technology and the human element - a balance that has been
broken in recent years."

"There is no substitute to a human source, because a human source goes into
their house, sometimes even into their minds," Yaakov Peri, a former official
with Shin Bet, the Israeli domestic intelligence service, told the New York
Times. "With all the technology - drones, you name it - you need a background,
and you need the assistance from a human source."

Judging from Hamas swift retributions, notwithstanding the intelligence failure
on the tunnels, those human sources are plentiful, whether blackmailed, cajoled
or coerced into service. To Hamas, they're traitors of the worst order, and are
to be executed - as when masked gunmen shot dead six suspected collaborators in
2012, dragging one of them through the streets behind a motorcycle while
residents screamed, "Spy! Spy!"

During the First Intifada in 1987 and 1994, it's believed as many as 1,000
suspected collaborators were killed by other Palestinians. "In Palestinian
society, to call someone a collaborator is to call him a traitor," wrote expert
Hillel Cohen, who has authored two books on collaborators, in his book "Army of
Shadows."

When Hamas swept into power in 2007, it made clamping down on collaborators a
top priority, Al-Monitor reports. "Nobody knows how many pro-Israel intelligence
agents operate in the Palestinian territories," Al-Monitor's Adnan Abu Amer
wrote in 2013. "No official statistics from Palestine or Israel have been
issued, nor have any exact numbers been provided." Some estimates say there
could be fewer than 10,000 "undercover agents."

"The inhabitants of the Gaza Strip exchange whisper stories of spies and
mistrust any stranger who asks the wrong question or encounters resistance
fighters or their families at the wrong time," writes Palestinian journalist
Asmaa Al-Ghoul.

And today, this clandestine force of spies and "undercover agents" appear to be
one of the strongest weapons at Israel's disposal. "Hamas is in a panic that
their organization has been penetrated by Israeli intelligence," one former
Israeli security official told the Post. "And they are trying to find who is
helping Israel to target their leaders."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


