                             2379 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 25, 2014 Monday 1:02 PM EST

Wonkbook: The quiet revolution in the world of central banking

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 5536 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: More than 1,000. That's the number of businesses
that the Department of Homeland Security says are affected by the "Backoff"
cyberattacks.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: The state of America's widening wealth gap.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) Dovish remarks in Jackson Hole; (2) Ferguson's
tough road back to normal; (3) international business policy update; (4)
Obamacare and the workplace; and (5) key policy issues fading in the midterm
campaigns.

Central bankers' new gospel: Spur jobs, wages and inflation. "The last time the
economic policy conference held here every August devoted its agenda to labor
markets, it was 1994 and the Federal Reserve's vice chairman scandalized the
audience by suggesting central banks worried too much about reducing inflation
and not enough about unemployment. Twenty years later, heresy has become gospel.
Leaders of the world's major central banks made clear...that they were focused
on raising employment and wages....Looming over the conference, however, was the
reality that central banks had made limited progress toward achieving these new
goals. They also face mounting questions about how much more they have the power
to do." Binyamin Appelbaum in The New York Times.

Yellen's revolutionary emphasis: wages. "It's no mystery where Wall Street
acquired its new-found appreciation for the financial fate of the American
working stiff. From her position as the world's single most powerful economic
voice, the chair of the US Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen, is forcing the
financial markets to rethink assumptions that have dominated economic thinking
for nearly 40 years. Essentially, Yellen is arguing that fast-rising wages,
viewed for decades as an inflationary red flag and a reason to hike rates,
should instead be welcomed, at least for now." Matt Phillips in Quartz.

Explainer: Takeaways from Jackson Hole, at a glance. Jon Hilsenrath and Pedro
Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street Journal.

But in the near term, banks have conflicting priorities. "The Federal Reserve is
preparing to reduce its economic support. By contrast, the European Central Bank
is considering more stimulus. So is the Bank of Japan. The Bank of England seems
to be moving toward raising interest rates. It isn't just the biggest economies
whose central banks are pulling in different directions. This year, central
banks in Mexico, Sweden and South Korea, among others, have lowered rates.
Others - in Russia and South Africa, for example - have raised them. It's a long
way from the coordinated efforts that major central banks made after the 2008
financial crisis erupted and economies began to stall." Martin Crutsinger in the
Associated Press.

Primary source: Read all the papers from the Jackson Hole conference.

Bottom line from Yellen: Rates will stay low for a while. Because jobs.
"Yellen's task is to decide which of the Fed's dual mandates is more important -
lowering unemployment or keeping inflation in check. Clearly she believes
lowering unemployment is the more important task, and that in doing so the Fed
is willing to risk a little more inflation....Yellen says all you need to know
toward the end of her speech: 'It likely will be appropriate to maintain the
current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after
our current asset purchase program ends.' So expect rates to remain low even
after the Fed stops buying bonds sometime around October of this year." Matthew
Philips in Bloomberg Businessweek.

Long read: The mystery woman who runs the economy. Michael Hirsh in Politico
Magazine.

Many economists don't want the Fed to wait long to lift rates. "Economists
overwhelmingly expect the Federal Reserve to hold off raising short-term
interest rates until at least 2015. But nearly a third say doing so would mean
the central bank waited too long, a new survey found. Of economists polled by
the National Association for Business Economics, 31% said the Fed should lift
rates from near zero this year. Just 4.5% expect that to actually happen,
according to the survey released Monday. The share of economists saying the Fed
should raise rates in 2014 has grown from 25% in the organization's February
policy survey." Eric Morath in The Wall Street Journal.

Yellen: Still no clear formula for deciding when the labor market has healed.
"In her remarks...Yellen said deciding when she'll be satisfied with the
progress in the labor market won't be easy to determine....Her comments echoed
the message from minutes of the July Federal Open Market Committee meeting,
which showed officials growing more aware that the job market looks healthier.
She said policy makers will have to consider a 'wide range" of indicators to
make that assessment, adding that there's 'no simple recipe' for deciding when
to raise rates for the first time since 2006." Simon Kennedy and Jeff Kearns in
Bloomberg.

Yellen shifts stance on source of slow wage growth. "Yellen seemed to shift her
stance on the country's stagnant wage growth. Previously, she has cited it as a
sign that the labor market remains weak. But on Friday she called on research
that suggests wage growth has been subdued because employers were unable to cut
salaries deeply enough during the recession, a phenomenon dubbed 'pent-up wage
deflation.' She also suggested that globalization and the difficulty that the
long-term unemployed face in finding jobs could also be depressing wage growth."

 Ylan Q. Mui in The Washington Post.

A different theory on job losses in Great Recession. "Employment losses...may
have had more to do with factors like the rise of Walmart than with the
recession itself, two economists say in a new academic paper. The paper...argues
that the share of Americans with jobs has declined because the labor market has
stagnated in recent decades - fewer people losing or leaving jobs, fewer people
landing new ones. This dearth of creative destruction, the authors argue, is the
result of long-term trends including a slowdown in small business creation and
the rise of occupational licensing." Binyamin Appelbaum in The New York Times.

Related: Paper by MIT's David Autor argues automation is polarizing labor
market. Jon Hilsenrath in The Wall Street Journal.

At the conference they faced another challenge - from activists. "A group of
activists has descended on the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank's annual
conference in Jackson Hole, Wyo., to tell central bank officials that any move
to raise interest rates soon could wreak havoc on the lives of Americans still
struggling with a weak economic recovery. U.S. unemployment has fallen fairly
rapidly in recent months, to 6.2% in July, down from its post-recession peak of
10%. However, the activists said those numbers mask much deeper troubles in the
country's poorer neighborhoods. The unemployment rate for African-Americans, for
instance, was 11.1% in July." Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street
Journal.

How much will Fed have to borrow in reverse repos to bump up rates? "The Federal
Reserve will probably borrow 'several hundred billion' dollars from money-market
mutual funds and others to anchor the federal funds rate when it begins
tightening policy, according to St. Louis Fed President James Bullard....The
central bank has been testing overnight reverse repos with a limited set of
counterparties, mostly money funds, as a tool to set a floor under short-term
interest rates....There is still disagreement among FOMC members over how much
borrowing the Fed will have to do through reverse repos in order to make sure
the fed funds rate moves up when the central bank wants to start tightening
credit conditions." Matthew Boesler in Bloomberg.

Other economic/financial reads:

Why robots may not take our jobs after all: They lack common sense. Neil Irwin
in The New York Times.

MOORE: The missing middle-class recovery. "The Federal Reserve does not have its
head entirely in the clouds. Janet Yellen, the chair, has been particularly
attentive to the unemployment problem. Where many pundits have excitedly touted
the falling unemployment rate as a victory, Yellen acknowledges the dropping
rate of the jobless - currently around 6% - 'overstates the improvement' for
jobs. Still the question remains: are economists, breathing that thin, high
mountain air in Jackson Hole, really aware of the murky atmosphere the rest of
us are breathing?" Heidi Moore in The Guardian.

SEN: Environmentalists ignore poor countries when they obsess about global
warming. "I would like to comment on two quite different, but ultimately
related, areas of neglected environmental analyses that demand immediate
attention. The first is the general problem of not having anything like an
overall normative framework...that could serve as the basis of debates and
discussions on policy recommendations. Despite the ubiquity and the reach of
environmental dangers, a general normative framework for the evaluation of these
dangers has yet to emerge. The second is a much more specific problem: the
failure to develop a framework for assessing the comparative costs of different
sources of energy...inclusive of the externalities involved, which can take many
different forms." Amartya Sen in The New Republic.

GLAESER AND SUNSTEIN: How to deregulate cities and states. "A widely overlooked
part of Paul Ryan's antipoverty plan draws attention to the problem of
occupational licensing, and it rightly calls on states and local governments 'to
begin to dismantle these barriers to upward mobility.' But how? The answer, we
think, lies in the adoption of a rigorous cost-benefit test. That test would
impose new discipline on what state and local governments do - and it would
eliminate unjustified barriers to job creation and economic growth." Edward
Glaeser and Cass R. Sunstein in The Wall Street Journal.

KRUGMAN: The wrong way nation. "So conservative complaints about excess
regulation and intrusive government aren't entirely wrong, but the secret of
Sunbelt growth isn't being nice to corporations and the 1 percent; it's not
getting in the way of middle- and working-class housing supply. And this, in
turn, means that the growth of the Sunbelt isn't the kind of success story
conservatives would have us believe. Yes, Americans are moving to places like
Texas, but, in a fundamental sense, they're moving the wrong way, leaving local
economies where their productivity is high for destinations where it's lower.
And the way to make the country richer is to encourage them to move back, by
making housing in dense, high-wage metropolitan areas more affordable." Paul
Krugman in The New York Times.

STRAIN: A conservative approach to infrastructure investment. "We shouldn't
follow the left's approach to infrastructure stimulus....Instead, a conservative
approach to infrastructure would begin with a question: What are some projects
that we actually need to fund? We all know by now that 'shovel ready' projects
are rare. So we should take some time to actually figure out which projects
offer the highest value to society. We should put in place a multi-year program
of infrastructure investment, not sugar-economics Keynesian stimulus....After
identifying high-social-value projects...we should move (some of) that spending
from the future into the present....More important, a conservative
infrastructure program should prioritize a conservative goal: Helping the
working class to rise." Michael R. Strain in The Washington Post.

MANKIW: One way to fix the corporate tax - repeal it. "The president has good
reason to be concerned. Yet demonizing the companies and their executives is the
wrong response. A corporate chief who arranges a merger that increases the
company's after-tax profit is doing his or her job. To forgo that opportunity
would be failing to act as a responsible fiduciary for shareholders....If tax
inversions are a problem, as arguably they are, the blame lies not with business
leaders who are doing their best to do their jobs, but rather with the lawmakers
who have failed to do the same. The writers of the tax code have given us a
system that is deeply flawed in many ways, especially as it applies to
businesses." N. Gregory Mankiw in The New York Times.

Nature interlude: Stunning up-close video of a Portuguese man of war.

As calm prevails in streets of Ferguson... "As tear gas canisters clanked around
him, Bishop Edwin Bass of the Church of God in Christ shuttled between
protesters and police, urging each side not to attack the other. Bass was joined
by other clergy and activists, people of different races, denominations and
backgrounds, all trying to ratchet down protests....As people in Ferguson looked
ahead to Brown's funeral Monday, these peacemakers hoped that the calm of the
past few days would continue." Rick Jervis in USA Today.

 ...the police try to rebuild trust. "The police tasked with keeping the peace
say they've made mistakes and are working to rebuild the trust of the community.
Critics of the police response to protests over the death of Michael Brown have
targeted the St. Louis County Police Department's Tactical Operations Unit - a
group of police officers who insist they just want to keep the peace and protect
people from a small group of criminals. Now, the embattled department is
desperate to tell its story and show the public its point of view." Yamiche
Alcindor in USA Today.

Long read: Injustice in Ferguson, long before Michael Brown. Peter Coy in
Bloomberg Businessweek.

A blue-collar town already struggling risks a further tumble. ""It one sense
that is a familiar feeling: this blue collar outpost of St Louis has long lived
on an economic edge, balanced between getting by and tumbling into poverty. The
clashes between riot police and protestors...have focused worldwide attention on
militarised US policing but they have also damaged local businesses and pushed
some of their workers and families closer to destitution....One store is burned
and gutted, other businesses are smashed and looted, others are physically
unscathed but bereft of customers....Some store owners have boarded up their
windows and doors and said they haemorrhaged so much they may not reopen." Rory
Carroll in The Guardian.

How the Ferguson community is helping struggling families. "With many stores
closed, families have been unable to obtain food and other essential items.
Unable to restock its shelves, the food pantry at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church
also was forced to close....Thanks to hundreds of donations from individuals and
groups, however, the pantry is now back up and running....In addition, the
church has been coordinating with other local churches and food pantries to make
sure supplies get to the community....Other groups have similarly stepped in to
help families in the Ferguson area. On Saturday, a number of organizations...set
up up a 'community resource drop-in center' at the Dellwood community center."
Sasha Belenky in The Huffington Post.

The first signs of normalcy are returning as schools reopen. "Ferguson School
Board President Rob Chabot announced Thursday at a community meeting that school
will "absolutely" be open Monday after more than a week of violence and unrest
that rocked this suburban community outside St. Louis....To the mostly white
audience of 300 or 400 packed in the First Baptist Church here, it was a welcome
sign of a return to normalcy at an event meant to reclaim the image of a town
that has become the center of a national debate over racism and police
brutality." Alex Seitz-Wald, Zachary Roth and Amanda Sakuma in MSNBC.

Profile: The campaign for Ferguson's good name. Philip Bump in The Washington
Post.

Ferguson is trying to help its children understand and cope with the crisis.
"Public schools in Ferguson, Mo., are reinforcing their counseling services for
the first day of school Monday in anticipation of students' anxieties after two
weeks of protests in their community....Younger children may not be able to
verbalize how they feel, and anxiety can reveal itself in...physical complaints,
said Steven Bruce, director of the Center for Trauma Recovery at the University
of Missouri-St. Louis....Traumatic events have a much more 'pervasive' impact on
children than on adults, said Ken Oliver, associate professor of counseling at
Quincy University in Illinois. Children may think a situation represents how
things are supposed to be." Jolie Lee in USA Today.

In St. Louis, one street divides city by race, and views of the shooting. "In
St. Louis, the break between races - and privilege - is...so defined that those
on both sides speak often about a precise boundary. The Delmar Divide, they call
it, and it stands as a symbol of the disconnect that for years has bred
grievances and frustrations, emotions that exploded into public view on the
streets of the majority-black suburb of Ferguson after a white police officer
fatally shot an unarmed black teenager. Ferguson is north of Delmar; the suburb
of Crestwood, where the officer lives, is south. Even the way people perceive
the Aug. 9 shooting and the street protests that have followed is influenced by
geography." Chico Harlan in The Washington Post.

But multiracial neighborhoods in Ferguson defy idea of strife. "Some black
residents who have taken to the streets to protest Mr. Brown's shooting have
noted that people of both races here generally get along well....While much has
been made of the problems in this St. Louis suburb, many locals of both races
say they remain proud of their town and the diversity that drew them to this
once quiet community of wooded hills. The distrust that exists, most residents
say, isn't among neighbors, but between the majority black residents and the
overwhelmingly white police force and city government, a chasm that has widened
as more African-Americans moved here over the past three decades." Matthew Dolan
and Dan Frosch in The Wall Street Journal.

Ferguson's experience offers lessons on integration. "In 1996, Dan Duncan, a
drug and alcohol counselor, joined others to devise a program that pooled funds
to make up for a resident's drop in home value - an inducement to keep white
owners from selling cheaply....But while white flight was stemmed, the power
structure at City Hall and the police department didn't change to reflect the
new black majority. The city has made efforts to reach out to its new
residents....'We didn't do the typical American thing, which is to run away from
each other,' Mr. Duncan said. But some observers say that is one reason
political power in Ferguson still rests largely with white residents." Douglas
Belkin and Matthew Dolan in The Wall Street Journal.

Meanwhile in Washington, Obama just ordered a review of police-arming programs.
"The White House-led review will consider whether the government should continue
providing such equipment and, if so, whether local authorities have sufficient
training to use it appropriately, said senior administration and law enforcement
officials. The government will also consider whether it is keeping a close
enough watch on equipment inventories, and how the weapons and other gear are
used. The review, coupled with proposed legislation and planned congressional
hearings, opens the possibility for significant changes in Washington's approach
to arming local law enforcement agencies." Matt Apuzzo and Michael S. Schmidt in

 The New York Times.

Other legal reads:

U.S. court to hear voting-restrictions case as ballot nears in Arizona. Erik
Eckholm in The New York Times.

How going nuclear unclogged the Senate of its judicial nominees. Burgess Everett
in Politico.

Bid to expand medical marijuana business faces federal hurdles. Dave Philipps in
The New York Times.

YEOMANS: Officer Wilson probably will walk. "Holder's presence instilled
confidence in many that justice will be done. For some...that will only be
achieved with Wilson's conviction. But there are long odds against that. The
history of criminal investigations of police shootings drives home how unlikely
it is for an officer to be convicted of a crime for using deadly force. While
hard numbers are difficult to come by, we know that police shoot hundreds of
people each year and there are at most a handful of successful criminal charges.
For better or worse, a variety of legal and cultural elements make criminal
accountability uncommon for police officers who kill." William Yeomans in
Politico Magazine.

HUNT: Blacks' unfinished journey. "The tragic shooting of a black teenager by a
white police officer in Ferguson, Missouri, has sparked an intense debate about
the state of race relations in America, but there's little indication much will
change. Predictably, Barack Obama, the first black president, is at the center
of the debate. Should he speak out more forcefully? Should he go to Ferguson? Is
this a teaching moment? This recalls the expectation that his election would
magically transform an issue that has plagued the U.S. for hundreds of years."
Albert R. Hunt in Bloomberg View.

FUND: Boost Ferguson voter turnout. "No one is suggesting that rescheduling the
dates of local elections would result in massive reform or that it should
substitute for other reforms such as economic development or the kind of curbs
on the political use of union dues that Wisconsin governor Scott Walker has
pushed through. But shouldn't we hold elections when people are more likely to
show up and dilute the outside influence of long-time incumbents and unions?
Clint Bolick, a libertarian constitutional scholar and author of the book
Grassroots Tyranny: The Limits of Federalism, thinks so....Liberals now have a
reason to join conservatives in supporting a reformed election calendar." John
Fund in National Review.

Lucky break interlude: Printer catches paper perfectly as it comes out.

Did Obama's condemnation of 'corporate deserters' halt inversions? "On July 24
Obama referred to companies looking to shift their domicile as 'corporate
deserters' and aides pledged to curtail the practice with or without
Congressional approval. Since then, no companies have announced any of these
deals - known as inversions - and it's no coincidence, according to lawyers and
investment bankers. The presidential rhetoric has caused several companies
exploring inversions to put on the brakes to see what emerges from the political
debate....The new caution was seen earlier this month when Walgreen Co....passed
on the opportunity to move its domicile to low-tax Switzerland." Matthew
Campbell, Manuel Baigorri and David Welch in Bloomberg.

Pfizer still mulling AstraZeneca inversion deal. "Pfizer Chief Executive Ian
Read has made clear he is still considering big deals to revive his firm's
pipeline and cut its tax bill - something buying AstraZeneca would allow it to
do via a so-called inversion that would shift its tax base to
Britain....Political uncertainty has also played into the British group's hands
to some extent, with recent U.S. threats to clamp down on tax inversions
provoking fears that such tax-saving deals may in future be blocked." Ben
Hirschler in Reuters.

Lew says business tax reform best way to tackle inversions. "U.S. Treasury
Secretary Jacob J. Lew said the best way to deal with corporate inversions is
through a comprehensive revamp of business taxation....Lew's comments came in a
meeting with policy specialists....Lew's comments [Thursday] echo his previous
statements on the issue, which emphasized reducing tax rates and making it
harder for U.S. companies to shift profits overseas. The Treasury Department is
also working on options for regulatory steps to curb inversions or make them
less attractive." Kasia Klimasinska and Richard Rubin in Bloomberg.

Obama goes to bat for big business in Ex-Im Bank push. "Obama's remarks come as
Congress prepares to decide whether or not to renew the bank's charter, which
expires at the end of the fiscal year in September. Conservatives want to
eliminate the export credit agency, which extends loans, guarantees and
insurance to U.S. companies to finance their sales in foreign markets, saying
the agency's activities are a form of corporate welfare and often amount to
crony capitalism. Obama took aim at that characterization of the bank." Eric
Bradner in Politico.

Related: Ex-Im Bank backers pin hopes on temporary reauthorization. Mark
Felsenthal and Susan Cornwell in Reuters.

Domestic battle over Ex-Im points to broader global trade battles. "The agency
helps large and small businesses sell products overseas through a combination of
guarantees, credit insurance and loans, occasionally with direct White House
involvement. But it also wades into thorny domestic issues, such as
controversial new limits on greenhouse-gas emissions for fossil-fuel projects it
helps finance overseas. One result: The agency is positioned squarely in the
middle of some of the world's largest trade fights between nations eager to gain
an advantage for their exporters. This includes battles with Europe over
aircraft sales and fights over who wins huge Asian infrastructure jobs." Damian
Paletta in The Wall Street Journal.

At least in quantity, Obama trade enforcements look more like Bush's than
Clinton's. "Since Jan. 20, 2009, USTR has filed 15 cases at the WTO, for an
average of fewer than three per year.... The Obama administration record
compares to 24 cases filed by the Bush administration during its eight years in
office and 68 cases filed by the Clinton administration between January 1995,
when the WTO was created, and January 2001. Obama trade officials argue that
judging their enforcement record by the number of cases they've filed is
unfair....Recent cases are also more complicated, strategic and broader in scope
than those filed by the two previous administrations, administration aides
argued." Doug Palmer in Politico.

Underwater view interlude: Underwater camera demonstrates how it looks to poach
an egg.

When are wellness programs illegal? "In what appears to be the first major legal
volley against wellness programs, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) filed suit on Wednesday against a Wisconsin company for allegedly firing
a worker because she refused to undergo a health assessment. According to the
EEOC, Orion Energy Systems instituted a wellness program in 2009 and asked its
employees to undertake a 'health risk assessment.' That's standard practice.
Employers say (not implausibly) that the assessments provide an opportunity for
employees to take stock of their health needs. But some workers fear (also not
implausibly) that their employers are intruding on their privacy." Nicholas
Bagley in The Incidental Economist.

Related: How is the Affordable Care Act affecting worker wellness programs?
Jayne O'Donnell in USA Today.

More, not fewer, could seek employer-based coverage. "In an earnings call last
week, Walmart announced that its workers were signing up for health insurance en
masse.....The change didn't come because of a more generous company policy....It
came because many more workers decided to take advantage of the offer. It's
early yet to be sure of a strong trend, but the Walmart experience mirrors
evidence from early polls and the historical experience of Massachusetts, which
enacted a law similar to the Affordable Care Act in 2006. More people may be
signing up for employer-based coverage than did before." Margot Sanger-Katz in
The New York Times.

Many employers will offer skimpy plans despite ACA. "Many thought such skimpy
coverage would be history once the health law was fully implemented this year.
Instead, 16 percent of large employers in a survey released Wednesday by the
National Business Group on Health said they will offer in 2015 these so-called
skinny plans along with at least one insurance option that does qualify under
ACA standards. The results weren't entirely unexpected. Last year, it became
clear that ACA regulations would allow skinny plans and even make them
attractive for some employers. But this survey gives one of the first looks at
how many companies followed through." Jay Hancock in Kaiser Health News and NPR.

Meanwhile, health premiums have gobbled up workers' wages. "To lasso runaway
costs, companies are increasingly asking workers to pay more of the costs of
their medical care. Most large U.S. employers are offering 'consumer-directed
health plans' next year that typically have high deductibles. They'll be the
only option at one third of the big companies that answered questions for a new
survey by the National Business Group on Health....Employers are gravitating to
plans that combine high deductibles with health savings accounts often funded by
both company and worker contributions. Workers use the accounts to pay for
doctor visits or other care until they reach a deductible of often $1,500 or
more, when the health plan starts paying." John Tozzi in Bloomberg Businessweek.

Other health care reads:

How the administration is changing Obamacare to comply with Hobby Lobby. Sam
Baker in National Journal.

Some insurers refuse to cover contraceptives despite ACA requirement. Michelle
Andrews in Kaiser Health News.

Americans: Stop worrying about Ebola. Every suspected case in the U.S. has been
a false alarm. Dan Diamond in Forbes.

Heart group calls on FDA to quickly regulate e-cigarettes. Liz Szabo in USA
Today.

Dog days of summer interlude: These dogs are keeping cool by having a pool
party.

The Affordable Care Act has faded. "President Barack Obama's unpopular health
care law is losing some of its political punch as vulnerable Democrats see it as
less of an election-year minus and Republicans increasingly talk about fixing it
instead of repealing. Two-term Arkansas Sen. Mark Pryor, who is locked in one of
the most competitive races in the country, says in an ad this week that he voted
for a law that prevents insurers from canceling policies if someone gets sick,
as he did 18 years ago when he was diagnosed with cancer. That prohibition on
terminating policies in this fashion is one of the more popular elements of the
4-year-old law that Pryor never mentions by its official name." Donna Cassata in

 the Associated Press.

Same with immigration reform. "The immigration debate that's raging in
Washington is almost an afterthought in the tight battle between Mike Coffman
and Andrew Romanoff....The shrug isn't limited to Colorado. Less than three
months before the midterm elections, there's virtually no competitive House race
that's animated by a debate over immigration. That's a dramatic shift from the
2012 election when Republican leaders, stung by Mitt Romney's defeat, looked to
some type of immigration reform as a way to make inroads with the Latino
community. Other factors - ranging from Obamacare to unease about the economy
and the president's sagging popularity - are far bigger issues this cycle." Jake
Sherman in Politico.

More Ice Bucket Challenges interlude: 26 governors have now taken the challenge.

What's next for Darren Wilson? These numbers could be a clue. Roberto A.
Ferdman.

The state of America's widening wealth gap. Emily Badger.

The Republican civil war over taxes is coming. Matt O'Brien.

Administration offers new tweak to birth control rule. Jason Millman.

Chart: How much canned tuna is safe to eat per week, based on your weight.
Roberto A. Ferdman.

Name That Data! Christopher Ingraham.

Yellen says she's confident in labor market progress, uncertain of road ahead.
Ylan Q. Mui.

Drone uproar shows hurdles to U.S. commercial rules. Alan Levin in Bloomberg.

U.S. finds "Backoff" hacker tool is widespread. Nicole Perlroth in The New York
Times.

Federal government ends hunt for housing for children crossing border. Anita
Kumar in McClatchy Newspapers.

Vanishing bird ignites debate over endangered species rules. Timothy Cama in The
Hill.

Schools avoid nutrition rules by dropping federal funds. Claire Suddath in
Bloomberg Businessweek.

Education Department to give leeway on test scores. Caroline Porter in The Wall
Street Journal.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


