                             2340 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 11, 2014 Monday 8:06 AM EST

An electric shock for local construction firms

BYLINE: J.D. Harrison

LENGTH: 433 words


Welcome to CapBiz A.M., your morning primer on business news with a focus on
Washington.

Vanishing act: Truland Group's sudden shutdown is creating ripple effects across
the region, impacting not just hundreds of the electrical contractor's laid-off
employees, but also dozens of construction firms that had hired Truland to work
on everything from condos and office buildings to hotels and schools. (CAPBIZ)

School shopping: Sixteen states, including Maryland and Virginia, offer some
sort of back-to-school sales tax holiday in July or August. Question is, do they
have the intended effect on spending? (CAPBIZ)

Anniversary gift: McLean-based Cvent, which provides software for event
planners, celebrated its one-year anniversary as a public company with a
surprise for investors - a second-quarter profit. (CAPBIZ)

Capital bound: Lowenstein Sandler, a national law firm headquartered in New
York, is following in the footsteps of several other firms of late by opening a
new office in Washington. (CAPBIZ)

Top-secret busboy: In post-Edward Snowden Washington, hiring for kitchens and
dining halls at federal agencies is grinding to a crawl, thanks to the need for
elaborate background checks. (WP)

Half-hour delivery? Amazon has teamed with three drone manufacturers in its
attempts to persuade federal agencies and lawmakers to move forward with
regulations for unmanned aerial vehicles. (CAPBIZ)

Not sufficiently severe: Apple, Google, Intel and Adobe had agreed to pay more
than $320 million to settle claims that they conspired not to compete with one
another for workers. A judge says that's not enough. (FORB)

You too? Volkswagen has recalled 189,490 vehicles in North America for stalling
issues. Meanwhile, the GM fund set up to compensate victims has received claims
for cases involving 63 deaths. (REU)

On Wall Street

Stocks rallied Friday, pushing the major indices to weekly gains. (Get the
latest updates here)

What's on tap today

U.S. Office of Personnel Management resume writing seminar (10:30 a.m.)

Prince Williams Chamber Small Business roundtable event (12:00 p.m.)

Business Analysis for Beginners Analyst Q&A meetup event in Falls Church (6:00
p.m.)

Help: How to communicate more effectively with your employees (WP)

Follow:  Cvent

Extra: Should bankers, like doctors, take a Hippocratic oath? (WP)

Thoughts? Have feedback, tips or events we should know about? Email us here.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


