                             2359 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                       August 15, 2014 Friday 1:09 AM EST

When John Conyers and Rand Paul agree

BYLINE: Greg Sargent

LENGTH: 645 words


From time to time, we get fleeting glimpses into the possibility of a left-right
alliance on issues where the preoccupations of civil liberties progressives and
libertarian conservatives intersect: The surprising bipartisan alliance to
defund NSA surveillance; the demand for more transparency into Obama's drone
program; the increasing chatter on drug war and sentencing reform.

The police killing of Michael Brown potentially offers another area of
left-right agreement, as it has focused national attention on the
over-militarization of our police forces, particularly in the wake of days of
standoffs between protestors and heavily armed police.

Today Rand Paul weighed in with a striking op ed piece on the Brown shooting
called: "We must demilitarize the police." In it, Senator Paul linked the
"militarization of law enforcement" directly to race:

Given the racial disparities in our criminal justice system, it is impossible
for African-Americans not to feel like their government is particularly
targeting them....Anyone who thinks that race does not still, even if
inadvertently, skew the application of criminal justice in this country is just
not paying close enough attention. Our prisons are full of black and brown men
and women who are serving inappropriately long and harsh sentences for
non-violent mistakes in their youth.

In an interview this afternoon, Dem Rep. John Conyers Jr. - the dean of the
Congressional Black Caucus and longtime civil rights figure - told me he found
Senator Paul's quotes "heartening."

"I never thought of him in that light before," Conyers said of Paul. "It
certainly is heartening. I'm encouraged by that kind of observation."

With the Department of Justice investigating the Brown shooting, Conyers and the
Congressional Black Caucus sent Attorney General Eric Holder a letter asking him
to broaden the scope of federal involvement to include an investigation of the
"legal and civil rights ramifications" of the shooting, as well as "the
potential for any pattern or practice of police misconduct by the Ferguson
Police Department." The letter cited "evidence of racial profiling by the
department" to bolster the case for a broader federal probe.

Conyers, who is also the ranking Dem on the House Judiciary Committee, suggested
Paul's acknowledgment of the racial dimension of police militarization was
exactly the sort of expression of support from libertarian conservatives that
civil rights liberals should welcome.

"We hope for it - and every now and then it happens," Conyers told me, adding
that he would reach out to Paul to gauge his support for a broader federal look
at the shooting. "I could see something like that happening," he said.

In his op ed piece, Paul talked about how "big government" is to blame for the
militarization of police, a broad-brush statement that many liberals would
reject. But his discussion of Washington's role in incentivizing the
militarization of police departments in the name of the war on drugs or
terrorism is an area for overlap with the left. Indeed, a massive ACLU report
recently documented "the excessive militarization of American policing" with an
emphasis on "federal incentives" and the toll of the war on drugs.

Laura Murphy, the director of the ACLU's Washington legislative office, also
says she sees potential in Paul's response to the Johnson shooting. "We've been
working towards a left-right alliance on militarization that also acknowledges
the racial dimension," she said. With the shooting focusing the nation's
attention, she added, "there is a stronger chance that a left right alliance
will develop in Congress to bring attention to these issues."

Murphy suggested Paul could help the cause further. "We would welcome Senator
Paul's support for a deeper investigation by the Justice Department into the
causes of racial profiling and ways to thwart it," she said.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


