                             234 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Spies Who Loved to Damage Our Reputation

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 798 words


Perhaps there's more we could do to antagonize American allies.

The National Security Agency could tweet Chancellor Angela Merkel's juicy phone
conversations, or post video clips on YouTube of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of
Japan singing in the shower.

The Pentagon could fly drones over Paris, dropping Big Macs on fine restaurants,
just to show that we can.

Government officials fume at Edward Snowden and Chelsea Manning for harm they
did to American security. Fair enough. But the latest uproar over our N.S.A.
spying is a reminder of how senior American officials have themselves
jeopardized our strategic interests -- by overreaching and doing things just
because they could.

Our national security policy has gone off the rails since 9/11. For a dozen
years, security has been an obsession, rarely constrained by a weighing of
trade-offs, and to what result? We have sought every tactical advantage, and
this sometimes leads -- as in eavesdropping of foreign allies -- to strategic
losses.

We have doubled spending on intelligence, after inflation, to more than $70
billion annually. More people have ''top secret'' clearances than live in the
District of Columbia -- and it was inevitable that there would be some rogues
among them. When everything is classified, the system loses credibility,
transparency and accountability.

The war on terror led us to fight wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, achieving few
obvious gains but costing thousands of American lives. For every jihadi we
killed, we appear to have created several new ones.

As a Chinese saying goes, we lifted up a rock and dropped it on our own feet.

When he took office, President Obama seemed likely to reorient security policy.
He did, indeed, bring troops back from Iraq and, after a misconceived ''surge''
in Afghanistan, is winding down our presence there.

But, over all, his security policy is surprisingly similar to President Bush's:
Guantánamo remains an affront to our values and the world's, N.S.A. spying
programs continue in force, drone strikes have been stepped up, and the White
House has tried to curb serious public conversation about drones, spying and
cyberwarfare. The Obama administration has prosecuted more whistle-blowers under
the Espionage Act than all previous administrations put together.

The latest scandal involving our spying on European leaders is symptomatic of
this larger myopia about our strategic interests.

It's true that some of the outrage in Europe is affected. As Bernard Kouchner,
the former foreign minister of France, bluntly noted in a radio interview:
''Let's be honest. We eavesdrop, too. Everyone is listening to everyone else.
But we don't have the same means as the United States, which makes us jealous.''

Still, our eavesdropping seems to have broken German law, as well as the first
rule of spying: Don't get caught.

If President Obama really didn't know that 35 world leaders were being listened
to, something was wrong with intelligence oversight. A former C.I.A. senior
official says that before 9/11, that kind of monitoring of world leaders was
always cleared by the White House.

''Anything with senior government officials or heads of state was checked quite
carefully, at least with the national security adviser, if not the president,''
the official told me.

Yet, since 9/11, our security policy has been on autopilot: If we can spy on
Merkel, let's do it! If we can use a drone to kill a suspected terrorist, go for
it! If we can keep people indefinitely in Guantánamo, why not?

Our hubris has undercut America's greatest foreign policy advantage: our soft
power. In Pakistan, for example, our drone strikes have removed some dangerous
militants. But drone strikes deeply antagonized the Pakistani people, tarnishing
our image and reducing our leverage in a pivotal country. Our drones damaged our
own influence in Pakistan more than the Taliban's.

As David Rohde of Reuters puts it: ''The United States obsession with Al Qaeda
is doing more damage to the nation than the terrorist group itself.''

Richard Haass, the president of the Council on Foreign Relations, notes that the
majority of Europeans today have no memory of the Cold War and that, as a
result, we have less leeway today to antagonize our allies. ''This is a
different geopolitical era,'' he said. ''We can't assume that people are for
us.''

Yes, there is still a place for drones, for spying on allies, for the N.S.A. But
they need to be subjected to scrutiny, context and brakes, as they were before
9/11.

Commercial aviation would be safer if we were all required to fly stark naked.
But we accept trade-offs -- such as clothing -- and thus some small risk. In the
same way, it's time to pause for a breath in the security realm and start
examining the trade-offs, rather than just doing things because we can.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/31/opinion/kristof-the-spies-who-loved-to-damage-
our-reputation.html

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


