                             2353 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 14, 2014 Thursday 1:53 AM EST

Rescue mission for Yazidis on Iraq's Mount Sinjar appears unnecessary, Pentagon
says;
A U.S. team visiting Mount Sinjar said refugee numbers are down and that those
there are in fair condition.

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 1508 words


A team of about 20 U.S. troops and aid workers who landed Wednesday on Iraq's
Mount Sinjar determined that a rescue operation of besieged minorities stranded
there is probably unnecessary, the Pentagon said.

"There are far fewer" refugees left at the northern Iraq location, where tens of
thousands were said to have been surrounded by Sunni Muslim extremists, and they
"are in better condition than previously believed," a Pentagon statement said.
It said that humanitarian airdrops and the nightly evacuation of Yazidis on land
routes appeared to have lessened the emergency.

U.S. officials credited U.S. airstrikes on militant positions surrounding the
mountains with allowing thousands to exit. "President said we're going to break
the siege of this mountain, and we broke that siege," assistant secretary of
state Brett McGurk said on Twitter.

The Obama administration had been weighing the use of U.S. ground forces and
aircraft to mount an emergency rescue of the members of the Yazidi minority
sect, even as it seeks to develop a longer-term strategy to push back advances
made by Sunni Muslim extremists.

That strategy depends on the formation of a new Iraqi government that is
responsive to the concerns of all ethnic and religious groups, an effort that
continued its rocky progress Wednesday.

But the strategy also hinges on other variables, including the capabilities of
both Iraqi and Kurdish troops, and their capacity to cooperate on the ground.
European and other allies are being enlisted to provide weapons and other
support, and neighboring Sunni states must be persuaded to use their influence
with Iraqi Sunnis who have been reluctant to join the fight against Islamic
State militants.

Once a new government is in place, "we will be providing training and equipping,
security assistance and advice to Iraqi and Kurdish forces, and then we can
begin to squeeze the space where ISIL is operating and start to push them back,"
deputy national security adviser Benjamin J. Rhodes said, referring to the group
also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

The one "limiting factor" he said, "is we don't want to be reintroducing U.S.
forces into a combat role on the ground." Rhodes spoke to reporters in Martha's
Vineyard, where President Obama is vacationing.

An expansion of U.S. military assistance to counter the Islamic State would
almost certainly include the deployment of additional military advisers to Iraq,
increased weapons transfers and possibly expanded airstrikes, although Pentagon
officials said Wednesday that they have yet to reach a consensus on what such a
mix would look like.

The departure of current Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki will not by itself
trigger an influx of military aid or more U.S. trainers, said senior Defense
Department officials who were not authorized to discuss internal planning.
Instead, the administration is expected to wait until a new government
demonstrates clear signs of support from Iraq's many political and religious
factions.

In the meantime, Obama last week authorized the U.S. military to carry out
airstrikes on a highly restricted basis - only to prevent the massacre of Iraqi
minorities or to neutralize threats to U.S. personnel or property. Defense
officials said they do not have clearance, for instance, to target individual
Islamic State leaders.

Several Pentagon officials said those restrictions will probably be loosened if
Obama approves a broader counterterrorism mission in Iraq. But there is
considerable internal debate over the strategic value of a bombing campaign.

Some military officials said an effective air campaign would require the
deployment of Special Forces on the ground to help guide attacks on specific
targets. Others said technological advances with drones and airborne sensors
might preclude the need for spotters on the ground.

Airstrikes over the past several days have targeted militants gathered in the
vicinity of Mount Sinjar, where members of the minority Yazidi sect had been
stranded. Obama this week deployed an additional 130 U.S. troops to Irbil, the
capital of Iraq's northern Kurdish region, to assess the situation and plan for
an expanded humanitarian relief mission.

On Wednesday, a team of those troops, accompanied by Agency for International
Development officials from Irbil, flew to Mount Sinjar to inspect conditions -
the first time U.S. forces have been present on the ground there, according to a
Defense Department official. The team safely returned to Irbil later in the day.

The new military deployments brought to more than 900 the total number of U.S.
troops Obama has authorized to protect U.S. personnel and facilities in Irbil
and Baghdad and to assess the needs and capabilities of Iraqi forces. Of those,
864 are currently on the ground in Iraq, and none of them has fired a weapon or
been involved in a firefight, Pentagon spokesman Col. Steve Warren said.

The new troops in the Kurdish region are accompanied by four V-22 Osprey
tilt-rotor aircraft and an unspecified number of helicopters, the first time the
Pentagon has acknowledged stationing aircraft in northern Iraq. The Pentagon did
not say what aircraft had carried the team to Mount Sinjar.

Prior to the assessment, Rhodes, the White House adviser, had said that a number
of options were under consideration for a rescue, including airlifts and
establishing a safe corridor on the ground.

"You look at corridors, you look at airlifts, you look at different ways to move
people who are in a very dangerous place on that mountain to a safer position,"
Rhodes said. The Pentagon later said that "the Yazidis who remain" on the
mountain "are in better condition than previously believed and continue to have
access to the food and water that we have dropped." The statement said
humanitarian assistance would continue as the remainder leave the area.

Pressed in separate briefings on whether any of the U.S. troops in Iraq could be
involved in combat, both Rhodes and Warren said the troops were equipped to
defend themselves but were not there to launch offensive actions.

The effectiveness of Iraq's security forces has been eroded badly since the U.S.
military withdrew from the country in December 2011. Pentagon officials said
many Iraqi units needed basic retraining in combat skills and in planning
offensive operations before they could be expected to take on Islamic State
fighters, who in many cases are better equipped and more experienced.

The Kurdish region's separate military force, known as the pesh merga, lacks
heavy weaponry and supplies. The two forces have long been at odds, as the
regional government in Irbil has argued over autonomy and fair distribution of
national resources with the central government in Baghdad under Maliki.

Although some covert assistance from the United States is said to have arrived
for the pesh merga, the official position of the United States and other
potential suppliers is that all aid must first go through Baghdad.

That limitation appears to have been eased in recent days - the Iraqi government
has sent some of its own supplies to Irbil and has authorized outsiders to send
weapons and other supplies directly to the Kurds.

Europe, which is increasingly worried about its own passport-holders among
Islamic State fighters, has dramatically stepped up its contribution to the
conflict this week.

France said Wednesday that it would start supplying unspecified arms directly to
the Kurdish forces, in coordination with Baghdad. Britain, which has dropped
humanitarian supplies to the Yazidis, said it would transport military equipment
supplied by others to the Kurds.

German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, in a Wednesday interview with
ZDF radio, said that "if the current threat level persists, I cannot rule out
that we will have to deliver weapons."

Islamic State forces have advanced through western Iraq, southward to within 60
miles of Baghdad, in part because Sunni Arab populations in those areas, opposed
to Maliki's Shiite-led government, have tolerated or even assisted them.

As the militants' offensive began in June, Arab states in the region with
influence over the Sunnis - including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait and Jordan - strongly advised the Obama administration not to intervene
on the Iraqi government's behalf lest the United States be viewed as supporting
Maliki, according to Arab officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to
describe those conversations.

As the administration began to publicly pivot away from Maliki in recent weeks,
those governments offered assurances that they would take action. Once Maliki is
gone and a more representative, inclusive government is established, officials
said, Sunni tribes in western Iraq will be prepared to take on the Islamic
State.

But "it's not a magic wand where you can deal with this issue in days or a
week," an Arab official said. "It will take a long time."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

Liz Sly in Irbil and Katie Zezima in Martha's Vineyard contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


