                             2375 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 22, 2014 Friday 12:57 PM EST

Wonkbook: BofA's record settlement may leave homeowners disappointed;
The big bank's $17 record billion settlement may not be as expensive as it
sounds.

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 5406 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: $16.65 billion. That's the size of the settlement
between Bank of America and the Justice Department, the single-largest penalty a
company has been levied by the government.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: How much Obamacare premiums are increasing in your
state.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) Context on the Bank of America settlement; (2)
protests calming in Ferguson?; (3) the Americans' Ebola recovery; (4) promising
pre-Yellen economic numbers; and (5) Ice Bucket Challenge politics and policy.

Bank of America and DOJ reach $17 billion settlement over crisis-era mortgage
securities. "Bank of America on Thursday became the third Wall Street bank to
reach a multibillion-dollar agreement with the Justice Department for allegedly
misleading investors about the quality of bonds sold in the lead-up to the 2008
financial crisis....There is no specific carve-out to compensate investors,
whereas funds are set aside to provide relief to homeowners and blighted
communities....Almost $1 billion of the Bank of America settlement will go to
states...whose attorneys general were investigating the bank or its Countrywide
Financial or Merrill Lynch units. Those state prosecutors have earmarked that
money for...retirement funds." Danielle Douglas in The Washington Post.

On paper, the largest punishment against a bank for the mortgage crisis... "The
settlement, which includes $9.65 billion in cash and $7 billion in consumer
relief, resolves civil investigations by government prosecutors, the U.S. said
today....The agreement cements Bank of America's status as the firm punished
hardest for faulty mortgage practices. It eclipses Citigroup Inc.'s $7 billion
settlement in July and JPMorgan Chase & Co.'s $13 billion accord in November.
Bank of America's settlement also comes on top of its $9.5 billion deal in March
to resolve related Federal Housing Finance Agency claims." Tom Schoenberg, Hugh
Son and David McLaughlin in Bloomberg.

...but less painful than it looks. "The actual financial burden...may not exceed
$12 billion....At issue is how much of the cost of the $7 billion in 'soft
dollars,' or help for borrowers, the bank will bear....Some of the relief the
bank will provide involves cutting the principal of a loan to make it easier for
the borrower to pay. The dollar amount of that reduction gets credited toward
what it needs to fulfill the settlement. But Bank of America wrote down many of
its troubled mortgages years ago." Peter Eavis and Michael Corkery in The New
York Times.

Some 'underwater' borrowers could face huge tax bill if they accept help through
settlement. "In 2007, Congress adopted a law that spared homeowners from being
taxed on the amount of the loan that was written off. But that tax break expired
in December, and now that kind of relief can be counted as income by the IRS, an
issue we wrote about in April....'That's why the Department secured a commitment
from Bank of America to pay a portion of the settlement - over $490 million - to
defray some of this tax liability,' U.S. Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.
said....'And our settlement requires the bank to notify all consumers of the
potential tax liability.'" Dina ElBoghdady in The Washington Post.

And few homeowners may benefit at all. "Consumer advocates say relatively few
people will be helped relative to the devastation triggered by the mortgage
bonds, which fueled the worst financial crisis since the 1930s and threw
millions of homes into foreclosure. Only a fraction of homeowners would be
eligible for refinancing under the settlement. And the process by which people
would qualify and receive aid could drag on for years, with payouts set to be
completed as late as 2018. Those who have already lost homes to a foreclosure or
a short sale - when a lender accepts less money from a sale than what the
borrower owes - wouldn't likely benefit at all." Josh Boak, Pete Yost and Marcy
Gordon in the Associated Press.

A similar JPMorgan settlement has had some disappointing results for homeowners.
"As of 31 March of this year, five months after the settlement, JPMorgan only
claimed verifiable modifications on 100 loans, for a grand total of $6m in
credited relief - a little under 1% of the total it has promised. Even though
the settlement provides a bonus credit for relief delivered within the first
year, JPMorgan has decided to stretch things out.Community housing activists
like the Home Defenders League have repeatedly questioned whether relief will
ever materialize. " David Dayen in The Guardian.

Under the deal, BofA can get credit for other firms' mortgage aid. "Bank of
America Corp. can get credit toward its record $16.7 billion settlement of U.S.
mortgage probes without doing a thing.  The lender, which jumped the most in 15
months in New York trading yesterday after agreeing to resolve government
claims, pledged $7 billion in consumer relief in the deal. Some of that may be
satisfied as borrowers get mortgage help from firms that bought their loans or
servicing rights from the bank, according to terms on the Justice Department's
website. That can even apply to assets the bank already sold. Past U.S.
settlements with big banks were criticized by investors and lawmakers after the
companies got credit for borrower relief that might have occurred anyway or left
other firms bearing the cost." Jody Shenn and Hugh Son in Bloomberg.

One group is left out: investors. "One group of people who were harmed, the
investors who purchased mortgage-backed securities and then took a beating,
won't be helped. Rafferty Capital Markets analyst Richard Bove, in a phone
interview, said: 'The shareholders are expected to pay for something they never
did, while the people who committed the crimes suffer nothing, while the people
harmed get nothing.'"Philip Van Doorn in MarketWatch.

Do these settlements normalize banks' bad behavior? "The constant drumbeat of
settlements really does normalize misbehavior: If  every  bank is  constantly
settling charges of mis-selling mortgages, then mis-selling mortgages can't
really be  that  bad, can it? If every bank is constantly paying billions of
dollars in fines, then paying billions of dollars in fines becomes less
shameful. And if every bank is fined over and over again for the same conduct,
then the attitudes of the bankers will shift." Matt Levine in Bloomberg View.

Other financial reads:

BoA seeks to prove Buffett right after settlement. Hugh Son in Bloomberg.

U.S. judge calls Argentina debt swap illegal. Nate Raymond and Joseph Ax in
Reuters.

Regulators struggle with conflicts in credit ratings and audits. Floyd Norris in
The New York Times.

KRUGMAN: Inflation hawks are crying wolf. "With very few exceptions, officials
and economists who issued dire warnings about inflation years ago are still
issuing more or less identical warnings today. Narayana Kocherlakota, president
of the Minneapolis Fed, is the only prominent counterexample I can think of.
Now, everyone who has been in the economics business any length of time, myself
very much included, has made some incorrect predictions. If you haven't, you're
playing it too safe. The inflation hawks, however, show no sign of learning from
their mistakes. Where is the soul-searching, the attempt to understand how they
could have been so wrong?" Paul Krugman in The New York Times.

COCHRANE: A few things the Fed has done right. "As Federal Reserve officials lay
the groundwork for raising interest rates, they are doing a few things right.
They need a little cheering, and a bit more courage of their convictions....The
Fed's plan to maintain a large balance sheet and pay interest on bank reserves,
begun under former Chairman Ben Bernanke and continued under current Chair Janet
Yellen, is highly desirable for a number of reasons - the most important of
which is financial stability. Short version: Banks holding lots of reserves
don't go under." John H. Cochrane in The Wall Street Journal.

BAI: We want our politicians to act like LBJ. But not really. "Obama...just
doesn't love the full contact sport of politics. He has no capacity for the
inside machinations or tactical brutality we associate with a more sophisticated
and celebrated president like Lyndon Johnson. What we really need, I guess, is
an executive in the mold of a Chris Christie or an Andrew Cuomo or a Rick Perry,
all of whom are more extroverted and more brazen about wielding their power as
governors than Obama is - and all of whom, not incidentally, are now fending off
prosecutors and investigations....This illustrates an interesting paradox of
modern politics: We love this idea of the ruthless and effective political
operator, right up until the moment we're confronted by the reality." Matt Bai
in Yahoo News.

YORK: The right stuff. "The very fact that Cantor felt it necessary to explain
such an elementary truth of modern American politics speaks volumes about the
present state of the Republican Party. Although the GOP has been successful at
the congressional level, its candidates for president have lost the popular vote
in five of the last six elections, in large part because they failed to attract
many of the millions of voters who are not entrepreneurs. Unless things change,
the landscape could look just as bleak in 2016." Byron York in Foreign Affairs.

McARDLE: Legalize drugs, deal with the downsides. "How much benefit can we
expect from drug legalization? For the past few years, John McWhorter has been
making powerful arguments that we should end the drug war that has fueled so
many problems in the black community....At the same time, I want to be realistic
about the potential benefits. If we legalize drugs, will the gangs, and all the
attendant costs of the drug war, really go away? Here's one optimistic piece of
evidence: The murder rate in America seems to have plummeted dramatically since
the end of Prohibition." Megan McArdle in Bloomberg View.

ROHATYN AND GOLDMARK: Rebuilding America, one bridge at a time. "States should
be asked to decide whether they want to join a national infrastructure program
of the kind we are proposing. Those whose legislature and governor decide not to
could take advantage of a simple alternative....Placing primary responsibility
for infrastructure renewal on the states could win support of more conservative
legislators who generally oppose new investments or expenditures by the federal
government....And having a universally accepted, existing mechanism available
for use of their share of the funds would allow states to opt out if they, for
whatever reason, do not believe such a program is in their interest." Felix G.
Rohatyn and Peter C. Goldmark Jr. in The Washington Post.

Kermit interlude: The Muppet takes the Ice Bucket Challenge.

Nixon orders National Guard to withdraw as protests calm down. "Gov. Jay Nixon
ordered the Missouri National Guard to begin withdrawing from this St. Louis
suburb Thursday, the clearest sign yet that the violent clashes between police
and residents may be subsiding after nearly two weeks of civil unrest. Nixon's
decision came four days after he first called on Guard troops to help contain
the escalating protests over the police shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown on
Aug. 9. The nightly confrontations between protesters and a heavily armed police
force wielding tear gas canisters and rubber bullets have attracted global
attention." Carol D. Leonnig and William Branigin in The Washington Post.

The gas is gone but the hot air remains. "Even though protesters and police are
no longer clashing in the street, many battles have only just begun. While the
relative calm is a welcome change from the nights of tear gas, rubber bullets
and gunshot injuries, the glaring issues that were simmering under the surface
before the city's anger boiled over after the death of Michael Brown are still
far from solved. Many residents are calling for a complete overhaul of the
police department and politicians. A number of petitions are in place, and voter
registration drives have become ubiquitous on the now calm streets." Kathleen
Caulderwood in International Business Times.

Who are the protesters getting arrested? A lot of out-of-towners. "Since the
protests erupted, people in Ferguson have insisted that the troublemakers are
not from this community. Capt. Ron Johnson, the highway patrolman in charge of
security here, said as much earlier this week....In fact, of the 51 people who
were arrested Tuesday night and Wednesday morning, only one person was from
Ferguson. The rest were from surrounding towns and faraway cities such as Des
Moines, Iowa, Chicago and New York." Jason Rosenbaum in NPR.

Activists and clergy may have been the biggest calming force in protests.
"Community activism and the work of local clergy were lauded by law enforcement
officials as the primary influences that led to a relatively calm night of
protests overnight in Ferguson. Missouri Highway Patrol Capt. Ron Johnson said
protesters remained orderly and police did not fire tear gas or seize any
handguns." Kurtis Lee in the Los Angeles Times.

The conduct of the investigation could shape the future evolution of protests.
"How long - and how deeply - the demonstrations will continue to run remained
anyone's guess after 12 days. Before delivering petitions Thursday that seek
removal of St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch from the case,
African-American organizers warned of ongoing civil disobedience unless demands
on their more expansive list are met." Ken Leiser in the St. Louis
Post-Dispatch.

Explainer: Here is everything police and witnesses said happened when Michael
Brown was killed. Mark Berman in The Washington Post.

Supreme Court case to shape Ferguson investigation. "To most people, an
18-year-old unarmed man may not appear to pose a deadly threat. But a police
officer's perspective is different. And that is how an officer should be judged
after the fact, Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote in the 1989 opinion. The
Supreme Court case, decided at a time when violence against police was on the
rise, has shaped the national legal standards that govern when police officers
are justified in using force. The key question about Wilson's killing on Aug. 9
is whether a reasonable officer with a similar background would have responded
the same way." Eileen Sullivan in the Associated Press.

Charts: Blacks aren't thrilled with Obama's Ferguson response. "Given that
Obama's approval ratings are generally underwater...when it comes to most issues
these days, that might seem a small victory for the White House. But one
emerging area to watch: how African Americans view his handling of the
situation. While the CBS/NYT poll notes that 60 percent of blacks are satisfied
with Obama's response to the Ferguson shooting...that's less overwhelming when
you consider how hugely popular Obama is among African Americans in general. The
latest Gallup numbers show that 86 percent of African Americans approve of the
president." Aaron Blake in The Washington Post.

Long read: How Al Sharpton became Obama's go-to man on race. Glenn Thrush in
Politico Magazine.

McCaskill to lead police militarization hearing. "The hearing, which will be
held by the McCaskill-chaired Financial & Contracting Oversight Subcommittee,
follows the Democrat's calls for demilitarization in Ferguson, Missouri....The
hearing will look into programs that have provided local police with military
equipment....The use of war-zone equipment by police in response to Ferguson
protesters has come under criticism from an array of politicians, including
Attorney General Eric Holder, who visited Ferguson on Wednesday and met with
McCaskill and other members of the Missouri congressional delegation." Lucy
McCalmont in Politico.

Other legal reads:

In Ferguson, young protesters are finding it's not their grandparents' protests.
DeNeen L. Brown in The Washington Post.

Sexual-assault victims get campus advocates. Erica E. Phillips in The Wall
Street Journal.

Why Jay Nixon missed his moment. Eli Yokley in Politico Magazine.

MENDELBERG AND BUTLER: Obama cares. Look at the numbers. "As the predominantly
black, disproportionately poor community of Ferguson, Mo., erupted in
protest...critics excoriated President Obama for his failure to empathize....Mr.
Obama's defenders point to his second-term commitment to issues that touch the
lives of poor communities of color, especially his initiative to assist young
minority men, My Brother's Keeper. But what both sides are ignoring is the
president's first-term record. A true measure of a president's priorities lies
hidden in plain sight in his budget proposals. Under that standard, Mr. Obama
has been more committed to communities like Ferguson than any Democratic
president in the past half century." Tali Mendelberg and Bennett L. Butler in
The New York Times.

LITHWICK AND WEST: Counselors, not protesters. "Tthere is a crucial difference
between the abortion opponents whose speech rights were feted by the court in
McCullen and the garden variety protesters who can still be rounded up in free
speech pens and summarily arrested on the streets of Ferguson: The court was
careful to explain that the protesters in Massachusetts are not actually
'protesters.' They are 'counselors.' This presents an obvious solution for the
outraged citizens who have taken to the streets of Ferguson and been met with
tear gas, rubber bullets, and incarceration: rebranding. From this day forth you
should consider yourself 'sidewalk counselors.'" Dahlia Lithwick and Sonja West
in Slate.

GILLESPIE: The libertarian moment in Ferguson. "The politics of exhaustion -
that desperate attempt to maintain an increasingly dysfunctional and
disheartening status quo that is swelling the ranks of independents and driving
down political approval ratings to historic lows-is giving way to new sets of
conversations that are as urgent as they are overdue. Exactly how those
conversations play out, especially in terms of partisan politics, is far less
important than the fact they are taking place and moving the country forward to
new areas of common ground." Nick Gillespie in The Daily Beast.

HENNINGER: Ferguson, USA. "Economic growth is nonpartisan. But inner-city public
education is totally partisan. Democratic politicians made a Faustian bargain
with the teachers unions, and the souls carried away have been the black
children in those doomed schools. What America's Fergusons need - from L.A. to
Detroit to New York - is a president, and a party, obsessed with growth and
messianic about giving a kid what he needs to hold the job that growth provides.
Maybe by the 100th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act." Daniel Henninger in The
Wall Street Journal.

Shocking interlude: Watch a fish scarf down a shark in one bite.

Good news: Ebola-sickened Americans are cured. Bad news: We don't know why.
"There is no cure for Ebola, and health officials aren't entirely sure what
treatment or combination of treatments worked for the American patients. They
received an experimental drug known as ZMapp, but because the drug has not been
tested in humans, there are no guarantees it was responsible for their recovery.
ZMapp might have made the difference; or supporting treatments, including
massive infusions of fluids, might have done the job on their own." Sam Baker in
National Journal.

Explainer: What's the outlook for the 2 American Ebola survivors? Linda Poon in
NPR.

Have a great day, dear, and don't get Ebola. "These procedures come straight
from interim guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
There's a good reason they're 'interim' - we don't have a lot of evidence to go
on yet....I wonder how effective the regime would really be if it were tested in
an outbreak. How many people will an Ebola patient get close to before finally
being ushered into a room with negative air pressure? Friends and family. At
least a couple of nurses. One or more doctors. Several sick and vulnerable
people in the waiting area, along with their companions. How do we know that the
disease won't spread to health care workers in the United States the way it has
in Africa?" Brian Palmer in Slate.

68 Ebola scares in the U.S., zero confirmed cases. "American hospitals and state
labs have handled at least 68 Ebola scares over the last three weeks, according
to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hospitals in 27 states
alerted the CDC of the possible Ebola cases out of an abundance of
caution....Fifty-eight cases were deemed false alarms after CDC officials spoke
with medical professions about patient exposures and symptoms, but blood samples
for the remaining 10 were sent to the CDC for testing, the agency told ABC News
today. Seven of the samples tested negative for the virus and results for the
remaining three are pending, the agency said." Sydney Lupkin in ABC News.

Long read: Ebola threatens to hobble $13 billion in GDP, three countries.
Pauline Bax, Silas Gbandia, and Elise Zoker in Bloomberg Businessweek.

Chart: This is how bad the Ebola outbreak has been in Africa. Julia Belluz in
Vox.

For Ebola drug 'market failure,' would a prize speed development of treatments?
"In the U.S., drugs to treat rare diseases have become lucrative, thanks to tax
incentives, special regulatory protection and a willingness by insurers and
governments to pay for life-saving treatments. But Ebola, like many other
diseases that are mainly a threat in less-developed countries, have been largely
neglected by drugmakers....Most Ebola drug research has been financed by the
U.S. government, she said, with Canada also pitching in. For Ebola, there may
need to be more financial help to get research started and a reward for
success." Scott Hensley in NPR.

Other health care reads:

Malpractice reform: One of the nation's most expensive ballot campaigns is
heating up. Niraj Chokshi in The Washington Post.

Long read: As more hospices enroll patients who aren't dying, questions about
lethal doses arise. Peter Whoriskey in The Washington Post.

American employers are rethinking their role in workers' health care.The
Economist.

Most Obamacare exchanges got bigger. California's is getting smaller. Dan
Diamond in Kaiser Health News and California Healthline.

Animals interlude: Cats with watermelon.

A rare sign of real economic confidence? "According to a new Gallup poll, 58
percent of Americans say they are 'completely satisfied' with their job
security. That's not only higher than it has been since the recession; it's also
higher than it has been for two full decades....It's easy to over-state the
significance of these numbers; after all, a recent poll showed about half of
Americans think we're still in a recession. Clearly, Americans aren't all that
confident about the overall job market. But at least in their personal lives, it
appears they feel some certainty has been restored." Aaron Blake in The
Washington Post.

Housing, jobs data bolster economic outlook. "U.S. home resales rose to a
10-month high in July and the number of Americans filing new claims for
unemployment benefits fell last week, signaling strength in the economy early in
the third quarter. The growth outlook was further buoyed by other reports on
Thursday showing factory activity in the mid-Atlantic region hit its highest
level since March 2011 in August while a gauge of future economic activity
increased solidly last month....Home resales have now increased for four
straight months after the housing market recovery stalled in the second half of
2013 following a run-up in mortgage rates." Lucia Mutikani in Reuters.

Despite rise in economic indicators, some areas of weakness remain. "The
Conference Board's index of U.S. leading indicators...climbed 0.9 percent after
a 0.6 percent gain in June....The median forecast of 49 economists surveyed by
Bloomberg called for a 0.6 percent advance. Other elements of the economy remain
challenged. Gains in wages since 2009 have barely kept up with a similarly tepid
pace of inflation....Growth in the U.S. is projected to reach 2 percent this
year, according to a Bloomberg survey of economists, supporting the Fed's
outlook that the economy will continue to require accommodative monetary policy
even after the central bank winds down its unprecedented bond-buying program."
Victoria Stilwell in Bloomberg.

Why are jobless claims falling so fast? "The improvement seems out of step with
other labor-market indicators....Economists believe that one reason for a lower
rate of layoffs is a labor market that has become generally less dynamic over
the last few decades. Employers have become less likely to lay off workers over
time, though they have also grown more cautious about hiring. Similarly, workers
have grown more reluctant to change jobs, possibly stunting career development
and earnings growth as a result. But more recently, most of the fall in jobless
claims has been driven by a decline in the number of the newly laid off who
don't bother to apply for government benefits in a generally improving economy."

 Jonathan House in The Wall Street Journal.

Private bankers left out of Jackson Hole meeting. "Economists and advisers from
firms such as Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Corp.
and other banks and hedge funds were long a staple at the Fed's annual meeting
in the Wyoming mountains. But top Fed officials have grown uncomfortable in
recent years with the advantages conferred on private-sector economists from
attending the high-profile event, where the world's leading central bankers rub
elbows with academics, journalists and others. As a result, the Kansas City Fed,
which organizes the symposium, has been paring the list of private-banker
attendees." Jon Hilsenrath in The Wall Street Journal.

Central bankers wrestle with easy money amid uneven global recovery. "Federal
Reserve officials...are waiting for more evidence that strong job gains can
continue before they start raising short-term interest rates. Elsewhere,
officials are debating whether to do more, not less....This leaves central
bankers in an awkward position. Many worry the low interest rates they're
employing to encourage borrowing and spur growth could spark a new financial
bubble....For now, they are depending on unproven regulatory policies to prevent
another crisis and leaving low interest-rate policies in place." Jon Hilsenrath
in The Wall Street Journal.

Foreign banks the beneficiary of Fed's exit strategy. "Unlike domestic banks,
foreign banks don't have domestic depositors to tap for funds, so they turn
elsewhere for dollars. Money market funds make the funds available for a few
hundredths of a percentage point. The foreign banks in turn park those loans at
the Fed for 0.25% interest. They earn profits on the spread between the cheap
cost of funds available from money market funds and the higher rate they get at
the Fed. It's a trade that domestic U.S. banks have been unwilling to make
because they have to pay additional fees to the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corp....By keeping a quarter-percentage-point spread in place between money
market funds and commercial banks with its new system, the Fed is effectively
keeping in place a structure that allows foreign banks to profit where domestic
U.S. banks can't." Jon Hilsenrath in The Wall Street Journal.

Related: Developing nations anxiously watching Fed at Jackson Hole. Jamila
Trindle in Foreign Policy.

Explainer: Five questions for participants at the Fed's Jackson Hole conference.
Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street Journal.

Other economic reads:

Why hotel, restaurant workers may soon get a raise. Quoctrung Bui in NPR.

Kayaking interlude: Giant humpback whale almost tail-slaps kayakers.

It's going to take a lot more ice buckets to fill the NIH funding gap. "The ALS
Association's donation surge...won't be enough on its own to fund the research
and development that's needed to eliminate this disease....The decline in NIH
funding isn't unique to ALS research. The agency budget, after reaching a peak
of $31.2 billion in 2010, fell to $30.2 billion in 2014. And the NIH says its
budget has effectively been cut by 22 percent in the past decade when accounting
for medical inflation. Further, the sequester's automatic 5 percent cut to the
NIH resulted in 8 percent fewer research grants in the 2013 fiscal year compared
to the previous year....Research is just one part of the equation. Then there's
actually the cost of developing drugs." Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

Don't expect U.S. diplomats, service members or House members to take the
challenge. "Lawyers at the State Department have banned American ambassadors and
other high-profile foreign service officers from participating in the ice-bucket
challenge...In a cable...to all U.S. diplomatic missions, the lawyers say it
runs afoul of federal ethics rules barring officials from using public office
for private gain 'no matter how worthy the cause.'...A House oversight committee
and the Department of Defense have also banned members from participating in the
challenge, echoing the State Department's concerns over ethical violations."
Associated Press and The Huffington Post.

Related: U.S. officials destroying evidence they took the challenge. Annalisa
Merelli in Quartz.

Videos: ALS Ice Bucket Challenge leads to creative political trolling. Asawin
Suebsaeng in The Daily Beast.

Oops: Lawmakers who took challenge voted (even if reluctantly) to cut funding.
"These contradictory decisions don't necessarily make the lawmakers hypocrites.
Many of them reluctantly cast that vote, and others are fine with funding ALS
research so long as the funding comes from private sources and not federal
taxes. But the contradiction does expose the curious ways in which government
officials often end up dealing with problems they created." Sam Stein in The
Huffington Post.

Background reading: The cold, hard truth about the Ice Bucket Challenge: funding
cannibalism. William MacAskill in Quartz.

Unique Ice Bucket Challenge interlude:Featuring a drone.

A drug naming dispute, with billions on the line. Jason Millman.

How much $100 is really worth in New York, Washington and Chicago. Niraj
Chokshi.

Some homeowners could get hit with a whopping tax bill if they accept help
through Bank of America's settlement. Dina ElBoghdady.

12 years of data from New York City suggest stop-and-frisk wasn't that
effective. Emily Badger.

It's going to take a lot more ice buckets to fill the NIH funding gap. Jason
Millman.

Profile: Prosecutor in Rick Perry case called ethical, fair. Andrea Ball in the
Austin American-Statesman.

Net worth falls for majority as wealth grows. Carol Morello in The Washington
Post.

Inversions push falls to Treasury's tax man, Mark Mazur. Damian Paletta in The
Wall Street Journal.

Florida same-sex marriage ban ruled unconstitutional, but decision stayed.
Michael Winter in USA Today.

Long read: Paying NCAA college athletes - inside the legal battle. Paul M.
Barrett in Bloomberg Businessweek.

Coal terminal decision highlights exports' greenhouse-gas emissions. Bobby
Magill in Climate Central.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


