                             2378 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 23, 2014 Saturday 1:23 AM EST

'Range of options' under discussion to combat Islamic State;
Administration discussing several alternatives as it grapples with how to combat
the Sunni extremist group.

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung

LENGTH: 1262 words


The Obama administration is considering seeking congressional authorization for
military action against the Islamic State under a revamped counter­­terrorism
strategy President Obama announced last year.

A mandate from Congress could provide domestic legal justification for the
unlimited use of force against the Sunni Muslim group across Iraq and Syria, a
senior administration official said. Congress last formally authorized such
action in 2001, against al-Qaeda and its associates, and 2002, against Iraq
under Saddam Hussein.

The new authorization is one of several alternatives under active internal
discussion as the administration grapples with whether and how to try to
militarily defeat the Islamic State, which controls a wide swath of territory
between Damascus and Baghdad.

The "range of options" for direct use of the U.S. military includes temporary
authority under the War Powers Resolution, constitutional authority for
emergency action to protect U.S. citizens, and "having that discussion with
Congress" about a more open-ended authorization to combat the Islamic State, the
official said.

Obama has ordered airstrikes in Iraq under the first option, good for 60 days
until early October. The second option was used this summer to launch a failed
rescue attempt of American hostages held by the Islamic State in Syria. The
third would entail a debate with an uncertain outcome among lawmakers with
widely divergent views on presidential powers and overseas military action.

The official did not rule out the immediate use of airstrikes or other action in
Syria if necessary to protect U.S. citizens. The recent military raid, which was
unsuccessful in locating four hostages, was followed by this week's videotaped
beheading of one of the captives, journalist James Foley.

"If you come after Americans, we are going to come after you," deputy national
security adviser Benjamin Rhodes told reporters Friday. "We're not going to be
restricted by borders."

Foley's execution "represents a terrorist attack against our country," Rhodes
said. The administration believes that it provides international legal
justification for military action under self-defense doctrines.

While contingency plans for broader airstrikes in Syria have been prepared for
presidential review should Obama ask for them, so far he has not. Nor has the
intelligence community drawn up a list of high-value targets among individual
Islamic State leaders, as it did with al-Qaeda, the senior official said.

"We're obviously trying to find them," the official said. But "we haven't made a
decision" on whether to target individuals. The official spoke on the condition
of anonymity to discuss closed-door policymaking and intelligence matters.

While it formulates a more comprehensive, long-term policy, the official said,
the administration is focused on driving the extremists out of Iraq and
containing them in Syria. The Iraq policy is "a convergence of U.S. airstrikes,
more arms and training" for Iraqi and Kurdish forces, and persuading Sunni
communities to reject the militants, the official said.

"There are going to be gaps to fill" in that strategy, "and that's what we are
looking at now," the official said.

Islamic State forces­ advanced into Iraq from Syria in the spring, quickly
capturing the northern city of Mosul and rapidly moving south to within 60 miles
of Baghdad. While the administration sent additional assistance to the Iraqi
military, it used the promise of still more aid as leverage to force a change in
Iraq's government.

But while the government formation process was still underway, the extremists
switched their focus toward Iraq's Kurdish region, threatening to overrun one of
the most peaceful areas of the country, where hundreds of American diplomats and
civilians were present.

On Aug. 7, Obama authorized airstrikes against Islamic State fighters who were
moving toward Irbil, the Kurdish capital in northern Iraq, and who had encircled
and threatened to kill tens of thousands of members of the minority Yazidi sect.

The success of those ongoing strikes - now numbering nearly 100 over the past
two weeks - and progress in forming a new, more inclusive version of Iraq's
Shiite-led government, have encouraged policymakers. The belief is that
neighboring Sunni-led states, including Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Turkey, will
help persuade Iraq's Sunnis to turn away from the extremists and join their
government's fight against them.

For its part, the administration expects to continue airstrikes in Iraq for the
foreseeable future, although it is "mindful" that it will soon have to address
the 60-day war powers restriction, the senior official said. "We always know
that as we evaluate how long we may need to take military action, there are
limits on what can be done under war powers."

"Separately," the official said, "we have to make a similar judgment about any
action in Syria."

The situation in Syria is far more complicated. In Iraq, where the
administration believes local forces­ can push the Islamic State back with some
American assistance, airstrike objectives are limited to protection of U.S.
personnel and facilities and humanitarian missions. U.S. action was requested by
the Iraqi government.

In Syria, where a full-scale civil war is raging, the United States supports a
weak rebel force that is fighting the government of President Bashar al-Assad as
well as the Islamic State and other extremist groups.

Obama, who has ruled out U.S. ground forces­ in Syria or Iraq, has resisted any
direct U.S. military action in Syria and has limited the aid he is prepared to
provide rebel forces­ out of concern that it would fall into the hands of
extremists. Although the CIA is training and equipping a number of rebel
fighters, a larger program that would allow the U.S. military to assist is held
up in congressional consideration of the defense budget.

An expanded covert program that would allow Islamic State forces­ to be targeted
by drones, such as the CIA effort against al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Pakistan,
is deemed risky. Not only do the extremists have surface-to-air missiles, but
Assad's forces control the air over Syria.

Authority for any military action, should it be seen as feasible and desirable,
could theoretically be found under the existing 2001 Authorization for the Use
of Military Force, or AUMF, against al-Qaeda.

"Three years ago, they would have clearly fit," the senior administration
official said of the Islamic State. But al-Qaeda's Pakistan-based core announced
last year that it had split with the group, objecting to its brutality against
Muslims and declaration of an Islamic caliphate across Syria and Iraq. Now,
officials are not certain whether that is a case worth making.

The administration has said it favors repeal of the Iraq AUMF, and some
lawmakers have said the same about the al-Qaeda measure. Obama, in a May 2013
speech outlining a new, long-term counter­terrorism strategy, called it
"outdated" with the dwindling power of al-Qaeda.

At the time, administration officials said the goal was to eliminate the broadly
worded measure - which has been used to justify U.S. military action against
groups labeled al-Qaeda "associates" in Yemen and Somalia - as a way of
narrowing presidential power.

Authority to deal with new, more specific threats could be sought from Congress
on a case-by-case basis, the officials said.

"If you look back on the president's speech, he kind of foreshadows going to
have additional" AUMFs, the official said. "It may be that this is the first
case."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


