                             2380 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 25, 2014 Monday 4:24 PM EST

The opportunities and challenges of online open-access publishing

BYLINE: Erik Voeten

LENGTH: 1631 words


This week around 7,000 political scientists will descend on Washington for the
annual meeting of the American Political Science Association (APSA). (Be
forewarned if you plan to spend any time in Woodley Park area cafes or
restaurants in the latter part of this week.) The theme of this year's meeting
is "Politics after the Digital Revolution."  One contribution I (and co-Monkey
Cager John Sides) will be making to the discussion  is a panel,  followed by a
wine reception, on the opportunities and challenges of online open-access
publishing (details at the link and at the bottom of this post).

Together with SAGE, three co-editors in chief (Catherine de Vries, Bernard
Steunenberg and Scott McClurg) and a large group of associated editors, I helped
launch a new open-access, peer-reviewed journal that focuses on publishing
high-quality short articles quickly: Research & Politics (R&P). The idea is
straightforward. Much of political science research could be relevant to policy
makers, students, journalists and the educated public. Yet, it is often written
up in articles that are too long, obtuse and hidden behind paywalls. Moreover,
academics are frustrated by the amount of time it takes to get their research in
print and by the limitations print imposes on how analytic insights and data can
be presented. Blogs are too short to communicate research findings thoroughly,
and they don't cater to academic incentives, since peer-review is still valued
highly (and rightly so).

The panel will discuss the opportunities for but also the challenges of online
open-access publishing in political science. Below I offer some personal musings

 based on the brief experience we have had.

1. Quality control

Most of you will have heard or read about one or more scandals involving
open-access journals. If you are a professor, and perhaps if you are not, your
e-mail inbox will regularly contain an invitation to submit your research to a
journal you have never heard of on a topic matter that has absolutely nothing to
do with your expertise. For a reasonable fee, it seems, you too can have a
"peer-reviewed" publication.

I don't think it is terribly difficult to distinguish a serious journal from
these types of article factories. A good start is a reputable publisher (in our
case, SAGE) and an editorial team that contains respected and widely known
scholars.

When we started I thought it would be absolutely essential to also create
artificial scarcity. Since we don't publish on paper, the marginal cost of an
additional article is very small. That might lower the barrier for accepting
research. If you commit to only publish a limited number of articles, the idea
goes, you could artificially increase the cost of each acceptance.

In practice, I now think such limits aren't terribly important. The process of
accepting articles is decentralized. The most important judgments are those by
individual referees who don't have a terribly good idea how many articles a
journal can or should publish. The decisions of editors matter, too, of course.
Yet, editors rarely go against two positive recommendations. Consequentially,
paper journals regularly run up two- or three-year backlogs because they accept
more articles than space allows.  Doing so would go against everything R&P
stands for. If peers deem an article competent and interesting, it should be
published, quickly.

As long as you pick high-quality reviewers and associate editors, they are not
going to let bad research pass (at least not more than for paper journals). Our
acceptance rate is in the 20 to 30 percent range, which is reasonable for a new
journal that is not yet attracting many "silly submissions" that can summarily
be rejected (a dirty little secret behind some very low acceptance rates). Even
as a new and experimental journal, we regularly reject submissions by
well-established senior scholars (including some involved with our journal!)
simply because the reviewers identify flaws with the research. I don't think the
referee process differs much at all from paper journals.

The bigger issue with regard to quality is how do you get people to submit good
scholarship to your journal? Unlike many new journals, we did not start with an
issue that contains articles by our most recognized and powerful friends. Not
doing so is a bit of a risk as such articles generally attract a lot of
attention and citations. Yet, we also thought it would send a bad signal as to
how seriously we take peer review.

I have been pleasantly surprised by how many submissions we have been able to
attract from young professors at high-quality institutions like Cornell, MIT,
University of California San Diego and Stanford. I think this is partially
because our format seems quite natural to a younger generation of scholars who
have grown up expecting quick publication and easy access. Perhaps they are more
likely to bet that a venture like ours will succeed.

In short, I don't think our issues with quality control are that different from
any new paper journal. The challenge is to get high-quality scholars to cite
work published in your journal and to submit their best work to your journal.
Some of the very best paper journals may be more selective than we are, but they
are also more selective than other paper journals. Our pool of reviewers is the
same as that for other serious political science journals, and they don't
exercise their gatekeeping tasks any differently simply because we don't kill
any trees.

 2. How to really use the online-only presence

I am really pleased with the content of R&P's articles. That content reflects
the possibilities of quick online publishing. For example, we have accepted two
peer-reviewed articles about the on-going Syrian conflict (the link is to one, a
second one should be up any day).  Others deal with issue areas of interest to a
broader audience such as public opinion on drones, the effects of international
election monitoring and democracy promotion, communal violence in South Africa,

 the English as an official language movement, partisan differences in female
candidates in U.S. elections, a comparison of Saddam Hussein's public and
private speeches,and the consequences of political innumeracy.

Yet, I will admit that so far our articles look like any other journal article
and the Web site like any other journal Web site. SAGE is working hard on
developing a new Web platform that is better suited for taking advantage of the
possibilities of online only publishing. This will launch soon enough. The
bigger challenge is to figure out how to best use the fact that the Web allows
for more dynamic and interactive presentations than paper.

This is a challenge for all social scientists rather than just for those of us
serving on the editorial team of a journal. We have started conversations with
subcommunities of political scientists to see how our platform may work for
them. For example, R&P would be happy to experiment with active citation and
publish replications of qualitative research. We would also like to be on the
forefront of publishing peer-reviewed data visualizations and other forms of
interactive displays of data and analytic insights.

These are examples of new forms of academic publications that will require new
standards, expertise and, most of all, creativity and initiative from members of
the political science community. It is clear to me that online only
peer-reviewed publishing will allow political scientists to do worthwhile things
that we are not now doing (or only on the side) simply because ultimately what
we write, will have to be published on paper. It doesn't matter if most people
read papers online. If you know that your research will eventually have to
printed in ink what's the point of exerting a lot of effort creating interactive
presentations of your findings or citations? Figuring this out is an area where
we can use a lot of input.

3. How to make open-access work financially.

This may be the most difficult issue. At the moment, R&P doesn't have any fees,
thanks to SAGE's investments and the editors' willingness to work for free. This
is obviously not sustainable. We aim to keep operational costs low through
online publishing and by spreading the workload over many associate editors. We
also hope to partner with foundations who aim to make scholarly work more widely
available to the public. But we will have to rely on author fees, too, hopefully
mostly through research grants.

In Europe, the winds are already changing, and some public funding agencies now
require that the research they fund is made available on an open-access basis,
thus creating line items in research budgets for publication. We will have to
see how this develops. Still, a good bit of political science research is
produced without large external grants and by professors without large research
funds. Obviously, we ought to be really careful not to replace one inequity
(unequal access to published research) with another one (unequal access to
outlets for publication). We have some policies to prevent this, but if this
weren't an issue, everyone would already be open-access.

If you are interested in discussing these issues, you are welcome to join us at
6:15 p.m. Friday (Aug. 29) in the Omni Shoreham hotel (Capitol Room, East
Promenade, Lobby Level) for a panel followed by a wine reception at 7:15. Aside
from myself, the panelists are the founding co-editor-in-chief of Political
Science Research & Methods professor Vera Troeger, the American University
School of International Studies dean James Goldgeier and the Monkey Cage's very
own John Sides. We hope to see you there and look forward to listening to your
thoughts and suggestions.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


