                             2300 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 29, 2014 Tuesday 1:40 PM EST

It's like Amazon and YouTube combined: free videos with links to buy related
items;
A new component of Amazon's Instant Video Web site, called Video Shorts, offers
free video browsing and chance to purchase items related to the video clips.

BYLINE: Jiaxi Lu

LENGTH: 542 words


Amazon now has the same "How to use chopsticks" video that gained more than
60,000 views on YouTube. But what's different about watching this tutorial video
on Amazon is that, next to the video, you can browse 55 items related to the
video you just watched, including chopsticks and sushi-making tools, which are
available to purchase on Amazon.com.

That's the general idea behind Amazon's Video Shorts site, quietly launched as a
new part to its existing Instant Video Web site. According to a Amazon
spokesperson, the Video Shorts destination within Amazon's Instant Video was
added within the past couple weeks. The content previously surfaced only within
relevant search results. The site features free short video clips including
movie and game trailers, music videos, concert clips, author interviews, how-to
tutorial videos for beauty, food and technology, all framed by relevant products
available to buy on Amazon.

So it's like Amazon meets YouTube. Like YouTube, the Video Shorts content has
run-time, a short description and a comments and review section. Unlike YouTube,
most videos on Amazon's site seem to be produced by companies rather than
individuals. The Amazon spokesperson said the company is working with a variety
of content partners on video licensing, but refused to provide any specific
details.

Although Amazon's new video section looks like a rival to many free-video Web
sites, the company seems more interested in promoting the platform itself than
any specific brand or company. Currently the site features videos from Howcast,
Vox Media, Universal, Sony, Disney and others. But as Mashable pointed out,
users can't click on the name of the channel to see all the videos uploaded by
that company, which is "an odd choice that could be a mere oversight or indicate
that Amazon is more interested in promoting the platform over any one brand."

Amazon didn't respond to the request for more details except to say that "our
focus has been (and remains) focused on growing our content selection for
customers."

Amazon may still have a long way to go to make its video business a rival to
Google's YouTube, but the company had been ambitious in expanding its e-commerce
sales and growing into new areas, from introducing its own smartphone Fire to
announcing its 3D printing business which makes it possible for consumers to buy
a 3D-printed coffee cup or bubble-heads.

"The company's ambitions are seemingly boundless, with investments in everything
from cloud infrastructure and services to mobile devices and consumer hardware.
The company wants to deliver groceries to your door, ship its products via
drone, stream media to all your screens, and even produce its own TV shows and
games," Sarah Perez, wrote in TechCrunch. "It shouldn't then come as any
surprise that Amazon would also see its Instant Video Service as something that
could not only take on iTunes and Netflix, but potentially YouTube as well...at
least, one day."

The Seattle-based e-commerce retailer posted a $19.3 billion revenue for the
second quarter of 2014, a 23 percent rise from $15.7 billion in the same quarter
last year. Amazon expects third-quarter revenue between $19.7 billion and $21.5
billion. Amazon CEO Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


