                             2303 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 30, 2014 Wednesday 2:52 PM EST

The awful decisions I've made to protect my Palestinian children from this war;

Is there anything worse than being a mother in a war zone?

BYLINE: Wejdan Abu Shammala

LENGTH: 613 words


My older son was so excited when the Israeli bombing raids began. "Fireworks!"
yelled Rami, 4.

"No," big sister Maryam, 6, replied. "That is fire-bombing."

"No, it's fireworks, but a little bit different from what we used to see in
Germany," he replied as Hasan, 2, took everything in, wide-eyed and terrified.

"Okay, okay," conceded 6-year-old Maryam, wisely. "You are right." But I knew
she was still far too young to understand fully.

My children used to talk about toys, "The Lion King" and books they were
reading. Now they chat endlessly with each other about the war, bombings,
shelling and the difference between F-16s and commercial jets. They want to know
how many deaths or injuries occur after every strike.

This is the first war they have endured. They were born and raised in Germany,
so they missed "Operation Cast Lead" in 2008-09 and "Operation Pillar of
Defense" in 2012. We came back to Gaza one year ago because my mother was
extremely ill (totally blind because of diabetes), and with the Rafah border
consistently closed it's impossible to get someone in her condition to Cairo,
let alone to Germany.

Since our return, my children are constantly asking questions. Why don't kids in
Gaza have playgrounds? Why do children play in crowded streets? Why don't their
peers have enough food? It breaks my heart to answer these questions, but at
least I know how.

Since the war started, though, I'm stumped more and more often - and the
questions are multiplying. What is happening, Mom? Why are they killing
children? (Three of their young second young cousins - Ibrahim, Eman, and Asem -
died, along with a pregnant woman and four other children, when Israel fired
missiles at their multi-family apartment building. No military target was
identified.) Will we die, too? Why do they hate us? Don't they have children?

Am I supposed to tell them that, yes, we could die at any time from an incoming
shell? Surely, I shouldn't tell them about 19 children of the Abu Jamei family
who were killed when a missile fired at one person struck them all as they broke
the Ramadan fast one recent evening. How can I explain that, yes, the soldiers
who have killed so many children often have children of their own? How can I
persuade them that fireworks in Germany signify joy and celebration, while
"fireworks" in Gaza cause death?

The most painful question they've asked me is a response to our neurotic
nighttime habits. One night, I make all three sleep in the same bedroom with us,
hoping to increase the odds they'll survive if a shell hits one of the empty
rooms in our house. But then the next night, I'll separate them, thinking that
if I divide my children they won't all die in an attack. (Unless we're hit by a
half-ton bomb, rather than artillery shell, in which case we'll all be killed,
anyway.)

These are the painful contortions I'd wish on no mother anywhere. Yet mothers
throughout Gaza make these decisions every night - and live with the
consequences of one ill-fated move. But how am I supposed to answer when Maryam
asks, "Why do we sleep somewhere different each night?"

My children, as with all children in Gaza, will need therapy following this
carnage. Most, of course, will not receive it.  They will enter adulthood
remembering these days and the soldiers, F-16s and drones that were heedless of
their nighttime cries and terror. Their mothers and fathers - unable to guard
their children from these horrors - will need psychological help. And
grandparents may have it worse of all, since the midnight terror this month
feels terribly like the nights nearly seven decades ago when they were expelled
from their homes in what became Israel, never to return.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


