                             2399 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 4, 2014 Thursday 8:52 AM EST

Huffington Post's new national security reporter is former NFL star Donté
Stallworth;
After 10 years in the NFL, a wide receiver gets drafted to cover national
security.

BYLINE: Gail Sullivan

LENGTH: 806 words


The Huffington Post has hired former National Football League wide receiver
Donté Stallworth to cover ... wait for it ... national security.

"Sooo... I just got off the phone with one of my favs, @ariannahuff... some very
exciting things are in the works! #CantWait," Stallworth tweeted on Wednesday.
To which his future boss Arianna Huffington replied: "Welcome aboard! We're so
excited to have you here."

News of Stallworth's new gig - he's a liberal on most issues - provoked
skepticism in conservative circles, including the Daily Caller:

Arianna Huffington sure knows how to pick her team. She's had various flavors of
lunatics and crazies write for her website in the past, but most of them weren't
on staff. That, it seems, is about to change. ... a former NFL player is now a
'Politics Fellow' at Huffington Post covering national security.

But Stallworth has been commenting on the news for some time now and takes the
jibes in stride. "Funny how people think that because you're a pro athlete that
you don't know or can't comment on issues outside of your sport.  #SillyRabbit,"
he tweeted in January 2013 after catching flak for expressing concern over the
safety of the H1N1 vaccine.

It's true: Stallworth's resume doesn't look much like the average journalist's.
But his Twitter feed sure does. He tweets more about the news than anything
else, including football. (Though he's also partial to motivational quotes.)
Last year, he caught the attention of Foreign Policy magazine who, in a piece
titled "Donté Stallworth's Secret Life as a Foreign Policy Wonk," invited him to
write for them.

His opinions haven't always been mainstream. After news of his new job broke, he

 caught flak from for some very truther-ish tweets. "NO WAY 9/11 was carried out
by 'dying' Bin Laden, 19 men who couldn't fly a damn kite. STILL have NO
EVIDENCE Osama was connected, like Iraq" he tweeted on July 20, 2009, followed
by ""Gggrrrrrrrrrrrrr @ ppl who actually believe a plane hit the pentagon on
9/11 ... hole woulda been ASTRONOMICALLY bigger, God bless lost lives."

Earlier this year, he told Mother Jones the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the
election of President Obama sparked his interest in politics, especially
international affairs.  "For me, 9/11, it was my last year in college and I
didn't know anything about Al Qaeda, I didn't know anything about bin Laden, I
had no idea. I think probably after a few years when I started seeing how the
country and the policy was shifting due to terrorism, I wanted to know: Why are
these people terrorizing us, and who are they?" Stallworth added: "My biggest
thing is I want people to understand that when there are hostilities between
nations there's always two sides."

Here's a sample of his more recent tweets:

FYI, if you looked at the recently hacked celeb nudes, you're a creep. Maybe not
an "out in the open" kind of creep, but a creep nonetheless

I've talked about the coming problems with the ubiquitous use of civilian drones
on a number of occasions. The FAA has it's hands full...

British janitor identified as ISIL militant... British car salesman identified
as ISIS militant... I highly doubt those would be headlines..

Anyone saying there's a correlation between terrorism and rap music is just
simply an idiot... Plain and simple

After 10 years in the NFL, Stallworth, 33, is currently a free agent and a
"Leonardo da Vinci wanna-be," according to his Twitter bio. He played college
ball at University of Tennessee, but left just 30 hours shy of a degree in
psychology. (He once said he could see himself being a child or family therapist
if a football career didn't work out).

After announcing he would go pro his junior year, Stallworth tried to reverse
the decision so he could finish college, which he had promised his mother he
would do, according to a 2002 interview with USA Today. But the NFL denied the
request and he was drafted by the New Orleans Saints.

Stallworth was suspended by the NFL in 2009 after he killed a pedestrian while
driving drunk in Florida and pleaded guilty to manslaughter. He was sentenced to
30 days in jail, of which served 24 days, and 1,000 hours of community service.

He returned to pro football for another two years in 2010 before becoming a free
agent.

In a July interview posted on the Baltimore Ravens' Web site, he hinted at
leaving football behind for good. "I could still play, but there are a lot of
other things I want to do. And I didn't really want to force trying to go out
and make a team," Stallworth said. "All good things come to an end."

He seems to have spent the past year trying out different career paths. Most
recently he was an intern for the Ravens' coaching staff at their summer
training camp.

Over the summer he also participated in the NFL's broadcast boot camp at NFL
films, a program helps former players transition to TV.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


