                             2388 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 1:42 AM EST

What the Islamic State learned from the U.S. about fighting a war

BYLINE: Brian Castner

LENGTH: 701 words


We're caught in a revenge cycle with a death cult, and it's redefining modern
warfare.

The horrific murder of journalist James Foley is case in point. Once, hitting
targets of opportunity or instituting a propaganda campaign were peripheral to
massed armies killing each other in trenches and cities and jungles. To win, one
country crushed another's will to fight by destroying the widest possible number
of targets: fleets, soldiers, cities.

No more. After a century and a half of industrial anonymous bloodshed, the
individual is key. The Islamic State attacked America when it killed Foley,
without a bomb or mass slaughter.

Since Sept. 11, we've been at war not with Pakistan or Afghanistan, but with
specific terrorist leaders and materiel experts. They have reciprocated,
attacking either symbolic targets or those soldiers that pose the greatest
threat.

That the United States has adopted this strategy is not news. Long campaigns in
Iraq and Afghanistan taught us that detaining or killing every bottom-rung
trigger-puller just made the insurgency worse. Islamic State leader Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi was caught in such a round-up in 2004.

We now use drones or small special operations teams to hit financiers or
suppliers or bomb-makers. President Obama expanded the use of Predator strikes
in Yemen and Pakistan. He authorized SEAL and Delta Force raids in Libya and
Somalia. The hunt for Osama bin Laden was prominent but not unusual; similar
smaller operations are undertaken daily. If the strike is successful, it makes
the news for one cycle. If not, we hear little. In either case, the resources
expended are minimized, but so is the public's knowledge of the actions taken on
our behalf.

Here's what's new. The enemies we're fighting - al-Qaeda affiliates, the
Taliban, the Islamic State - have learned to be equally selective in reverse. In
2007, at the height of the surge in Iraq, IED-disarming bomb technicians were
seven times more likely to be killed in combat than average soldiers. As the
surge progressed, and even as the death rate stabilized or even decreased
overall, it doubled for bomb techs. Similar ratios played out during the surge
in Afghanistan.

This can't be explained by contrasting the relevant danger in any particular
job; plenty of soldiers walk and drive in minefields. Rather, an increasing
percentage of IEDs were designed not for mass casualties, but rather to give the
trigger-man maximum control over who he killed. And killing bomb techs
eliminated specialists

Other high-value targets within the U.S. military saw a similar increase in
their casualty rate. The "green on blue" attacks in Afghanistan (shootings by
local soldiers on their supposed NATO allies) allowed insurgents to target
individuals, like Major General Harold Greene, the highest ranking officer
killed in the war. In Jake Tapper's book "The Outpost," the story of the
counter-insurgency campaign in Nuristan province, only one remote-controlled IED
ever appears, and it is used specifically to assassinate Captain Rob Yllescas,
killed because he was so adept at befriending the local elders.

And now, with the videotaped beheading of James Foley, we can see the entire
process in gruesome miniature. Iraq is imploding. The United States launches
airstrikes, targeting columns of Islamic State troops, but also specific leaders
within the organization. The Islamic State strikes back against the most
prominent target available to them, James Foley. They kill James and call on his
brother John, an officer in the Air Force, to stop the bombing, threatening that

 another journalist, Steve Sotloff, will be killed. We have intelligence on the
executioner, a "Beatle" from Britain now identified as Abdel-Majed Abdel Bary,
and we will surely now target him.

War is reverting to a perversion of classical single combat. Foley was a tragic
unwilling participant, executed for the crime of being American. But even for
the champions that volunteer, the burden we as a country ask each soldier to
bear, always large, is growing heavier. No more myth of fighting dehumanized
"enemy combatants." We send our forces to kill specific men with faces and
families and names known to them, if not to us.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


