                             2389 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 11:42 AM EST

Cease-fire between Israel and Hamas holding;
Fifty days of warfare has killed more than 2,200 people.

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 1324 words


GAZA CITY - An open-ended cease-fire between Hamas and Israel was holding
Wednesday after seven weeks of warfare that killed more than 2,200 people.

The Israeli military said early Wednesday that there had been no reports of
violations since the cease-fire with Gaza went into effect Tuesday evening. The
army later said it responded to fire from across the border with Syria after an
officer was injured earlier in the day.

In the Gaza Strip on Wednesday, people were out en masse, and electricity crews
were trying to restore power and repair transmission lines. Residents in the
hardest hit districts were  using shovels and their bare hands to clear paths
through the rubble to their homes.

United Nations assessment teams began to do field reporting to match their
satellite images of the destruction.

"Gaza had 50 percent unemployment before," said Frode Mauring, special
representative  of the administrator of the U.N. Development Program, as he
stood in front of  a leveled yogurt factory. "Imagine what it is now."

He said the challenge will be not just to return Gaza to its status on July 7
before the war began but to open it up to the world. "The root cause" of the
conflict "is that Gaza is not a livable place," Mauring said in an interview.
"There's no trade, no way to build a viable economy." He estimated the strip's
losses at about $4.2 billion.

Hamas on Wednesday put its traffic cops back on the streets, where they were
joined by so-called military police in green uniforms and red berets carrying
rifles.

Ali Musabeh was clearing rubble from his family's home to make a space in the
one room left for them to sleep. He was anxious for the truce to hold.

"A cease-fire is not a victory," he said.

Musabeh, like most people in Gaza, quickly learned that the truce deal struck in
Cairo on Tuesday was not better for Palestinians than an Egyptian proposal after
the first week of the war.

"What good has come of this?" asked his mother, Naima Musabeh. "They've
destroyed us. We are displaced people. We got nothing from this suffering."

After the cease-fire took hold Tuesday evening, Palestinians poured into the
streets of the ravaged territory to celebrate.

"We have won," Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri exulted at a news conference in
front of Shifa Hospital. The Palestinian Islamist group's fighters accomplished
"what no Arab army has done," he said. "We have defeated them."

His exuberance aside, officials from Hamas and another Gaza-based militant
group, Islamic Jihad, said the cease-fire agreement essentially brings Israel
and Palestinians back to terms agreed on in the truce signed after the 2012 Gaza
war.

A senior official in Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's office,
speaking about the latest cease-fire on the condition of anonymity, said Hamas
had gained little, if anything, from the conflict, which has left vast tracts of
Gaza in ruins.

"Hamas is now finally accepting a cease-fire proposal that was first proposed by
Egypt on July 15," the official said. "There is nothing more to the proposal
than there was a month and a half ago."

Under the deal, Israel will immediately ease restrictions on Gaza and allow
relief aid and construction materials to enter the coastal enclave. The deal
will also allow Gaza fishermen to venture six miles offshore; until now, they
were restricted to three miles.

Other demands by the Palestinians - building a seaport and an airport, opening
all border crossings and improving the movement of goods and people - are set to
be discussed in Cairo. Israel also will press its demand that Gaza be
demilitarized.

The cease-fire deal was modest. To be dealt with later are the big questions
about who will control the Gaza Strip: Hamas, which currently runs the enclave
and denies Israel's right to exist, or the Palestinian Authority, which is
committed to nonviolence and has been unsuccessfully seeking to create a
sovereign state in the West Bank and Gaza.

U.S. Secretary of State John F. Kerry welcomed the deal and urged the two sides
to "fully and completely comply with its terms."

Kerry also sounded a note of caution, saying in a statement: "We are all aware
that this is an opportunity, not a certainty. . . . We are approaching the next
phase with our eyes wide open. We have been down this road before, and we are
all aware of the challenges ahead."

The senior Netanyahu aide expressed similar views, saying, "There have been 11
cease-fire attempts that have either been rejected or violated by Hamas, and the
key to moving forward and easing the restrictions is honoring cease-fires."

In Gaza City, residents who an hour earlier were hunkered down in their houses,
listening to rocket and missile fire, burst into the streets after the deal was
announced.

There were fireworks and chants, and flags of Hamas and Islamic Jihad were waved
while banners celebrated the sacrifices of martyrs. Israeli drones continued to
fly overhead, as they have for the entire conflict.

During his emotional news conference, Abu Zuhri boasted that the Gaza brigades
had shut down Tel Aviv's international airport and that Hamas rocket fire had
forced Israeli residents in the border communities to flee their homes.

"Whatever Netanyahu says, he will not be able to defend his failure," the Hamas
spokesman said.

Meanwhile, even as Hamas leaders started to announce the deal, mortar rounds
fired from Gaza killed two Israeli civilians and seriously injured several
others on a kibbutz near the border, and Israeli airstrikes claimed eight lives
in Gaza.

The conflict has killed about 2,130 Palestinians and 70 Israelis.

Israeli news media reported that the Netanyahu cabinet was split on the decision
to accept the cease-fire proposal brokered by Egypt.

The fiercest critic appeared to be the hawkish economy minister, Naftali
Bennett, who, according to the news portal Walla, had requested that Netanyahu
bring the proposal to a cabinet vote.

Community leaders from Israeli farm towns bordering the Gaza Strip - those hit
hardest by rocket fire from the enclave, especially in the past few days - were
skeptical about the cease-fire agreement, telling Israeli news channels that
only time will tell whether the deal is for real.

"The leaders on both sides will probably each declare victory, while the people
on each side do not feel like they are victors at all," said Miri Eisin, a
former army colonel who served as the deputy head of Israel's combat
intelligence corps.

"I am not sure that this is a cease-fire or that it will be respected any better
than the previous ones," said Giora Eiland, former head of Israel's National
Security Council. "We will need to wait two or three days to see if this is
stable enough. All previous declarations were not very reliable."

"It is much more a lose-lose situation than a decisive victory to either side,"
Eiland said.

Israeli hard-liners are complaining that the deal did little to guarantee that
Hamas would not quickly rearm and begin firing rockets and mortar rounds again.

"The decision to accept the latest cease-fire with Hamas is completely without
justification," said Danny Danon, a member of parliament and leader of
Netanyahu's Likud party.

"After thousands of rockets fired at our cities, and scores of Israelis killed
and wounded, we are agreeing to accept the very situation that allowed Hamas to
arm itself and prepare its forces for their murderous attacks on Israel," Danon
said.

Mahmoud Abbas, the leader of the Palestinian Authority, made the cease-fire
announcement in front of the executive committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization in the West Bank city of Ramallah.

"We accept the cease-fire," Abbas said. "It will provide food and construction
materials for Gaza," which he described as being in a "disastrous situation,
almost unimaginable."

"Later we will have more talks," he said.

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Eglash reported from Jerusalem. Hazem Balousha in Gaza contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


