                             2358 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       August 15, 2014 Friday 1:08 AM EST

Reacting to Missouri

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 972 words


In  response to the tragic killing of Michael Brown in Missouri, the violence
afterward and the heavy-handed tactics with the press, how did politicians
react?

On this one - don't faint - I think the president got it mostly right. He
expressed sympathy but did not identify with the victim as a show of racial
solidarity, as he did when he said that if he had a son he would have looked
like Trayvon Martin. He called for calm and defended the press's First Amendment
rights. Lastly, without prejudging the incident he called for a federal
investigation to see if there was a civil rights violation. He made clear an
attack on the police is never justified. I'm not sure what else he could have
said differently or left out that would have been better.

Interestingly, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) also sounded restrained, a quality for
which he is not usually commended. Like the president, he stood up for the First
Amendment, expressed sympathy and urged calm.

As in war, the first reports of these incidents are often wrong. TV pundits can
mouth off but elected officials have a responsibility to exercise restraint and
reserve judgment.

But on issue like this we also see the stark difference between conservatives
and libertarians.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) issued an over-the-top denunciation of the criminal
justice system as racist and condemned excessive funding for police forces.
Somehow this is all the fault of too much federal government: "There is a
systemic problem with today's law enforcement. Not surprisingly, big government
has been at the heart of the problem. Washington has incentivized the
militarization of local police precincts by using federal dollars to help
municipal governments build what are essentially small armies - where police
departments compete to acquire military gear that goes far beyond what most of
Americans think of as law enforcement." He continued, complaining that police
are over-armed:

When you couple this militarization of law enforcement with an erosion of civil
liberties and due process that allows the police to become judge and jury -
national security letters, no-knock searches, broad general warrants,
pre-conviction forfeiture - we begin to have a very serious problem on our
hands.

The idea that criminals can get all the weapons they want but police cannot will
strike many Republicans as bizarre. Moreover, using a tragedy not having
anything to do with drug legalization to hawk his libertarian spiel on drugs
seems at best a stretch and at worst insensitive opportunism. Most voters,
certainly conservatives, don't believe Michael Brown died  because pot is
illegal or because Missouri gets support from the feds for law enforcement. And
they certainly don't buy that "targeting" - which implies intent - of minorities
is the norm. (The fact that federal authorities provide training or defensive
equipment to minimize use of violence doesn't seem to factor into his rant.)
Moreover, the rush to judgment before any investigation is undertaken and his
assumption the police were in the wrong - which in this case the president
avoided - are not exactly presidential behavior.

One longtime Republican operative figuratively rolled his eyes, e-mailing, "He
thinks he will get support from folks who don't normally vote GOP by attacking
the police. Risky move and it's a terrible one." To be fair, however, although
this may be representative of how Republicans react, it not an accurate to say
Paul is being cynical or putting on an act. It is likely that Paul is entirely
sincere. He is expounding straight from the libertarian playbook he and his
father having been singing from for years.

We've heard this before. We can't have e-Verify on immigration system because of
Big Brother. We can't have a National Security Agency system because of Big
Brother. We can't drone American jihadists in Syria or Yemen because the next
thing you know they'll be droning Americans at Starbucks. While the Pauls would

 bristle at restricting criminals' right to carry whatever weapons the
libertarian absolutists like, allowing the police the same protection is, again,
one step from tyranny. The federal government is inherently and extremely
abusive in this telling. That's the perspective that led him to critique civil
rights laws as an invasion of property rights.

Again I don't think Paul is adopting his tone or ideas to get the GOP
nomination. But he is wrong if he thinks he can win over voters who share these
views in sufficient numbers  to replace all the voters he will lose from the
base of the GOP. Those anti-police, anti-drug-law voters are by and large also
pro-abortion, pro-gay marriage and pro-Obamacare. They are called liberals. It
is highly unlikely they will drop their Democratic affiliation to vote in GOP
primaries for a guy who wants to slash the federal government, eliminate
Obamacare and outlaw most abortion. The sliver of the electorate that is
actually libertarian and isolationist but pro-life and pro-traditional marriage
(Paul's formulation) is, to put it mildly, small. In the GOP primary process, it
is tiny. (Imagine him reading the op-ed at an Iowa GOP gathering. Dead silence,
I'd suspect. He'd get cheered at the University of California at Berkeley, but
there are not thousands of them who will register as Republicans to make up for
the Iowans who would listen to his condemnation of police and the justice
system, slack-jawed and even offended.)

What Rand Paul is selling - when he is honest about what he believes - is not
that far from what his father peddled. Sure, he's slapped a pro-Israel label on
his back and is more polished. But eventually and especially when acting
impulsively he winds up back to his father's dilemma: How does a rock-ribbed
libertarian win the GOP presidential nomination? A lot of his opponents have an
answer: He doesn't.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


