                             2377 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 22, 2014 Friday 3:40 PM EST

3 memorable moments from Rand Paul's trip to Guatemala;
After four days trailing one of the most closely-watched men in Republican
politics, here are a few things that stick out.

BYLINE: Ed O'Keefe;Michael S. Williamson

LENGTH: 1100 words


The trip taken this week by Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) served not only as a personal
mission to provide medical care to some of the world's poorest people, but also
a unique opportunity to build out his national profile and expose a side of his
background little-known to most Americans.

After four days on the road with Paul, members of his family and aides, here are
a few of the most memorable moments from the week:

It was Tuesday afternoon, and a documentary film crew along for the trip was
packing up. But they wanted one last action shot -- an overhead view of the tiny
Lion's Club clinic where Paul and the surgeons performed hundreds of surgeries.
The crew asked Paul's aides whether it would be okay to quickly usher the
surgical teams outside for a quick shot. The senator's team obliged.

Quickly, the documentary crew fired up their drone while the surgeons mingled
near the front door. With the device levitating, the surgeons pretended as
though they couldn't see it. Paul seemed a little uncomfortable with the staged
nature of the shot, and his aides appeared nervous once other reporters on the
trip stepped out to watch.

The crew was there with David Bossie, the founder of Citizens United, the group
that successfully sued and prompted the U.S. Supreme Court to rule that
corporations and labor unions can spend unlimited funds on direct advocacy for
or against political candidates. He brought along his daughter and the crew and
said little about his plans, other than that his footage would appear in a
forthcoming film. Also there were Paul's political ad makers, Rex Elsass, and
Rick Tyler, who is a former close aide to Newt Gingrich. Where and how that
footage will be used remains to be seen.

Paul's entourage also included his 18-year old son, Duncan; his niece, Lisa
Paul, who is a pathologist, and her fiancée, Wes Kimbell; his top political
aide, Doug Stafford; two spokespeople, Sergio Gor and Eleanor May; and a close
friend, Robert Porter, a Kentucky banker and frequent golfing partner.

Reporters from The Washington Post, NBC News the Christian Broadcasting Network
and conservative outlets the National Review and Breibart.com rounded out the
group. (More on some of the logistical challenges here.) Most of the reporters
didn't know that Bossie, Elsass and Tyler would be along for the ride until
everyone met in Guatemala City last Sunday morning to make the trip north.

Asked about the size of Paul's delegation, Stafford was unapologetic. "There's
nothing wrong with letting people see what he does," he said. "This is what he's
done with his life."

Almost immediately, it was evident that Paul is not a touchy-feely guy. While
other surgeons, nurses, technicians and volunteers on the trip quickly developed
rapports with patients, Paul took a more clinical approach. When patients were
being reviewed after surgery, he would work his way down rows of chairs scanning
the patients' eyes, informing them of what to expect next and then moving on to
the next. He awkwardly accepted hugs and held a few hands, but didn't linger or
emote.

One surgeon assessed Paul's demeanor as aloofness. Another said, that's just the
way surgeons are -- clinical, matter-of-fact and eager to move on to the next
case. Still another -- a surgeon who said she's not a Republican, or inclined to
agree with most of the senator's positions -- suggested that Paul's focused
demeanor in the midst of chaos might lend itself well to the presidency,
especially when disasters strike. .

Asked later about his apparent lack of emotion, and whether he enjoyed retail
politics, Paul admitted that he doesn't.

"Ever since I was a little kid, I always hung around with old people. I was
comfortable with old people, I still am, because most of my patients are very
old. Although I'm catching up to where my patients are," he said.

"I like going to a dinner party with potentially 10 supporters or to a business
roundtable with 10 or 15 supporters," he added later. "I'm not a huge fan of
just 'Hey, your shirt looks good, hey your shoes look nice.' Or sort of the
empty vacuous cocktail talk. That I'm not so much big into. But I like shaking
hands and meeting people. But I actually prefer a small group of discussion when
we try to point to what are your concerns, what are ways we can fix them and do
something legislatively."

Paul was just one member of a team of roughly 70 surgeons, nurses, technicians
and volunteers who traveled to Salama -- and it's worth giving them a shout-out.

The trip was primarily organized by the John A. Moran Eye Center at the
University of Utah. The director of its international outreach division, Alan C.
Crandall, is an especially skilled surgeon, who spends two months each year on
the road with members of his team performing surgeries in third world countries.
Paul and Crandall were joined by several others, including David Chang, a member
of the faculty at the University of California San Francisco and past president
of the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery (which also sent
along top officials as volunteers); and Charles C. Barr, of the University of
Lousiville, who conducted countless retinal laser treatments.

The Hope Alliance, based in Park City, Utah, brought along the majority of
volunteers, who set up camp at another facility and distributed approximately
8,000 pairs of eyeglasses. Volunteers said they simply were seeking a way to
participate in a medical mission -- a practice popular among American Mormons,
evangelicals, Catholics and countless nonprofit groups or academic
organizations.

So what about the photo? Well, it captures one of the countless number of simply
human moments witnessed during the week. In the image, Jorge Recinos, a student
a school for special needs children next door to the Lion's Club, is carrying
Petrona Lopez, 80, a woman who had difficulty walking. She was first carried
into the clinic by her daughter -- but Recinos, eager to help, quickly
volunteered to carry her between the waiting room, screening room and operating
room over the course of several hours.

Long after Paul, his team and the American surgeons and volunteers head home,
folks like Recimos and Lopez will still be living in Salama. This image is a
reminder that despite the personal, professional or political intentions of
anyone participating on the medical mission this week, everyone had the same
goal: Restore or improve eyesight. They succeeded. And they provided help and
hope in a terribly desperate place, to Guatemalans who normally don't have
things break their way.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


