                             238 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Thin Rationale for Drone Killings

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; TODAY'S EDITORIALS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 625 words


The Obama administration on Monday reluctantly released its justification for
killing an American citizen, Anwar al-Awlaki, whom it considered a terrorist, in
a 2011 drone strike in Yemen. But the rationale provides little confidence that
the lethal action was taken with real care.

Under orders from a federal appeals court, the Justice Department made public a
2010 memo explaining why the drone strike was legal. Considering how long the
administration fought the release, which was sought by The New York Times and
the American Civil Liberties Union, one might have expected a thoughtful memo
that carefully weighed the pros and cons and discussed how such a strike accords
with international and Constitutional law.

Instead, the memo turns out to be a slapdash pastiche of legal theories -- some
based on obscure interpretations of British and Israeli law -- that was clearly
tailored to the desired result. Perhaps the administration held out so long to
avoid exposing the thin foundation on which it based such a momentous decision.

The main theory that the government says allows it to kill American citizens, if
they pose a threat, is the ''public authorities justification,'' a legal concept
that permits governments to take actions in emergency situations that would
otherwise break the law. It's why fire trucks can break the speed limit and
police officers can fire at a threatening gunman. But it's a dangerous concept
if expanded because it could be used to justify all kinds of government
misdeeds, especially since Congress has never explicitly authorized an exception
for official killing in this kind of circumstance, as the memo acknowledges.

The sheer power of drone strikes, several of which have killed many innocent
bystanders, is in no way comparable to the kind of police shootings that the
memo cites as precedent. (And, in most cities, police shootings are carefully
investigated afterward, and officers face punishment if they exceed their
authority. Has that ever happened with an errant drone strike?)

There's no explanation given in the memo for how the United States knew Mr.
Awlaki was planning ''imminent'' mayhem, as the memo claims. It's possible that
this information was contained in the dozen or so pages that were redacted from
the 41-page memo, which was written by David Barron, then an assistant attorney
general who was recently appointed to a federal appellate court. The memo says
only that Mr. Awlaki had joined Al Qaeda and was planning attacks on Americans,
but that the government did not know when these attacks would occur.

Mr. Awlaki's due-process rights are dealt with summarily. The ''realities of
combat'' meant that no serious due process was possible, the memo said, citing
the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force that allows antiterror measures
anywhere. And the memo never questioned whether the Defense Department and the
Central Intelligence Agency, which operate the drone programs, would properly
follow international law. ''We understand,'' Mr. Barron wrote, that the two
agencies ''would conduct this operation in a manner that accords with the rules
of international humanitarian law governing this armed conflict.''

Blithely accepting such assurances at face value is why these kinds of killings
are so troubling, and why we have repeatedly urged that an outside party -- such
as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court -- provide an independent review
when a citizen is targeted. How did the Justice Department know that capturing
Mr. Awlaki was not feasible, or that the full force of a drone strike was
necessary? This memo should never have taken so long to be released, and more
documents must be made public. The public is still in the dark on too many vital
questions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/24/opinion/a-thin-rationale-for-drone
-killings.html

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


