                             2331 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 8, 2014 Friday 11:42 AM EST

The new U.S. military mission in Iraq: What we know now

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 642 words


President Obama said Thursday night that he has authorized two new, major
actions by the U.S. military in Iraq: airstrikes against militants with the
Islamic State if U.S. interests or personnel are threatened, and humanitarian
assistance for thousands of civilians who have fled the Islamist advance in
northwest Iraq and are now trapped on a mountain.

Even those two specific missions are more complicated than that, however.

First, the U.S. humanitarian mission on Mount Sinjar began Thursday with
airdrops by military aircraft, but it could require targeted airstrikes in order
to "break the siege" at the base of the mountain and allow authorities to
provide more assistance to the civilians, Obama said. They would be conducted in
coordination with the Iraqi government and Iraqi Kurdish security forces known
as pesh merga.

Second, the advance of the Islamic State near Irbil appears to be a line in the
sand for the Obama administration. The United States has both diplomats and
military advisers in the city, which is the capital of the Kurdistan region of
Iraq. The United States also has a consulate in Irbil, creating enough interests
that the United States wants to protect the city from harm.

"To stop the advance on Irbil, I've directed our military to take targeted
strikes against [Islamic State] terrorist convoys should they move toward the
city," Obama said. "We intend to stay vigilant, and take action if these
terrorist forces threaten our personnel or facilities anywhere in Iraq,
including our consulate in Irbil and our embassy in Baghdad."

Here's what we know now about the specifics of these missions:

Humanitarian air drops The U.S. military launched one C-17 and two C-130 cargo
planes near Mount Sinjar on Thursday, dropping 8,000 prepackaged meals and 5,300
gallons of water, senior U.S. officials said. The aircraft were accompanied by
two F/A-18 fighter jets, which came out of an undisclosed air base in the Middle
East. The Pentagon did not indicate which units or branch of service operated
any of the aircraft.

Pentagon officials said in a statement that the three cargo planes released a
total of 72 bundles of supplies. They flew over the drop area for less than 15
minutes, and left the area before Obama announced the actions in his 9:30 p.m.
address.

Senior U.S. officials left open the possibility that the United States could
conduct more airdrops in coming days if it's needed. That appears possible,
considering human rights workers have estimated that up to 40,000 civilians may
be trapped on the mountain, unable to return their homes for fear of being
killed by militants.

"We feel that this is a unique and urgent humanitarian challenge," one senior
officials said Thursday night.

Preparing for airstrikes The advance of militants across northern Iraq has been
watched closely this week, but a new wave of attacks threatened Irbil in a way
it had not been before, U.S. officials said. That led the president to authorize
airstrikes if necessary.

U.S. officials also said that with the increased threat now facing Irbil, the
United States has either surveillance drones or manned aircraft flying over the
area almost constantly, keeping tabs on militant movements.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said in a statement Thursday night that U.S.
military advisers in Iraq will continue to assess ways to help train and assist
Iraqi forces, and will provide undisclosed "increased support" once Iraq has
formed a new government. Most of the troops there are U.S. Army Special Forces.

Outgoing Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Malikihas faced fierce criticism for
appointing friends to key positions, allowing corruption and cutting Iraq's
Sunni population out of the political process, fueling the insurgency. A new
prime minister could be selected in coming days, U.S. officials signaled
Thursday night.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


