                             2361 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                       August 15, 2014 Friday 3:11 PM EST

How two changes to two laws could make future Fergusons very different

BYLINE: Philip Bump

LENGTH: 1431 words


With tensions in Ferguson, Mo., waning - hopefully for good - attention is
turning to ways  in which what happened this week might have been avoided or
otherwise unfolded differently.

The aggressive response to protesters that unfolded in front of cameras
Wednesday night drew new attention to a longstanding policy allowing police
agencies across the country access to military gear no longer needed by the
Department of Defense. The Post's Christopher Ingraham has documented the
department's 1033 program, which allows a simple application process for police
forces to request items. In Missouri, the state Department of Public Safety has
a Web page explaining to local agencies how to apply, and two staffers waiting
to help. Missouri law enforcement has received more than $17 million in gear
through the program.

Rep. Hank Johnson (D-Ga.) plans to introduce a bill that would change that
program. Johnson has long argued against the militarization of police
departments, including co-authoring an opinion piece in USA Today in March.
"Americans should ... be concerned," he wrote then, "unless they want their main
streets patrolled in ways that mirror a war zone." It's a call that was echoed
in Sen. Rand Paul's (R-Ky.) essay in Time on Thursday. "There is a legitimate
role for the police to keep the peace, but there should be a difference between
a police response and a military response," he wrote.

Once Congress returns to D.C. next month, Johnson plans to introduce a bill that
would overhaul the legislative authorization for the program (granted under 10
U.S. Code §2576a). A full delineation of the changes he proposes is at the
bottom of this article, but it can be summarized fairly easily.

It's not yet clear how much support Johnson's proposal will receive. If it
passes, however, it could mean a gradual scaling back of military-grade
equipment owned - and therefore used - by local police forces.

There's another proposed piece of legislation that has garnered some attention
in the wake of the Ferguson tension. A state legislator in Missouri introduced a
bill that would add the identity of police officers involved in shootings to the
list of things mandated to remain private during public records requests, unless
the officer was charged with a crime. Which, were it in effect at this point,
would have made Friday's announcement of the identity of the officer who shot
Michael Brown not legally necessary.

The proposal, from state Rep. Jeff Roorda (D), predates the events in Ferguson
by several months. Roorda's motivation  appears to be his experience working
with law enforcement. In addition to serving in the legislature, Roorda is also
the business manager of the police officer's union in St. Louis. He explained
his position to the St. Louis Post-Dispatch in response to the events in
Ferguson. "These guys face threats during their eight-hour shifts. They
shouldn't have to face them at home."

This echoes the argument the Ferguson police used in withholding the name of
officer Darren Wilson until Friday: That identifying him put him at risk of
retaliation. Roorda's proposal didn't go anywhere in the current session of the
legislature, and it isn't clear whether it will be reintroduced. But if it were
to go into effect, it would shift the arguments surrounding one of the key
causes of the tension that erupted in Ferguson this week.

Key: Section removed. Section added.

10 U.S. Code §2576a: Excess personal property: sale or donation for law
enforcement activities

(a) Transfer Authorized.-  (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law and
subject to subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense may transfer to Federal and
State agencies personal property of the Department of Defense, including small
arms and ammunition, that the Secretary determines is-  (A) suitable for use by
the agencies in law enforcement activities, including counter-drug and
counter-terrorism activities; and  (B) excess to the needs of the Department of
Defense.  (2) The Secretary shall carry out this section in consultation with
the Attorney General and the Director of National Drug Control Policy.

(b) Conditions for Transfer.- The Secretary of Defense may transfer personal
property under this section only if-  (1) the property is drawn from existing
stocks of the Department of Defense;  (2) the recipient accepts the property on
an as-is, where-is basis;  (3) the transfer is made without the expenditure of
any funds available to the Department of Defense for the procurement of defense
equipment; and (4) all costs incurred subsequent to the transfer of the property
are borne or reimbursed by the recipient; and (5) the recipient certifies to the
Department of Defense that it has the personnel and technical capacity,
including training, to operate the property; and (6) the recipient certifies to
the Department of Defense that if the recipient determines that the property is
surplus to the needs of the recipient, the recipient will return the property to
the Department of Defense.

(c) Consideration.- Subject to subsection (b)(4), the Secretary may transfer
personal property under this section without charge to the recipient agency.

(d) Preference for Certain Transfers.- In considering applications for the
transfer of personal property under this section, the Secretary shall give a
preference to those applications indicating that the transferred property will
be used in the counter-drug or counter-terrorism activities of the recipient
agency.

(d) ANNUAL CERTIFICATION ACCOUNTING FOR TRANSFERRED PROPERTY.-For each fiscal
year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress certification in writing that each
Federal or State agency to which the Secretary has transferred property under
this section has provided to the Secretary documentation accounting for all
personal property, including arms and ammunition, that the Secretary has
transferred to the agency. If the Secretary cannot provide such certification
for an agency, the Secretary may not transfer additional property to that agency
under this section.

(e) REPORT ON SURPLUS PROPERTY.-Before making any property available for
transfer under this section, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a
description of the property to be transferred together with a certification that
the transfer of the property would not violate this section or any other
provision of law.

(f) LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFERS.-  (1) The Secretary may not transfer the following
arms and ammunition under this section:  (A) Automatic weapons not generally
recognized as particularly suitable for law enforcement purposes, including
those that are .50 caliber or greater.  (B) Tactical vehicles, including highly
mobile multi-wheeled vehicles, armored vehicles, and mine-resistant
ambush-protected vehicles.  (C) Armored drones.  (D) Aircraft.  (E) Flash-bang
or stun grenades.  (F) Silencers.  (2) The Secretary may not require, as a
condition of a transfer under this section, that a Federal or State agency
demonstrate the use of any small arms or ammunition.

(g) CONDITIONS FOR EXTENSION OF PROGRAM.- Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available for any
fiscal year may not be obligated or expended to carry out this section unless
the Secretary submits to Congress certification that for the preceding fiscal
year-  (1) each Federal or State agency that has received property under this
section has demonstrated 100 percent accountability for all such property to the
State coordinator in accordance with paragraph (2) or has been suspended from
the program pursuant to paragraph (3);  (2) the State coordinator responsible
for each such agency has verified that the coordinator or an agent of the
coordinator has conducted an in-person inventory of the property transferred to
the agency and that 100 percent of such property was accounted for during the
inventory or that the agency has been suspended from the program pursuant to  8
paragraph (3);  (3) the eligibility of any such agency for which 100 percent of
the equipment was not accounted for during an inventory described in paragraph
(2) to receive property transferred under this section has been suspended; and
(4) each State coordinator has certified, for each Federal or State agency
located in the State for which the State coordinator is responsible that-  (A)
the agency has complied with all requirements under this section; or  (B) the
eligibility of the agency to receive property transferred under this section has
been suspended.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


