                             2350 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 12, 2014 Tuesday 10:52 PM EST

How Obama can show he is serious about helping Iraq;
The leader of the Islamic State made a strategic error.

BYLINE: David Ignatius

LENGTH: 770 words


When Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared his terrorist Islamic State, he ignored a
warning from Osama bin Laden that jihadists should be cautious about
establishing a caliphate too quickly. In torching a firestorm in Iraq and Syria,
Baghdadi has united his enemies and given them a target to attack, just as bin
Laden predicted.

Baghdadi's bloodbath has achieved the impossible: He has provided a common
adversary for Saudis and Iranians, Turks and Kurds. He has united many of Iraq's
Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish politicians behind an inclusive new government. He has
forced a reluctant President Obama to come halfway off the bench in authorizing
airstrikes for "limited military objectives" in Iraq.

The counterattack against the Islamic State that began last weekend could last
"months if not years," in the vague phrase used by U.S. and Iraqi officials.
U.S. power will be essential in this rollback, but Obama was right to warn
Monday, "There is no American military solution to the larger crisis in Iraq."

"This is the last chance for Iraq," Kurdish leader Massoud Barzani said Monday
in a video interview with the Aspen Strategy Group, at a foreign-policy
gathering I attended. "While we need your military support," Barzani said,
referring to the airstrikes and advisers Obama has authorized, "we will never
ask you to put boots on the ground to fight for us."

As Obama must understand, the United States has returned to the slipperiest
slope on earth. He may seek a limited military involvement, but Baghdadi's
Islamic State gets a vote. It will use suicide bombers against U.S. targets
anywhere it can find them. With its allies, it will try to attack the U.S.
homeland. What began last weekend as an attempt to rescue Iraqi refugees on a
mountaintop will likely have to expand.

Obama stepped gingerly into this fight, dropping humanitarian supplies, then
bombing Islamic State mortar positions and hitting convoys. In an interview with
Tom Friedman of the New York Times, he urged for Iraq the spirit of "no victor,
no vanquished." That's a sensible call to compromise, but it was somewhat
discordant alongside the president's explanation that he had used U.S. power in
Iraq in a situation "in which genocide is threatened."

Obama's strategy may be to deter the Islamic State from attacking the West, by
focusing on the defense of U.S. personnel and rescue of Iraqis - and threatening
massive drone attacks and targeted killings if they cross his line. But
deterring terrorists is a risky course, because it counts on their rationality.

If Obama wants to send a signal that he's serious about helping a new Iraqi
government, he should consider sending retired Gen. David Petraeus and former
ambassador Ryan Crocker - the two Americans who probably know Iraq best - to
Baghdad as his special envoys.

Obama has gotten the broad outline of America's reentry into Iraq right, by
insisting that the United States will use its power in support of an inclusive
Iraqi government that unites to battle the Islamic State. In practice, that will
mean arming militia groups that fight under an Iraqi banner, including the  pesh
merga   and a new Sunni "national guard," which two senior Iraqi Sunni leaders
recommended in a separate video interview Sunday night with the Aspen Strategy
Group.

"In the beginning, [Sunni] people were very sympathetic to the Islamic State as
defenders of the Sunnis," explained one Iraqi leader. "Now they see that they
are al-Qaeda, exploding mosques and killing people." Said a second Sunni
official: "They are the enemy of all."

This turn away from the Islamic State is just what bin Laden warned might happen
if his followers were seen to be killing fellow Muslims in their grab for power.
In a document found in Abbottabad, Pakistan, after he was killed in 2011, bin
Laden cautioned that such red-hot tactics "would lead us to winning several
battles while losing the war at the end."

Bin Laden thought Yemen was the most likely place where his supporters might
declare a caliphate, but he worried they would do it too soon. An undated
letter, perhaps written by bin Landen, cautioned: "We want . . . to establish an
Islamic State, but first we want to make sure we have the capability to gain
control of it. Even though we were able to militarily and economically exhaust
and weaken our greatest enemy before and after [Sept. 11, 2001] the enemy
continues to possess the ability to topple any state we establish."

Baghdadi couldn't wait. His fighters ruthlessly seized the Sunni heartland of
Iraq. Now we'll see if bin Laden's estimation of U.S. power remains correct.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


