                             237 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 2, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Koreas, After Exchanging Fire, Rearm With Insults

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 522 words


SEOUL, South Korea -- A day after exchanging artillery fire across their
disputed sea border, North and South Korea hurled insults at each other on
Tuesday, with the North rejecting an ambitious overture from the South's
president, Park Geun-hye.

In a speech in Dresden, Germany, that was broadcast live in South Korea on
Friday, Ms. Park promised a huge investment in North Korea's decrepit
industries, as well as humanitarian aid for babies and nursing mothers, if the
North gave up its nuclear weapons program.

Although Ms. Park's proposal largely reiterated what her three predecessors had
proposed, it was her most detailed overture toward the North since she came to
office shortly after the North conducted a nuclear test in February 2013.

On Tuesday, the state-controlled North Korean newspaper Rodong Sinmun scoffed at
Ms. Park's speech, calling the unmarried South Korean leader an ''eccentric old
spinster'' and ''a frog in a well.'' It said her overture was ''full of
deception'' and ''filth'' and was aimed at destroying the North Korean
government.

South Korea immediately responded, condemning the North for using ''expressions
even street ruffians would refrain from.''

''North Korea must realize that by the way it is behaving, it will attain
nothing and will only deepen its isolation,'' the government in Seoul said in a
statement.

North Korea stoked tensions on the divided Korean Peninsula last spring by
threatening to launch nuclear strikes at Washington and Seoul. In the past few
months, it had been moving to ease the tensions, but in recent weeks it
conducted a series of short-range and midrange missile tests.

Then on Sunday, North Korea threatened to carry out a ''new form of nuclear
test.'' On Monday, it fired 500 artillery shells and rockets off its southern
coast, with 100 of them falling south of a disputed sea border between North and
South Korea. The South fired back, pounding North Korean waters with 300
artillery rounds.

The tensions continued on Tuesday, with the South Korean military saying it was
investigating an unidentified drone that crashed on Baengnyeong Island, in South
Korean waters near where the exchange of fire occurred. The drone was first
spotted by an islander on Monday.

''We have collected its debris for investigation,'' said a spokesman for the
South Korean Ministry of National Defense who spoke on the condition of
anonymity, citing ministry policy. ''We are looking into all possibilities,
including the possibility that it came from the North.''

The spokesman declined to provide further details. But the South Korean news
agency Yonhap quoted an unidentified government official as saying that the
drone was 6.5 to 10 feet long and carried a small camera. The drone had a
Japanese engine and Chinese components, it said.

North Korea unveiled what appeared to be drones during recent military parades
in its capital, Pyongyang. In March last year, its news media showed the
country's leader, Kim Jong-un, watching drones attack targets during a military
drill.

Mr. Kim was quoted as saying at the time that the drones were intended to be
used to attack targets in South Korea.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/world/asia/korea.html

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: South Korean marines on Tuesday at Baengnyeong Island, where an
unidentified drone crashed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YONHAP, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE --
GETTY IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


