                             2321 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 5, 2014 Tuesday 6:47 AM EST

Executive directives - and misdirection

BYLINE: Andrew Rudalevige

LENGTH: 1031 words


There are plenty of reasons for the House not to sue the President (see here,
here, here, and here). Not on the list, though: that President Obama has barely
used his executive powers.

This claim was made most recently by the White House itself, when senior adviser
Dan Pfeiffer spoke to ABC's George Stephanopoulos on Sunday's "This Week." The
threat of impeachment is credible, Pfeiffer said, since the GOP is so crazed
that "the House [took] an unprecedented step to sue the President of the United
States ... even though he is issuing executive orders at the lowest rate in 100
years."  Or as Sally Kohn put it in a CNN op-ed, after listing executive order
totals for Obama, TR, Eisenhower, Reagan, and Bush, "House Republicans are using
taxpayer dollars to fund a lawsuit against a President who has literally done
not only what every president before him has done but has done it less often..."

To be pedantic (I think I'm supposed to say first that I hate to be pedantic,
but I'm a professor, and that would be a lie), this is both true and hugely
misleading.  It is true that President Obama has issued fewer executive orders
both in absolute terms, and on an order-per-year basis, than most of his recent
or even recent-ish predecessors. It's also true that executive orders can matter
greatly, as with Obama's expansion of protections for the employees of federal
contractors.

And yet to equate executive orders (a formal type of presidential directive)
with executive powers, as the White House and its allies seek to do, is to
misdirect - to hope that the hand will be quicker than the eye. As Philip Bump
has put it, the fuss is about executive actions more broadly. While Obama issued
only 20 executive orders in 2013 (the lowest single-year total in more than a
century), that same year he issued 41 presidential memoranda to the heads of
departments and agencies, along with nine additional presidential
"determinations" designed to serve as the basis for bureaucratic behavior.

And there are lots of other avenues for that. We could include regulatory
action, signing statements, legal interpretations, and administrative orders
technically issued by department heads but at the behest of the White House.
(We could also include unpublished memoranda, and classified orders, and
military orders, and the Presidential Policy Guidance and Presidential Policy
Directive documents produced that year through the National Security Council
advising process.)

Indeed, consider a few of the greatest hits touted by those who feel Obama has
abused his executive authority:

1. The actual topic of the lawsuit, implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
Some of the delays in question were achieved by (as per Assistant Secretary Mark
Mazur's 2013 letter) the "exercise of the Treasury Department's longstanding
administrative authority to grant transition relief when implementing new
legislation." Others were rules changes announced by an administrative bulletin
issued by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services.

2. Waivers to the provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act. Granted by the
Secretary of Education under authority granted by, well, the No Child Left
Behind Act. (The oft-bruited, but hypothetical, waivers to the work mandates of
the 1996 welfare reform law are linked to a July 2012 Health and Human Services
guidance document which flowed from a 2011 presidential memorandum aiming to
enhance states' administrative flexibility. However, the work requirements
themselves were excluded from the law's waiver section.)

3. Deferring deportations. This of course (so far) was of a limited category of
non-citizens - basically, the proposed beneficiaries of the DREAM Act. It was
carried out by the Secretary of Homeland Security via administrative memorandum
as a means of setting priorities for her department given insufficient resources
to deport everyone eligible for same.

4. Other selective enforcement of laws. Here, guidance minimizing federal
statute's conflict with Washington and Colorado drug laws flowed from the
Department of Justice, which urged U.S. Attorneys to "address the most
significant threats in the most effective, consistent, and rational way."  The
Attorney General himself issued a memo in August 2013 "refin[ing] our charging
policy" to avoid incurring mandatory minimum sentences for "low-level,
non-violent" offenders.

5. Failing to defend the Defense of Marriage Act in court. Again, as with (3)
and (4), a version of prosecutorial discretion, tied up in the long debate over
the president's role as Constitutional arbiter, implemented by a presidential
determination declaring his opinion that DOMA was unconstitutional, and conveyed
to Congress by a letter from Justice.

6. The "job-destroying environmental regulations" attacked by Speaker Boehner
and others. Flows from the regulatory authority delegated to the EPA by the
Clean Air Act and the Supreme Court's interpretation of same. Not every proposed
regulation is legal, as shown in a recent case, but nearly every law bequeaths a

 process of rulemaking.

7. The release of Guantanamo detainees in exchange for Bowe Berghdal, without
following a statutory notice requirement.  It is not clear what mechanism
formally authorized the transfer, but no executive order to this effect is
published on the White House web page; Obama had noted in a signing statement
that he doubted the constitutionality of the provision requiring notice.

8. Drone warfare (including the targeting of American citizens abroad) -
justified by the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel in an opinion
finding "justified" killings of this sort part of warfare and presumably carried
out by national security directive.

None of this is to evaluate the substance or process these actions entailed;
I've commented elsewhere on that. It is to point out that none of them was
carried out by executive order, per se.

Is this just playing with words? Well, if we use "executive order" as a
catch-all, we can't also use it as evidence that President Obama has renounced
the administrative presidency. He has not. I suggest that instead we need to
catch up with what the administrative presidency now includes.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


