                             2433 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 15, 2014 Monday 3:51 PM EST

Why the U.S. might just need a Federal Commission on Robots

BYLINE: Nancy Scola

LENGTH: 794 words


Why does the United States needs a new federal commission focused solely on
understanding our robot future? The real question is, why don't we?

Ryan Calo is an assistant professor at the University of Washington School of
Law, and in a new paper out from Brookings he makes the case that a new Federal
Robotics Commission would help make sense of the various technology applications
that separate human agency from execution. (Of course, robots and robotics are
not perfectly overlapping fields, but a federal robot agency sounds so much
cooler as to justify the fuzzy rhetoric.) Calo opens with a recent example from
the automobile agency:

The U.S. Department of Transportation had a problem: Toyota customers were
alleging that their vehicle had accelerated unexpectedly, causing death or
injury. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) found some
mechanical problems that may have accounted for the accidents - specifically, a
design flaw that enabled accelerator pedals to become trapped by floor mats -
but other experts suspected a software issue was to blame. Like most
contemporary vehicles, Toyotas rely on computers to control many elements of the
car. Congress was worried enough at the prospect of glitches in millions of
vehicles that it directed the DOT to look for electronic causes.

But such ad hoc cross-agency consultancy isn't a long-term fix, Calo points out.
For one thing, the space agency has spaceships to attend to. Writes Calo, "The
best and brightest at NASA can take a break from repairing space stations or
building Mars robots to take a look at the occasional Toyota," but it's not a
sustainable solution for the federal government contending with a future that is
increasingly technologically confusing.

In fact, the glitchy Toyota gas pedals are an odd way to lead the paper, as
they're one of the more straightforward examples of what's happening in the
robotics space. There are also autonomous cars, drones, robotic surgery,
high-frequency trading -- in short, all sorts of examples across fields and
industries of robotics changing how things are done. But what Calo and others
argue is that those changes aren't merely variations on existing practices but
entirely new ones, and ones in which, importantly, outcomes are difficult to
predict. An algorithm, Calo points out, organizes a warehouse differently than a
human would, even if it's programmed by a human in the first place.

That's a sort of emergent behavior, and it raises all sorts of legal, ethical
and technological questions that take a type of expertise and holistic thinking
to understand and support. Bitcoin enthusiasts, for example, are musing about a
future in which not only can autonomous taxis "own" money but, without human
decision-making, can also go about acquiring additions to their fleets. Is the
Treasury Department set up to make sense of that? Is the Department of
Transportation?

Of course, there are considerable downsides to starting a new federal agency,
not the least of which is startup costs -- especially when you consider that
nearly every Federal Robotics Commission employee is going to want a coffee with
the unavoidably awesome new agency logo. And there are those who have argued
that at least when it comes to driverless cars, our existing legal structures
are perfectly capable of coping with whatever changes they might wreak.

And, too, it's possible that the Treasury or Transportation Department could
develop the expertise to handle our robotic eventualities. But the way that Calo
seems to be imagining it, they wouldn't have to. The FRC could serve as as sort
of floating band of robotics experts available to help out its allied agencies
when such questions arise but that is meanwhile developing useful expertise in
its chosen field.

No doubt, there's a risk of technological determinism here; when you're an
agency charged with focusing on robots, everything can look like a problem for
robots to solve. But Calo makes a compelling case for the idea that agencies
rooted in single solutions can evolve into ones that capture major themes of
modern American life. The Federal Radio Commission grew out of a desire to
promote and protect the futuristic industry of its time, and that begat today's
Federal Communications Commission. Or take the newish Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, and its organizational starting point of how real-live people
engage with consumer financial products that seems to be expanding into an
experiential understanding of citizen-centered enforcement.

We might, in other words, start with a Federal Robotics Commission in 2015 and
by 2030 end up, usefully, with a United States Department of Emergence.

You can read -- or have your robot assistant read you -- Calo's paper here.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


