                             2492 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      October 13, 2014 Monday 3:16 PM EST

Obama brings GOP together, helps blur differences

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 692 words


President Obama has a remarkable ability to bring Republicans together. We have
seen this both in the immigration realm and on national security.

On immigration, the Republicans in the House and Senate have been and still are
plainly divided on reform legislation. Some lawmakers voted for the Senate bill,
others voted against it but favor comprehensive reform of some type - e.g. Sen.
Rand Paul of Kentucky and Rob Portman of Ohio - and yet others oppose virtually
any type of immigration reform other than strict border control (e.g. Sen. Jeff
Sessions of Alabama). The House was paralyzed between, on one hand, Rep. Paul
Ryan and GOP leadership, who see the benefit of fixing a broken system, and on
the other, members who either feared an internal battle before the midterms  or
actively oppose any comprehensive bill. But Obama is balm that soothes all sore
points. If there are two things virtually all Republicans can agree upon, they
are that current border security is insufficient and that it would be outrageous
for Obama to move unilaterally. On that everyone from Sessions to Florida's Sen.
Marco Rubio can find common ground.

The same is true on national security. Paul until recently took a hands off
stance on Iraq and primarily blamed President George W. Bush for the Middle East
chaos. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) has zig-zagged between tough rhetoric and the now
mostly discredited theory that air power alone can defeat the Islamic State.
Meanwhile, hawks in the Senate and potential 2016 contenders have inveighed
against the premature withdrawal from Iraq, the president's delay in doing
something about Syria and the president's decision to rule out ground forces.
But what can bring everyone together is the threat of Obama unilaterally and in
contravention of existing law moving to transfer Guantanamo detainees to the
homeland.

Republicans in the House and Senate were united in outrage. Paul, who in the
past has had differences with the majority of the Senate caucus on anti-terror
issues (including use of drones and indefinite detention), was as vehement as
any senator in opposing the move. Although in 2013 he voted with Democrats
against a measure to tighten restrictions on transfers, his longtime adviser
Doug Stafford says that Paul "doesn't always get to decide the language in a
bill or offer amendments," citing Sen. Harry Reid's tactics in squashing
amendments. "When presented with three options on how or when to possibly bring
detainees here, Senator Paul voted not to all three times," said Stafford. (In
previous years, it was Paul's disagreement with Republicans on trials for U.S.
citizens that got the most ink.) Likewise, Cruz voted no on the December 2013
vote on defense authorization because he claimed the measure allowed indefinite
detention of U.S. citizens. But all those details - and many more differences -
get swept away when Obama gives the GOP a target on which they can all agree.
The president wants to override the Congress's power of the purse and bring
detainees to the homeland in direct violation of law? Every Republican will
holler, "No way!"

The difficulty will come if the GOP winds up in the majority. Then presumably
there will be many votes on amendments and the Senate will be obliged to pass
legislation, be it on the war, immigration, health care or any other topic. It
is then that differences are likely to become more acute. That is the "burden"
of majority status, if you will. Leadership will need to try to meld diverse
views, and GOP senators will have to make clear what they are for, not merely
what they are against.

Being in the majority would also clarify which lawmakers make the perfect the
enemy of the good and which are capable of moving the ball steadily in their
direction. It is easy to vote no on every imperfect measure (i.e. all of them),
but it does not leave a record of accomplishment or create the impression of
problem-solving leadership. When no bill is ever good enough or the timing just
"isn't right," voters will conclude the lawmaker isn't serious about his
professed aims or lacks judgment to know when he has gotten the best he is ever
going to get.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


