                             2466 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 29, 2014 Monday 3:25 PM EST

Cost of U.S. campaign against the Islamic State likely closing in on $1 billion

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 628 words


The United States has likely spent between $780 million and $930 million in its
military campaign against the Islamic State militant group so far, and it will
likely cost between $200 million and $320 million per month going forward if
conducted with about 2,000 U.S. service members on the ground, according to a
new report published Monday.

Those costs would grow to between $350 million and $570 million per month if the
pace of the airstrikes increases and 5,000 U.S. troops are deployed, according
to the report, released by the independent Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments in Washington. On an annual basis, lower-intensity air operations
could cost $2.4 billion to $3.8 billion per year, the report said. The annual
cost would jump to between $4.2 billion and $6.8 billion if the pace of
airstrikes increases and is sustained.

The report was released after the United States reported completing about 220
airstrikes in Iraq since Aug. 8, and about 40 more in Syria since they began
there early Sept. 23. In addition to the airstrikes, the U.S. Navy also has
launched at least 47 Tomahawk cruise missiles, which each cost more than $1
million, into Syria. Most of those were aimed at targets affiliated with the
Khorasan Group, which U.S. officials say is affiliated with al-Qaeda and which
was was planning "imminent" attacks against the United States and other Western
nations.

Airstrikes have been conducted thus far by fighter jets, "attack aircraft" like
the AC-130 gunship, drones and the B-1B bomber. At this point, the Air Force,
Navy and Marine Corps all have played a hand. There are believed to be more than
1,000 U.S. service members on the ground - many of them Special Operations
troops - and the U.S. is preparing to deploy a 500-soldier headquarters to Iraq
from the U.S. Army's 1st Infantry Division, of Fort Riley, Kan.

CSBA released this graphic illustrating various costs associated with the fight:

The United States is starting to see help it didn't have previously in the fight
against the Islamic State. Partner Arab nations have been carrying out
airstrikes in Syria with U.S. oversight, and France, Britain and other nations
have recently pledged support for the campaign in Iraq or have already joined
it. Nevertheless, here are three scenarios laid out by CSBA analysts for the
future:

A continue air campaign of similar scope: $200 million to $320 million per month
The United States was carrying out about 60 air sorties per day to conduct
surveillance over Iraq before it expanded operations into Syria, meaning even
more are likely needed now. As time progresses, it's likely that the amount of
airstrikes the U.S.-led coalition carries out will dwindle, but the aerial
intelligence gathering will continue. There are currently about 1,600 U.S.
service members deployed in Iraq as part of the mission, which will likely grow
to about 2,000 personnel once the 1st Infantry Division headquarters arrives in
Baghdad and Irbil, the city in Iraq's Kurdish region where the United States has
a large presence.

A larger air campaign: $350 million to $570 million per month This assumes two
things: the United States bumping up its campaign to about 120 surveillance
flights and 150 airstrikes monthly, while expanding its presence on the ground
to about 5,000 service members.

"Boots on the ground": $1.1 billion to $1.8 billion per month This scenario has
been ruled out by President Obama. It assumes an even larger air campaign, with
150 surveillance flights and 200 targets hit monthly in Iraq and Syria. It also
assumes 25,000 U.S. service members on the ground in Iraq and Syria, as some
have advocated. About 80 percent of the cost with scenario would come from
sustaining the ground forces.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


