                             241 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 12, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Al-Qaeda units survive post-9/11 fight

BYLINE: Greg Miller;Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1514 words


In declaring that the United States would degrade and "ultimately destroy" an
al-Qaeda offshoot in Iraq and Syria, President Obama articulated an objective
that the United States has yet to achieve against any of the Islamist
adversaries it has faced since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Through two wars, thousands of drone strikes and hundreds of covert operations
around the world, the United States has substantially weakened al-Qaeda and its
affiliates, eroding their capabilities in ways that have reduced the threat they
pose to the United States.

The scope of that conflict is poised to expand again as U.S. military officials
said Thursday that they were given new authority to begin targeting leaders of
an al-Qaeda rival known as the Islamic State.

But even as Obama warned that "it will take time to eradicate a cancer" like the
Islamic State, the timing of his remarks - coming 13 years after the attacks on
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon - underscored how elusive the finish
line has been for the United States in a series of conflicts that have come to
resemble a permanent war.

Although the conventional wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have essentially
concluded, the United States is still battling al-Qaeda affiliates in countries
including Pakistan, Somalia and Yemen. None of those groups has been eradicated,
or even degraded to a degree that would allow U.S. counterterrorism operations
to end.

The only apparent exception to this pattern had been al-Qaeda in Iraq, a group
that was seen as virtually dismantled until its reincarnation as the Islamic
State. After conquering parts of Syria and Iraq in the span of six months, and
beheading two U.S. journalists, the group is again in U.S. crosshairs.

"We're not going to see an end to this in our lifetime," said Charles F. Wald, a
retired Air Force general who oversaw the start of the air war in Afghanistan in
2001. Airstrikes and ground operations by allies can degrade the Islamic State
and force it to surrender its territorial gains, Wald said. But "there isn't
going to be any time where we all of a sudden can declare victory. This is what
the world is going to be like for us for a long time."

A day after Obama's speech, U.S. intelligence officials said the CIA has
completed a new assessment of the Islamic State's strengths, showing that it has
more than doubled in size in recent months.

"CIA assesses the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) can muster between
20,000 and 31,500 fighters across Iraq and Syria, based on a new review of
all-source intelligence reports from May to August, an increase from our
previous assessment of at least 10,000 fighters," according to a CIA spokesman,
using another name for the group, which he discussed on the condition of
anonymity. "This new total reflects an increase in members because of stronger
recruitment since June following battlefield successes and the declaration of a
caliphate, greater battlefield activity, and additional intelligence."

At the same time, details of how the Pentagon will pursue the new offensive
began to emerge. U.S. military officials said they have new authority to carry
out strikes against the group's leaders, including Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who
earlier this year declared himself the head of a restored caliphate.

Such targets had been off-limits under the more narrow terms of an air campaign
that Obama had described as a humanitarian effort to protect members of
religious minorities and also shield American diplomats from Islamic State
fighters in Iraq.

Pentagon officials described their altered mission as a shift to offense from
defense. "We're going to intensify our efforts inside Iraq, there's no question
about that," said Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary.

In remarks to reporters Thursday, Kirby declined to answer directly when asked
whether the Pentagon now had a green light to hunt down individuals, but he
said: "One of the ways you get at, and you destroy the capabilities of an enemy
like ISIL is to be pretty aggressive against them. And that does include
disrupting their ability to command and control, and to lead their own forces."

Kirby said the 475 additional U.S. troops that Obama ordered to Iraq will arrive
over "the next week or so." Among them are a detachment of about 125 personnel
who will operate armed U.S. surveillance aircraft for the first time from Irbil,
the capital of Iraq's semiautonomous Kurdish region. Kirby said that officials
are still considering which types of aircraft to send to Irbil but that the
fleet will not include drones.

The campaign is aimed at a terrorist group whose rapid expansion and brutal
tactics have alarmed Western security officials, although there is significant
confusion and debate over how significant a threat it poses to the United
States. The Islamic State has seized cities in Syria and northern Iraq and
amassed cash and weapons at a rate eclipsing any al-Qaeda rival. But so far it
has not been tied to a transnational terror plot.

Obama conceded that point during his speech, but he warned of a growing danger
if the Islamic State was left unchecked.

The group is a descendant of al-Qaeda in Iraq, a violent terrorist force founded
by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi that sought to ignite a sectarian conflagration in that
country before it was subdued by Sunni tribal leaders who were dismayed by its
tactics and backed by U.S. cash and commando teams. The group's collapse was so
complete that U.S. intelligence agencies estimated it had lost 95 percent of its
membership and strength by the time U.S. forces left Iraq in 2011.

But the group's remnants relocated to Syria and took advantage of the chaos
created by civil war there - as well as Sunni discontent with the
Shiite-dominated government in Iraq - to regroup. This year, it severed ties
with al-Qaeda and rebranded itself the Islamic State.

"Defeating a group doesn't necessarily mean you will have been successful at
eradicating every single person who was ever aligned with the group," Matt
Olsen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said during a
recent briefing for reporters on the Islamic State. "Even if you've been
successful at eliminating the threat that they pose, it doesn't mean every
single person ever affiliated with the group will have adopted a new worldview."

Supporters of Obama said his terms were aimed to a large extent at preparing the
nation for another extended conflict. "Rallying the public to a war effort is
hard to do if you're only talking about degrading an enemy," said Rep. Adam B.
Schiff (D-Calif.), a member of the House Intelligence Committee.

"Within a matter of years we can get to a point where ISIL no longer poses a
significant threat to the homeland or region," Schiff said. "In terms of
extinguishing it as a group that bears any resemblance to the Islamic State?
That could take much longer."

Obama cited U.S. counterterrorism operations against al-Qaeda affiliates in
Yemen and Somalia as models for the strategy against the Islamic State. But the
comparison is problematic because key factors in those countries don't exist in
Syria, including effective allies on the ground and free rein for U.S. aircraft
including armed drones.

In Somalia, the United States has spent much of the past decade organizing and
largely paying for an international proxy force of about 18,000 African Union
troops to counter the al-Qaeda linked group al-Shabab.

The African force has gradually wrested territory away from the Islamist group,
while the U.S. military has intermittently targeted leaders with raids and drone
strikes, including a Sept. 1 air attack that killed its co-founder.

In Yemen, the United States has virtually unchecked authority to patrol the
country's skies with armed drones. Yemeni counterterrorism forces are backed by
U.S. funding, training and intelligence.

Experts said the United States can expect similar cooperation from Iraq, but not
Syria.  President Bashar al-Assad's military has lost territory but almost
certainly retains control of the country's airspace, said James O. Poss, a
retired U.S. Air Force major general. Even if U.S. drones were able to evade
Syria's ground-based missile batteries, the Syrian air force could easily
scramble fighter jets to chase and shoot down unmanned aircraft, which fly at
relatively slow speeds.

To send drones into Syria, "we'd have to do so with the tacit approval of the
Syrian air force," Poss said. "It depends on how strident the Syrians would want
to be in defending their airspace."

Even with drones and ground forces, the campaigns that Obama cited in Yemen and
Somalia are far from over. Al-Shabab killed 67 people last year in a three-day
siege of a crowded Nairobi mall. Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, as the
Yemen-based affiliate is known, has gone several years without launching a major
attack but is still seen as the most direct danger to the United States,
surpassing that posed by the Islamic State.

"We've not seen any sign that their interest or capability has abated," Olsen
said.

greg.miller@washpost.com

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


