                             2475 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      October 2, 2014 Thursday 3:17 PM EST

Fix the Senate: More experience, less Harry Reid

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 875 words


It is telling that Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) - who supported the shutdown,
filibustered on an absurd national security issue (arguing against drone
jihadists overseas), falsely smeared a fellow senator, voted against bipartisan
immigration reform bill and every budget compromise since elected, and now wants
to invalidate a state law so he can run for president while keeping his current
job - thinks term limits would cure the "dysfunction" in Washington, D.C. (He
apparently doesn't think when it comes to his own state that there are people
"equally capable of maybe more capable" of doing his job.)

In fact, the newest members are the Senate are among the biggest contributors to
disharmony, rancor and partisan gridlock. Would imposing term limits to chase
people like Sens. John McCain (R-Ariz.) or Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) and replace them
with the likes of Rand Paul and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) really going to make the
place less dysfunctional? There is little evidence that the longer one stays the
worse one behaves and the less constructive one becomes. To the contrary,
whether one agrees with their output or not, the more experienced lawmakers tend
to be the most productive. Earlier this year the National Journal reported:

[T]he honor of Most Laws Passed goes to Sen. Orrin Hatch, according to data from
the Library of Congress. Hatch has sponsored or cosponsored 742 bills that
eventually became law. For comparison's sake, the median senator, David Vitter,
has seen 78 of the bills he sponsored or cosponsored enacted.

There is no lack of turnover in the current Senate: 68 of the current senators
have served two terms or less. The better argument is that the more turnover,
the worse the body gets.

Let's take a step back and look at what is "dysfunctional." It is not, I would
suggest, automatically "dysfunctional" because we have ideologically polarized
parties or an polarized electorate. Having strong differences of opinion did not
stop prior generations from doing the people's business. Nor is it
"dysfunctional" when the Senate fails to pass a measure when the country is
intensely divided on a controversial issue. Not getting what you want when you
have not convinced enough people to agree with you reflects how the system is
supposed to function.

Dysfunction - the inability to perform basic constitutional obligations or to
accomplish aims when, as Rand Paul puts it, the sides actually agree - stems
from several factors, I would suggest, having nothing to do with longevity.

First, Sen. Harry Reid (D-Nev.) has made it a practice not to allow open debate
and free amendments. He does not want to vote on items (e.g. Iran sanctions,
Keystone pipeline) where there is broad bipartisan support. You can agree or
disagree with his motives, but it results in less getting done and exasperation
on both sides of the aisle. In that regard Reid has furthered a disagreeable
trend in which lawmakers of the party in the White House do not defend the
institutional prerogatives of the body in which they serve. That merely
encourages the White House to go around Congress. One need only look at the
dozens of bills passed by the House, many of which could gain widespread
support, gathering dust in the Senate because Reid refuses to bring them to a
vote.

George Will observes, "As Congress becomes more trivial, its membership becomes
less serious. It has an ever-higher portion of people who are eager to make
increasingly strenuous exertions to hold offices that are decreasingly
consequential."  His solution however - term limits - I would argue does not
address the problem; it aggravates it as the number of senators with low
seniority demonstrates. Constant turnover rewards those with little
institutional loyalty and greater ambition, who see the Senate as a place to
promote a presidential campaign, a book deal or a TV cable show.

Second, for a host of reasons (campaign finance laws, 24/7 media, the
deterioration of party control) there are many senators, Rand Paul included, who
see the job as a forum for quixotic efforts ("Eliminate foreign aid!"), personal
advancement in which partisan rhetoric and not governance is stressed (a
practice certainly accelerated by Barack Obama's short time in the Senate), and
opportunity to fight for the sake of fighting. The Senate becomes known for a
series of confrontational vignettes not for an ongoing process of problem
solving. The tendency is exacerbated by people who have never served in any
elective capacity come to the Senate. It often turns out they can't make deals,
offend colleagues and are entirely disagreeable.

Third, it is hard to examine "dysfunction" without seeing the role the president
plays. Even among Democrats, this president is not known for engaging his
opposition, or even his own side. The president is very good at generating
scandals (the Veterans Administration, the Obamacare rollout, the IRS, etc.)
which tend to suck of the oxygen and absorb the body in nonstop necessary
investigations.

In short, if we want a better Senate we should elect more sober-minded mature
legislators, a president more adept at governance and a majority party that will
install a majority leader whose aim is to get things done, not avoid exposing
his members to hard votes.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


