                             2499 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 17, 2014 Friday 5:54 PM EST

Meet '5G,' the next-gen technology that will bring you mobile data on steroids;

Future wireless data and phone calls could be "ricocheted" around obstacles at
super speeds.

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 462 words


Many wireless carriers are still rolling out their 4G LTE networks. But federal
regulators are already turning their eye toward next-gen technologies that will
allow incredibly fast mobile data. We're talking rates that are 1,000 times
faster than what the average American gets at home today from a fixed broadband
connection.

Welcome to the era of 5G.

At some point, most wireless technologies are thwarted by obstacles or distance.
That's because wireless spectrum -- the airwaves that carry mobile voice and
data -- are subject to the same laws of physics that govern everything else. But
the Federal Communications Commission thinks there might be promise in a
high-energy spectrum that the industry has taken to calling "millimeter waves,"
due to their high frequency. And on Friday, the FCC said it would begin asking
the public just what it can do to promote this technology.

We already know of a few possibilities. Wireless transmissions today generally
require a line-of-sight connection between the source and the receiver. But with
advanced spectrum in the 24 gigahertz range - far higher than where most
wireless devices operate (in the sub-3 GHz range) - engineers believe they can
"ricochet" signals around obstacles.

"Our next-generation networks are going to have to do some heavy lifting," said
FCC Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel. "So how do we meet those demands? We look
up. Way, way up. To infinity and beyond."

Future mobile technologies could exceed the 24 GHz threshold and take advantage
of even higher-intensity airwaves in the 60 GHz or even 90 GHz bands. These
moves could allow for mobile broadband ranging from 1 gigabit per second (which
is equivalent to the best that today's fiber-optic networks have to offer) to a
mind-boggling 10 gigabits per second, according to FCC Commissioner Ajit Pai.

It won't be long before Americans start connecting more than just smartphones
and tablets to the Internet. Soon they'll be linking appliances, cars, drones
and all manner of other mobile devices, meaning that consumer and business
demand for these airwaves is going to spike.

And that means telecom companies will need more freedom to deploy cell sites,
particularly towers that can create smaller cells to help manage congestion.
Separately Friday, the FCC approved measures that would make it easier for
wireless companies to build these towers.

While there's no universally agreed-upon definition for 5G, FCC Chairman Tom
Wheeler said it was imperative to begin deciding now which spectrum bands can be
used and how they'll be licensed to wireless companies.

"I don't care what they call it - millimeter wave, 5G, kumquats - I don't care,"
Wheeler said. "What we do when we open the [notice of inquiry] is to help us
answer those kinds of questions."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


