                             2457 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                   September 24, 2014 Wednesday 10:10 AM EST

Rand Paul's five biggest Republican feuds;
Paul is one of the biggest draws in the Republican Party. But he's also one of
its most polarizing figures.

BYLINE: Sean Sullivan

LENGTH: 573 words


Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) is one of the biggest draws in the Republican Party right
now. He's also one of its most polarizing figures.

That was evident once again on Tuesday when Mark Salter, a longtime aide to Sen.
John McCain (R-Ariz.), penned an op-ed lambasting the possible presidential
candidate over his claim that McCain met with members of the Islamic State.

It got us to thinking: Who else has Paul clashed with in his own party? Plenty
of people -- often hawkish Republicans -- over plenty of comments, often over
national security and foreign policy.

Below we take a look at Paul's biggest feuds with fellow Republicans, in reverse
chronological order. Did we miss any? As always, let us know in the comments
section.

1. Mark Salter: We can't mention Salter without laying out the full story. The
former McCain aide wrote on Real Clear Politics that Paul is "completely
unsuited" for the presidency and "is either a liar or too easily captivated by
the kinds of outlandish conspiracy theories that excite many of his and his
father's supporters, a cohort long overrepresented by political fringe
dwellers." So, yeah. That happened. Salter's beef was Paul's insistence that
McCain met with representatives of the Islamic State last year. "He [McCain] did
meet with ISIS, and had his picture taken, and didn't know it was happening at
the time," Paul recently told Daily Beast. The Washington Post Fact Checker gave
Paul's claim four Pinocchios.

2. Rick Perry: The Texas governor wrote a July Washington Post op-ed arguing
that it was "disheartening to hear fellow Republicans, such as Sen. Rand Paul
(Ky.), suggest that our nation should ignore what's happening in Iraq." Three
days later, Paul put up his own op-ed in Politico accusing Perry of
mischaracterizing his views. "Apparently his new glasses haven't altered his
perception of the world, or allowed him to see it any more clearly," wrote Paul.
Oh yes, he went there.

3. Peter King: The New York Republican congressman said in May that part of the
reason he was considering running for president was to stop Paul and Sen. Ted
Cruz (R-Tex.). King is one of the most hawkish members of Congress. It surprised
no one when the libertarian-leaning Paul clashed with him.

4. Chris Christie: We could be witnessing the early stages of an epic battle
between Paul and the New Jersey governor, since neither are shy about speaking
their minds and both are openly considering running for president. It all
started in earnest in the summer of 2013, when Christie expressed deep concerns
about the skepticism Paul and other libertarian-leaning Republicans voiced about
the National Security Agency's sweeping surveillance efforts. Paul swiftly
offered a rebuttal on Twitter. More than a year later, the spat still hasn't
been smoothed over. Asked in a recent interview with Kentucky Educational
Television what the first word is that comes to mind when he hears Christie's
name, Paul responded "Bridges," a clear dig at the "Bridgegate" traffic scandal
that rocked Christie's office.

5. John McCain: The longtime Arizona senator labeled Paul and a trio of other
members of Congress "wacko birds" in an interview with the Huffington Post.
McCain took issue with of the filibuster of now-CIA Director John O. Brennan
over drones. "I treat Sen. McCain with respect. I don't think I always get the
same in return," Paul responded.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


