                             2416 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 10, 2014 Wednesday 4:00 PM EST

Ahead of Obama's strategy speech, members face crossfire on Capitol Hill

BYLINE: Ed O'Keefe

LENGTH: 993 words


President Obama plans to present a comprehensive strategy Wednesday night for
defeating Islamic State terrorists in Iraq and Syria, and will lay out how he
intends to work with Congress to achieve his goals, according to a White House
official.

Up on Capitol Hill, congressional leaders traded barbs over the day's pair of
foreign policy speeches - the planned address by Obama, and another from former
vice president Dick Cheney -- as they accused the opposition of being misguided
on foreign affairs.

The presidential address, scheduled for 9 p.m., will include details of plans to
"degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, including U.S. military action and support
for the forces combating ISIL on the ground - both the opposition in Syria and a
new, inclusive Iraqi government," said the official. "The president will discuss
how we are building a coalition of Allies and partners in the region and in the
broader international community to support our efforts, and will talk about how
we work with the Congress as a partner in these efforts."

Obama will be speaking on a subject of intense interest to the American public:
Ninety-four percent of Americans have heard about the news of two journalists
beheaded by Islamic radicals in recent weeks, a record-high, according to an NBC
News/Wall Street Journal poll released Tuesday night.

The White House said Obama and Vice President Biden would be meeting with
members of the National Security Council in the Situation Room. Members of the
president's national security team were briefing lawmakers on the growing threat
of the Islamic terror group. But Francis Taylor, a homeland security
undersecretary for intelligence and analysis told a Senate panel that there is
"no specific, credible threat from ISIL."

Also on Capitol Hill, Senate Majority Leader Harry M. Reid (D-Nev.) said he
supports Obama's use of airstrikes and unmanned aerial drones to go after the
Islamic State, calling the strategy "a smart, strategic and effective approach."

But harkening back to a similar debate 12 years ago to authorize military action
in Iraq, Reid repeatedly criticized House Republicans for meeting this week with
Cheney, who visited the Hill Tuesday. Reid said Cheney "is more responsible than
anyone else for the worst foreign policy decision in the history of the
country."

"Taking advice on foreign policy from Dick Cheney? That's a terrifying
prospect," Reid said in remarks on the Senate floor Wednesday morning.

House Republicans huddled Tuesday morning with Cheney in a long-scheduled
meeting that touched on foreign affairs and election-year politics. Some in
attendance described the former vice president's comments as a "prelude" to
Cheney's Wednesday speech at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative
think tank, where he weighed in on Obama's handling of Middle East policy.

Heeding Cheney's advice likely would again result in sending U.S. military
combat troops into the Middle East, Reid said. "That's not an option for the
American people," he said.

Later, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) called on Obama to deliver
a detailed explanation of his military strategy and what he might need from
Congress.

The president needs to lay out a detailed plan to defeat the Islamic State "and
link those actions to any additional authorization and appropriations he'd like
to see from Congress," McConnell said. "And if the President develops a regional
strategy, builds a combat effective military coalition, and explains how his
strategy will lead to the defeat of ISIL, I believe he'll have significant
congressional support."

"But Americans don't want a lecture," McConnell added. "They want a plan - a
credible, comprehensive plan to deal with this menace that clearly wants to harm
us here at home, and that is only becoming stronger by the day."

McConnell used his morning floor remarks to once again sharply criticize Obama's
foreign policy, labeling him "a rather reluctant commander in chief." Suggesting
repeated failures across the globe, McConnell cited the president's decision to
seek closing the terrorist detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; his plans
to withdraw U.S. combat troops from Afghanistan at the end of the year; his
failed attempts to "reset" relations with Russia; and an all-but abandoned
"strategic pivot" to the Asia-Pacific region.

But he suggested that the growing threat from Islamic terrorists in Iraq and
Syria "presents a turning point" for Obama.

"Will the fall of Anbar Province and the threat posed by ISIL to Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, and Turkey lead to a re-consideration of his entire national security
policy, of the kind I've alluded to here and elsewhere? Or will the President
confine himself within the bookends of short-sighted national security policies
that were originally conceived on the campaign trail in 2008?" McConnell said.

Neither Reid nor McConnell signaled that they support leading congressional
debate on extended military action even as a growing number of lawmakers say
they want an opportunity to do so.

"I believe if I was president I'd want to go to Congress," Sen. Joe Manchin III
(D-W.Va.) told MSNBC's "Morning Joe" Wednesday morning.

"If you have 60 to 70 percent of people supporting [using force in Iraq], don't
you think he should have the stamp of approval from Congress?" Manchin said.
"He's going to have to work with us sooner rather than later."

Sens. Tim Kaine (D-Va.), Angus King (I-Maine) and Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.),
among others, have also called for congressional debate.

"This is not Libya, this is not Grenada, this is not Panama. This is at least
two or three years," Alexander said Tuesday afternoon. "It's not nation-building
-- we assume -- but anytime our country is expected to have a military action,
especially in the Middle East again, it needs to have the full support of the
American people, and that starts here."

Juliet Eilperin and Adam Goldman contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


