                             2485 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                      October 7, 2014 Tuesday 4:58 PM EST

We've learned nothing in the Middle East. That isn't going to change.;
What counts as "strength" and "weakness" for today's political classes.

BYLINE: Paul Waldman

LENGTH: 870 words


If you thought that two disastrous wars in the Middle East spread over 13
miserable years might cure Washington of its delusion that the next war will
solve all our problems, you were wrong. The truth is that the people in power
and contending for power have learned nothing. And guess what: two years from
now, somebody in the grip of that same delusion is going to be elected
president.

This delusion is the common thread running through two of today's stories: The
call from John McCain and Lindsey Graham for more war; and Leon Panetta's new
book criticizing President Obama on foreign policy.

For months, Republicans criticized Obama for not arming "moderate" rebels
fighting against the regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria. Nobody's suggesting
that we invade, they insisted, but we need to help these folks out! And now that
the administration is doing just that, their demands inevitably ratchet up. So
today, Senators McCain and Graham have an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal
lamenting the fact that "the administration still has no effective policy to
remove Bashar Assad from power and end the conflict in Syria."

Just "end the conflict" - what could possibly go wrong? McCain and Graham do
allow that what they're recommending "would not be minor military operations,"
but that's exactly what gets the senators' blood pumping.

Lest you think this is solely a Republican obsession, former CIA director and
defense secretary Leon Panetta is out touring his new book, "Worthy Fights," in
which he argues that Obama "lost his way" when he became reluctant to dive into
the Syrian civil war - a way-losing that by sheer coincidence happened to
coincide with Panetta's departure from the administration, at which point Obama
was hamstrung by not having Panetta's wise counsel to rely upon.

Although I haven't read Panetta's book, from the press descriptions and his
interviews, he seems to see Obama's principal shortcoming as a lack of
enthusiasm for fighting, both at home and abroad, particularly the latter. And
even after Iraq and Afghanistan, this remains the prevailing Beltway belief:
"strength" is good, "weakness" is bad, and the two are defined by how often you
cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war. Kevin Drum described this well:

Panetta isn't even a super hawkish Democrat. Just moderately hawkish. But his
basic worldview is simple: as long as Obama is launching lots of drone attacks
and surging lots of troops and bombing plenty of Middle Eastern countries - then
he's a "strong leader on security issues." But when Obama starts to think that
maybe reflexive military action hasn't acquitted itself too well over the past
few years - in that case he's "kind of lost his way."

There are any number of explanations one could offer for the persistence of this
mindset. Some Republicans just get off on dropping bombs on swarthy foreigners
in dusty far-off lands. Some Democrats have spent so many years trying to prove
they aren't weak that they've become sincerely militaristic.

There's also a catastrophic hubris that I think is related to the endless
blather about "American exceptionalism," the quasi-religious belief that says
that America has the strongest military and the largest economy not because of a
combination of geography and history, but because we are the smartest and most
moral and generally the best people, whom God himself has elevated to our
position atop the world. If you really believe that, then you also probably
believe that the next war will work out great, for no other reason than that
we're America.

It would be wonderful if the current campaign renders ISIS impotent. It would
also be wonderful if the Syrian civil war wrapped up soon, with the Assad regime
replaced by an inclusive democracy in which everyone's human and civil rights
are honored. But realistically, chances are that in two years time Barack Obama
will bequeath to his successor a situation that is still unresolved and still
bad (though perhaps in ways we haven't even yet imagined).

And no matter who that successor is, the answer he or she offers to the question
of Syria and Iraq - and whatever questions follow - is likely to be more
military actions. That president will either be Hillary Clinton, who throughout
her career has been one of the most hawkish Democrats around, or it will be a
Republican who is even more hawkish. And if you think that Rand Paul, who has
expressed reservations about military actions in the past, might act differently
if he were president, don't bet on it. Any Republican will come under
extraordinary pressure from within his party to answer any foreign policy
challenge with more bombings, more aggression, more wars. After all, that's what
being "strong" means, right?

In 2008, in an election where the ongoing disaster of Iraq was the single most
important policy issue, we elected a president who was inherently skeptical of
the effectiveness of military adventurism, particularly in the Middle East. Yet
even he could not resist the pressure to make things go "boom" in the hope that
this time will be different. Once he has departed, we'll be escalating our
involvement in Syria. And we'll probably be looking around for a couple of other
countries to invade, too.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


