                             2451 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 5:51 PM EST

Syrian airstrikes and the costs of Obama's inaction;
Once begun we must see this through to its conclusion: seeing the jihadists
decimated.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 731 words


Too late? Certainly. Insufficient without a ground component? Obviously. But
news that the president ordered air strikes against the Islamic Forces in Syria
with participation of even a few Arab states is a positive development in the
war against the jihadist terrorists. The Post reports: "A statement issued by
the U.S. Central Command early Tuesday said that a 'mix of fighter, bomber,
remotely-piloted aircraft and Tomahawk' cruise missiles destroyed or damaged
multiple Islamic State targets in Syria, where a civil war has been raging for
more than three years." This is the most significant action in the war against
the Islamic State:

The written statement said 14 airstrikes damaged or destroyed Islamic State
training compounds, storage facilities, a finance center, supply trucks and
several armed vehicles. . . . The statement said airstrikes also struck an
al-Qaeda group in Syria - the Khorasan Group - who had established a safe haven
around the embattled city of Aleppo and were planning an attack against the
United States and Western interests.

Once begun we must see this through to its conclusion: seeing the jihadists
decimated on both sides of the Iraq-Syrian border. It is inconceivable that we
could fail to accomplish our objective, for example by refusing to use the force
necessary on the ground and in the air to defeat the enemy. The president has
said many foolish things, but six months or a year from now if the choice is
between failure and introducing additional troops, voters will expect the
commander in chief to do what it takes to win. That is precisely why military
commanders have been desperately trying to keep the door open even a crack for
ground forces. Chris Griffin, executive director of the Foreign Policy
Initiative cautions, "The administration has finally taken a first step toward
dismantling ISIS and other Islamist extremists in Syria, but the effort risks
being too little, too late."

We don't know what would have happened had the president acted sooner, but his
inaction resulted in a terrible human cost and ceded momentum to the terrorists.
"Over the past three years, the President has wasted opportunities to establish
safe zones in which the moderate Syrian opposition could have taken root, to
deter or punish Bashar al-Assad, or to strike ISIS and other extremist groups
before they seized so much territory," says Griffin. "The President's efforts
now will be judged against this record of inaction, and he must make clear that
he will do whatever it takes to defeat ISIS and bring about a post-Assad Syria
that is free of terror."

The non-interventionists who argued for years that we should stay out of the
fight against the Islamic State now can get on the right side of the offensive
against the Islamic State. They too have a chance to get it right - but only if
they continue to press for a comprehensive plan to recapture land lost to the
terrorists, push to properly fund the military and resist the siren call to
involve the worst actor in the region, Iran, in the fray.

Foreign policy is now front and center in the 2014 and 2016 elections. Scott
Brown in New Hampshire is already out with an ad accusing President Obama and
his opponent Jeanne Shaheen of being "confused" on the nature of the threat we
face and argues that he wants to "restore America's leadership in the world."
Candidates who have supported military cuts or wanted to handcuff our
intelligence community, like those who imagine we can't drone American jihadists
plotting attacks on the U.S. look foolish. Those like Tom Cotton (R-Ark.) who
have been cautioning about the dangers of inaction don't need any last minute
"adjustments." His military background and sound judgment are now an asset.
("'We had a huge change in public perception,' said Ed Bethune, a former
Republican congressman from Arkansas who believes Pryor tried to hurt Cotton
earlier in the race by highlighting his aggressive foreign policy. 'I think
their early calculation has misfired.'")

The prominence of foreign policy may be devastating to those who've urged
inaction, refused to put forth a comprehensive strategy of their own or  who are
not up to speed. For these politicians we have one bit of advice: Don't run for
president. The world is too dangerous and too complicated for us to take a risk
on another commander in chief who really has no idea what is going on.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


