                             2477 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 2, 2014 Thursday 6:37 PM EST

'Homeland' is the most bigoted show on television;
The show, which returns Sunday, carelessly traffics in absurd and damaging
stereotypes.

BYLINE: Laura Durkay

LENGTH: 807 words


A blonde, white Red Riding Hood lost in a forest of faceless Muslim wolves: This
is how "Homeland's" creators have chosen to represent their show as it begins
its fourth season, which sees CIA officer Carrie Mathison stationed in Pakistan.
It is also the perfect encapsulation of everything that's wrong with this show.

Since its first episode, "Homeland," which returns Sunday, has churned out
Islamophobic stereotypes as if its writers were getting paid by the cliché. Yet
the show, created by "24" veterans Howard Gordon and Alex Gansa and former
Israeli paratrooper Gideon Raff, continues to rack up awards, critical praise
and millions of viewers.

For starters, the show is riddled with basic errors about Islam and the Middle
East. Laila Al Arian points out some of the more obvious ones: You don't need to
bury the Koran after someone's dropped it on the ground; Issa, the son of
terrorist leader Abu Nazir, has his name mispronounced by everyone on the show;
Roya Hammad - there to remind us that even a Westernized, business-suit-wearing
Arab is not to be trusted - is supposedly Palestinian but has a Persian first
name.

More broadly, "Homeland" carelessly traffics in absurd and damaging stereotypes.
The show hit peak idiocy, for instance, at the beginning of season two, when
Beirut's posh Hamra Street was depicted as a grubby generic videogame universe
of Scary Muslims in which Mathison must disguise herself to avoid detection. The
real Hamra Street is a cosmopolitan, expat-filled area near the American
University, where Western chains like Starbucks and Gloria Jean's compete for
customers and no one would look twice at a blonde, blue-eyed white woman with
uncovered hair. Islam itself is presented as sinister and suspicious: Brody
secretly prays in his garage to foreboding music, and an imam who's outraged
that worshippers were shot during a police operation at his mosque turns out to
be hiding information about Brody's fellow POW-turned-terrorist Tom Walker.

These errors all add up to something important: The entire structure of
"Homeland" is built on mashing together every manifestation of political Islam,
Arabs, Muslims and the whole Middle East into a Frankenstein-monster global
terrorist threat that simply doesn't exist.

The arch villain of season one is Abu Nazir, a member of al-Qaeda (and obvious
bin Laden stand-in) who's plotting an attack on the United States with the
possible help of Marine-turned-terrorist Nicholas Brody. At the beginning of
season two, we see Abu Nazir meeting with a Hezbollah leader (who's also a
wife-beater, naturally) in Beirut. And in season three we learn that a deadly
bomb attack on CIA headquarters was in fact financed by the Iranian government,
and that terrorism suspect Brody is being hidden in rogue state Venezuela.

In just a few steps, the show has neatly stitched together all the current
bogeymen of U.S. foreign policy. (The ISIS tie-in is presumably coming in season
five.)

There's just one small problem: Al-Qaeda and Hezbollah don't actually like each
other. Hezbollah is currently fighting the al-Nusra Front, the al-Qaeda
affiliate in Syria. Iran and al-Qaeda were on opposite side of the sectarian war
in Iraq in the mid-2000s. And at the moment, the United States  is de facto
cooperating with Iran to prop up the Shia central government of Iraq against the
Sunni forces of ISIS.

But all of this is way too nuanced for "Homeland," in which Muslims can play one
of exactly two roles: terrorists or willing collaborators with U.S. intelligence
forces. (This latter role is repeatedly filled by women on the show, who of
course need the CIA's protection from their violent Muslim husbands, epitomized
by the murderous Majid Javadi in season three.) When Brody's wife discovers he's
a Secret Muslim and waves the Koran at him, shouting, "These are the people who
tortured you!" she's not just being melodramatic. She's expressing the show's
core philosophy. Muslims - be they Arab, Iranian or Pakistani - are brutal
terrorists who can't be trusted, and they're all out to get us.

It's easy to argue that "Homeland" is just a TV show, a thriller that naturally
demands diabolical villains and high stakes. But these same stereotypes about
Arabs and Muslims are used politically to justify actions in the real world -
U.S. wars, covert operations and drone strikes; CIA detention and torture;
racist policing, domestic surveillance and militarized borders. In this context,
"Homeland" is not just mindless entertainment, but a device that perpetuates
racist ideas that have real consequences for ordinary people's lives.

RELATED:

(1) I'm a 14-year-old Yazidi girl given as a gift to an ISIS commander. Here's
how I used a meat cleaver to escape.

(2) 'Homeland' and other TV shows set in Washington

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


