                             2469 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 29, 2014 Monday 10:27 PM EST

Islamic State militants switching up tactics after airstrikes, general says

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 319 words


Militants with the Islamic State are adopting new tactics after more than a
month of being hit with U.S.-led airstrikes in Iraq and Syria, traveling in
groups less often and moving less freely, an Air Force general said Monday.

"The bottom line is air power's targeted actions are disrupting ISIL's command
and control, their logistics and infrastructure and their freedom of movement,"
said Maj. Gen. Jeff Harrigian, using one of the acronyms for the militant group
that still has control of broad areas of both countries.

The Islamic State once traveled frequently in long columns of vehicles, massing
forces before attacking towns, military bases and other targets. That occurs
less frequently now because it is easy for U.S. forces to spot them with aerial
surveillance.

"They are a smart adversary, and they have seen that that's not effective for
their survival, so they are now dispersing themselves to allow themselves
situations to be more survivable, if you will," Harrigian said, adding that it
"requires us to work harder to locate them, and then develop the situation to
appropriately target them."

Harrigian said that the bulk of the strikes - about 74 percent - have been
carried out by the U.S. Air Force. Others have been launched by Navy and Marine
Corps pilots flying off ships in the Persian Gulf. The Air Force has flown F-22
Raptors in their first combat campaign along with F-15 fighters, B-1B bombers
and drone aircraft.

To coordinate airstrikes in Iraq, the United States has joint terminal air
controllers in military operations centers that communicate with Iraqi and
Kurdish troops who are out in the field, the general said. The American JTACs
decide what kind of action is appropriate based on the information they receive,
Harrigian said. That does not occur in Syria, however, suggesting the United
States and its partners are striking the Islamic State based on aerial
surveillance alone.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


