                             2414 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                   September 10, 2014 Wednesday 10:23 AM EST

Ebay's Paypal embraces virtual currency bitcoin. Could help bitcoin get some
respect.;
The open-source online "virtual currency" could soon be used to pay for an Uber
taxi ride or that weekend get away booked through AirBnB.

BYLINE: Caelainn Hogan

LENGTH: 692 words


While the deafening buzz around Apple Pay drones on, one of its competitors
quietly did something important.

Paypal, the eBay-owned mobile payment system and the world's second biggest,
announced that it would soon let customers pay in bitcoin, the virtual currency.
The catch, for the moment, is that merchants will have to agree to accept the
use of bitcoin, which for some could be problematic.

Still, the announcement is a major commercial milestone for bitcoin, which has
had its ups and downs as backers have fought for acceptance. "Fairly or not,"
wrote Wired, "bitcoin still has an image problem. For every VC who extols the
innovative power of the digital currency, pop culture still sees it as a way for
the paranoid cyber-libertarian to shop for black-tar heroin on the Silk Road.
All the more reason, then, that bitcoin fans should rejoice" at the Paypal deal.

In a move announced Monday at Techcrunch's Disrupt conference, PayPal is
supporting the cryptocurrency on its Braintree payments platform. When the
Internet's most mainstream brand for moving money embraces a technology, it's
hard to see that system as a fringe operation.

The open-source online "virtual currency" could soon be used to pay for an Uber
taxi ride or that weekend get away booked through AirBnB.

"We're announcing PayPal's first foray into bitcoin," announced Bill Ready,
chief of eBay's Braintree unit, during the Techcrunch's Disrupt SF conference on
Monday, Bloomberg reported. "Over the coming months we'll allow our merchants to
accept bitcoin. On the consumer side it will be a sleek experience."

A Braintree blog post, the same day of the announcement, said "Goodbye to
passwords," and hello to bitcoin:

While we're focused on giving people more seamless buying experiences, we're
also fierce advocates of giving merchants - and in turn their customers -
flexibility and the freedom of choice. That's why today, we also announced that
we'll enable our customers to easily accept bitcoin in the coming months via a
partnership with Coinbase - a trusted, high quality bitcoin payment processor
with            1.6M consumer wallets and 36,000 merchants globally           .
As we make bitcoin available, our v.zero SDK will make it seamless for
developers and merchants to add bitcoin to their existing payment methods and
provide an elegant, adaptive user interface for consumers to pay in bitcoin with
their Coinbase wallet (           request access to the upcoming beta
).

Bitcoin was allegedly invented by a mysterious programmer, or group of
programmers, known only by the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto. It's run into
problems in the past year because of its appeal to assorted hackers,
tax-evaders, money-launderers and drug dealers, as well as plain ordinary
people.

The elusive and famed bitcoin founder is rumored to have an equally notorious
bitcoin fortune stashed away somewhere - estimated by some to be more than one
million bitcoins, the equivalent of $460 today, reported Vice.

The "innovative payment network" offers its users a chance to escape the high
fees and rates imposed  by commercial banks and credit-card processors.

Coinbase - which advertises itself as the most convenient and secure worldwide
"Bitcoin wallet" - will be partnering with Paypal in the new initiative, and the
company has high hopes that bitcoin is evolving into a widely used and reliable
currency for global buying and selling, reported Wired.

Co-founder and chief executive of Coinbase, Brian Armstrong, said the Braintree
integration is just the latest step towards that goal: "To build a new efficient
payment network for the whole world."

While the cryptocurrency has been shadowed by its links with online "black
market" merchants such as Silk Road, bitcoin appears to be rapidly developing
into a popular and increasingly accepted online-payment system.

Bloomberg conducted a poll of financial professionals in July that indicated
people were still wary of the digital currency, with 55 percent surveyed
agreeing that it trades at "unsustainable, bubble-like prices," and reported
Bitcoin prices have catapulted to as little as $341 this year from highs of
$900.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


