                             2446 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 1:53 AM EST

U.S. begins airstrikes against Islamic State in Syria;
Residents of the group's self-declared capital reportlarge explosions

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 579 words


The U.S. military expanded its war against the Islamic State late Monday by
sending waves of warplanes and launching Tomahawk missiles into Syria to attack
an array of targets in an aggressive and risk-laden operation that marks a new
phase in the conflict.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said late Monday that U.S.
commanders had deployed a mix of fighter jets and bombers and had also launched
ship-based Tomahawk missiles against Islamic State targets in Syria. He said the
operations were ongoing and that more details would not be released until after
the strikes were finished.

Kirby said in a statement that "partner nation forces" were also involved in the
attacks but did not identify which other countries participated.

Residents of the northeastern Syrian city of Raqqa - the Islamic State's
self-declared capital - reported news of large explosions on Twitter and said
repeated passes from military aircraft were clearly audible.

The United States was planning to attack as many as 20 Islamic State targets in
the operation, which would mark the biggest single day of attacks since the
military began striking the jihadist group in Iraq on Aug. 8, according to a
senior U.S. military official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss
details of the planned operation.

The targets of Monday's operation included buildings occupied by Islamic State
leaders and the group's training sites and arsenals, according to the U.S.
military official, who said drones were also involved in the attacks.

President Obama and other U.S. leaders had all but promised in recent days that
they would order airstrikes against Islamic State strongholds in Syria. The
jihadist movement - which the CIA estimates has up to 31,000 fighters at its
disposal - controls much of eastern Syria and has used its bases there as a
springboard for seizing territory in neighboring Iraq.

But in ordering the attacks, Obama also thrust the U.S. military directly into
Syria's devastating civil war, something that he had steadfastly tried to avoid
since the country began breaking apart in 2011.

Obama was on the cusp of ordering U.S. military strikes in Syria a year ago to
punish President Bashar al-Assad after strong evidence emerged that the Syrian
government had used chemical weapons against civilians. Obama backed away at the
last minute, however, when Syria agreed to an international plan to destroy its
massive chemical weapons arsenal.

This time, the Americans' target is not Assad, who has managed to cling to his
seat in Damascus, but the Islamic State, a one-time al-Qaeda affiliate that has
exploited the chaos in Syria to attract a huge flow of recruits, weapons and
money.

The Islamic State also represents a mortal threat to Assad and has beaten back
his forces on several fronts. The Obama administration has said repeatedly it
would not cooperate with Assad in any way, even though the two sides now share
an enemy.

As a result, it was unclear how Assad's armed forces would respond to
unauthorized intrusions into Syrian airspace by U.S. warplanes.

The Syrian government has some of the most formidable air defenses in the Middle
East. Obama had publicly warned Syria in advance not to interfere with any U.S.
operations against the Islamic State, saying the Pentagon would respond
forcefully. In the end, U.S. military planners said they expected Assad would
stand down and allow them to attack Islamic State targets freely.

Craig.Whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


