                             2479 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       October 3, 2014 Friday 7:29 PM EST

Even if we defeat the Islamic State, we'll still lose the bigger war;
Why the campaign in Syria won't end better than any of the others.

BYLINE: Andrew J. Bacevich

LENGTH: 1146 words


As America's efforts to "degrade and ultimately destroy" Islamic State militants
extend into Syria, Iraq War III has seamlessly morphed into Greater Middle East
Battlefield XIV. That is, Syria has become at least the 14th country in the
Islamic world that U.S. forces have invaded or occupied or bombed, and in which
American soldiers have killed or been killed. And that's just since 1980.

Let's tick them off: Iran (1980, 1987-1988), Libya (1981, 1986, 1989, 2011),
Lebanon (1983), Kuwait (1991), Iraq (1991-2011, 2014-), Somalia (1992-1993,
2007-), Bosnia (1995), Saudi Arabia (1991, 1996), Afghanistan (1998, 2001-),
Sudan (1998), Kosovo (1999), Yemen (2000, 2002-), Pakistan (2004-) and now
Syria. Whew.

With our 14th front barely opened, the Pentagon foresees a campaign likely to
last for years. Yet even at this early date, this much already seems clear: Even
if we win, we lose. Defeating the Islamic State would only commit the United
States more deeply to a decades-old enterprise that has proved costly and
counterproductive.

Back in 1980, President Jimmy Carter touched things off when he announced that
the United States would use force to prevent the Persian Gulf from falling into
the wrong hands. In effect, with the post-Ottoman order created by European
imperialists - chiefly the British - after World War I apparently at risk, the
United States made a fateful decision: It shouldered responsibility for
preventing that order from disintegrating further. Britain's withdrawal from
"east of Suez," along with the revolution in Iran and the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan, prompted Washington to insert itself into a region in which it
previously avoided serious military involvement.

At the time, oil - not freedom, democracy or human rights - defined the
principal American interest, and stability was the goal. Military power offered
the means by which the United States hoped to attain that goal. Armed might
would keep a lid on things. The pot might simmer, but it wouldn't boil over.

In practice, however, whether putting  boots on the ground or relying on
missiles from above, subsequent U.S. efforts to promote stability have tended to
produce just the opposite. Part of the problem is that American policymakers
have repeatedly given in to the temptation to unleash a bit of near-term chaos,
betting that longer-term order will emerge on the other end.

Back in Vietnam, this was known as burning down the village to save it. In the
Greater Middle East, it has meant dismantling a country with the aim of erecting
something more preferable - "regime change" as a prelude to "nation building."
Unfortunately, the United States has proved considerably more adept at the
former than the latter.

Mostly, coercive regime change has produced power vacuums. Iraq offers a glaring
example. Although studiously ignored by Washington, post-Gaddafi Libya offers a
second. And unless the gods are in an exceptionally generous mood, Afghanistan
will probably become a third whenever U.S. and NATO combat troops finally
depart.

In place of governing arrangements that Washington judged objectionable, the
United States has found itself coping with the absence of any effective
governments whatsoever. Instead of curbing bad behavior, spanking induced all
sorts of pathologies.

By inadvertently sowing instability, the United States has played directly into
the hands of anti-Western radical Islamists intent on supplanting the
European-imposed post-Ottoman order with something more to their liking. This is
the so-called caliphate that Osama bin Laden yearned to create and that now
exists in embryonic form in the portions of Iraq and Syria that Islamic State
radicals control.

Want to measure what America's war for the Middle East has accomplished through
its first 13 iterations? The Islamic State has to rank prominently on any list
of achievements. If Iraq possessed minimally effective security forces, Islamic
State militants wouldn't have a chance. But the Iraqi army we created won't
fight, in considerable measure because the Iraqi government we created doesn't
govern.

President Obama did not initiate the long and varied sequence of military
actions that has produced this situation. Yet he finds himself caught in a
dilemma. To give the Islamic State a free hand is to allow proponents of the
caliphate to exploit the instability that U.S. efforts, some involving Obama
himself, have fostered. But to make Syria the latest free-fire zone in America's
never-ending Middle East misadventure will almost surely prolong and exacerbate
the agonies that country is experiencing, with little ability to predict what
consequences will ensue.

Even if U.S. and allied forces succeed in routing this militant group, there is
little reason to expect that the results for Syrians will be pretty - or that
the prospects of regional harmony will improve. Suppress the symptoms, and the
disease simply manifests itself in other ways. There is always another Islamic
State waiting in the wings.

Obama's bet - the same bet made by each of his predecessors, going back to
Carter - is that the skillful application of U.S. military might can somehow
provide a way out of this dilemma. They were wrong, and so is he.

We may be grateful that Obama has learned from his predecessor that invading and
occupying countries in this region of the world just doesn't work. The lesson he
will bequeath to his successor is that drone strikes and commando raids don't
solve the problem, either.

We must hope for victory over the Islamic State. But even if achieved, that
victory will not redeem but merely prolong a decades-long military undertaking
that was flawed from the outset. When the 14th campaign runs its course, the
15th will no doubt be waiting, perhaps in Jordan or in a return visit to some
unfinished battleground such as Libya or Somalia or Yemen.

Yet even as the United States persists in its determination to pacify the
Greater Middle East, the final verdict is already in. U.S. military power has
never offered an appropriate response to whatever ails the Islamic world. We've
committed our troops to a fool's errand.

And worse, the errand is also proving unnecessary. With abundant North American
energy reserves now accessible - all that shale oil and fracked gas - we don't
need the Persian Gulf oil that ostensibly made our post-1980 military exertions
imperative. For whatever reasons, Washington's national security elites seem
oblivious to the implications these resources have for policy in the Middle
East.

No matter how long it lasts, America's war for the Greater Middle East will end
in failure. And when it does, Americans will discover that it was also
superfluous.

outlook@washpost.com

Read more from Outlook:

Why Obama's assurance of "no boots on the ground" isn't so reassuring

The Islamic State threat is overstated

Follow our updates on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


