                             2402 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      September 5, 2014 Friday 2:04 PM EST

Wonkbook: The policy takeaways from a busy day of big court decisions

BYLINE: Puneet Kollipara

LENGTH: 4718 words


Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog's morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara
(@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or
ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click
here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Wonkbook's Number of the Day: $18 billion. That's how much more in liability
penalties BP may end up having to pay over the 2010 Gulf oil spill. A judge
ruled the company, which has already paid out $28 billion, was grossly
negligent.

Wonkbook's Chart of the Day: The job market is improving, but Americans are
still economically pessimistic.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) A cornucopia of court decisions; (2) how
government helped businesses cheat workers; (3) money matters in the Ebola
outbreak; and (4) why an upcoming NYC climate meeting matters.

Obamacare supporters just got some good news from the courts. "The Obama
administration and supporters of the president's health-care law are probably
breathing a little easier this morning after some pretty big news from the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. A few months after a three-member
panel of the court ruled the federal government can't provide insurance
subsidies through federal-run exchanges in 36 states, the court on Thursday
granted the Obama administration's request for the entire panel to re-hear the
case. The en banc hearing, as it's known, wasn't entirely unexpected - and with
a heavy makeup of Democratic-appointed judges on the panel, it seems likely the
administration will get a more favorable ruling when the entire court
reconsiders the case later this year." Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

sahilkapur: Halbig en banc will feature 8 Dem-appointed judges, 5 GOPs.
http://bit.ly/1vS7tmj Original panel had 2 GOP, 1 Dem.

Background reading: The potential side effects of Halbig. Larry Levitt and Gary
Claxton in Kaiser Family Foundation.

What that news means for potential SCOTUS review of other subsidy case. "The
controversy has already reached the Justices in the case of King v. Burwell, in
a petition filed by challengers to the subsidies seeking to overturn their
defeat in the Fourth Circuit. The government has not yet replied in that case;
this week, it received an extension until October 3 to file its response brief.
It is unclear at this point whether the D.C. Circuit's grant of en banc review
of the subsidies question will have any effect on the Supreme Court's
consideration. The Justices might opt to wait to see if a conflict in lower
court exists, but they also could go ahead and grant review of the pending case.
That would proceed more slowly than will the new review in the D.C. Circuit,
however." Lyle Denniston in SCOTUSblog.

Obamacare decision shows impact of Obama's judges. "For decades a bastion of
conservative jurists appointed by Republican presidents, the appeals court...is
undergoing a political metamorphosis that could affect everything from workplace
rules to the air we breathe. It took nearly five years for Obama and Senate
Democrats to overcome Republicans' opposition to his most controversial
nominees. In the end, they had to change the chamber's rules to prevent
filibusters by a minority of senators. That cleared the way for Obama to fill
out the 11-member court late last year. As a result, the nation's second-most
powerful court now has seven judges named by Democratic presidents and four
named by Republicans." Richard Wolf in USA Today.

Appeals court strikes down same-sex marriage bans in Indiana, Wisconsin. "The
lengthy, often sarcastic ruling from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th
Circuit said the states could not justify denying marriage to homosexuals, who
it said are 'among the most stigmatized, misunderstood and discriminated-against
minorities in the history of the world.'....Two other regional appeals
courts...have ruled that state bans are unconstitutional....The winners and
losers in all of those cases have asked the Supreme Court for a definitive
ruling....The Supreme Court could consider whether to accept the question as
early as this month. The 7th Circuit's decision was not unexpected." Robert
Barnes in The Washington Post.

Quotable: "Heterosexuals get drunk and pregnant, producing unwanted children;
their reward is to be allowed to marry. Homosexual couples do not produce
unwanted children; their reward is to be denied the right to marry. Go figure."
- Judge Richard Posner on the same-sex marriage bans that the ruling struck
down. Lawrence Hurley in Reuters.

Va. Gov. McDonnell convicted on 11 corruption counts. The lesson: Politicians,
beware. "The former Virginia governor's conviction...Thursday could send a
chilling message to other lawmakers, ethics experts say, because the verdict was
rooted in an unusually broad definition of what can be considered an official
act that's traded for gifts. It's a precedent that could make it easier to go
after other politicians who may think the little favors they do for others
aren't really 'official.'...McDonnell was convicted even though the most the
prosecution could prove was that he did fairly mundane things....Legal experts
say the implications of the McDonnell verdict Thursday go way beyond Virginia."
David Nather in Politico.

A court also blocked law restricting early voting in Ohio. Why that matters.
"Ohio is among several states, including Texas, Arizona, Wisconsin and North
Carolina, battling in court over election rules. Such cases involve poll hours,
voter-identification rules and requirements to show proof of citizenship when
registering. A federal trial began this week in Corpus Christi, Texas, where the
U.S. Justice Department has sued the state claiming its new voter-identification
requirement discriminates against minorities and violates the federal Voting
Rights Act. Voting fights in Ohio tend to draw particular interest because of
its role as a key swing state in presidential elections." Mark Peters in The
Wall Street Journal.

'Gross negligence' ruling against BP over Gulf spill could cost it billions more
in liability. "The interim ruling substantially increases the additional
multibillion-dollar liability BP will face in the continuing litigation over the
largest offshore spill in U.S. history. The precise dollar amount of BP's
additional legal bill won't be known until after further judicial findings on
just how much crude oil spewed into the Gulf....BP has already paid out more
than $28 billion in claims and cleanup costs. Barbier's ruling on gross
negligence could mean it will face additional penalties of as much as $18
billion. The company has reported that it has taken a $43 billion charge to
cover all costs related to the spill." Paul M. Barrett in Bloomberg
Businessweek.

Halliburton and Transocean will fare better than BP. "Halliburton Co. (HAL) and
Transocean Ltd. (RIG) were cleared of gross negligence for their roles in the
biggest U.S. offshore oil spill, allowing the companies to avoid the harshest
penalties....Transocean, which owned the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig, and
Halliburton, which provided cement services on the well, weren't completely
cleared of blame - the judge assigned the companies 30 percent and 3 percent
responsibility, respectively. Barbier's finding that Halliburton and Transocean
were each negligent, and not grossly negligent, 'right away limits the fines and
penalties that they're exposed to,' said Rob Desai, an analyst for Edward Jones
in St. Louis." David Wethe in Bloomberg.

Meanwhile, here's what the DOJ will look at in its civil-rights investigation of
Ferguson police tactics. "A federal investigation of the Ferguson, Mo., Police
Department - announced Thursday by Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. - will
examine whether officers have routinely engaged in racial profiling or a pattern
of using excessive force. Holder said the Justice Department will also conduct
an 'intensive review' of racial profiling, stops, searches, frisking and the
handling of mass demonstrations by police officers in the St. Louis County
Police Department, which voluntarily agreed to the review." Kimberly Kindy and
Sari Horwitz in The Washington Post.

Related: Probe into Trayvon Martin shooting still active. Benjamin Goad in The
Hill.

But that's not all. Second civil-rights probe into Brown's death could have
wider implications. "The DoJ is also conducting a civil rights inquiry into
Brown's death. Holder said on Thursday that the second, wider civil rights
investigation may yet expand to take in surrounding police forces and
jurisdictions. Initially it will also consider stops and searches of Ferguson
residents by police, in response to racial disparities detailed in public
documents." Jon Swaine in New York and Paul Lewis in The Guardian.

Other legal reads:

Migrants' right to counsel argued. David Rogers in Politico.

Why SCOTUS will rule on beards. Kaveh Waddell in National Journal.

Holder: No jail for New York Times journalist. Josh Gerstein in Politico.

HASEN: Ohio early-voting case could be a biggie. "This is a significant case,
which could potentially make it to the Supreme Court. It expands voting rights
in a broad way, and makes it difficult for a state like Ohio to cut back on any
expansions of voting rights that it puts in place. The big question is where the
stopping point is in a decision like this, and how to justify calling it
unconstitutional for a state like Ohio to make a modest cutback in early voting
while allowing many other states to offer no early voting at all." Rick Hasen in

 Election Law Blog.

KRUGMAN: The deflation caucus. "The European Central Bank announced a series of
new steps it was taking in an effort to boost Europe's economy....It's far from
clear that the measures now on the table will be strong enough to reverse the
downward spiral....Things in the United States are far from O.K., but we seem
(at least for now) to have steered clear of the kind of trap facing Europe. Why?
One answer is that the Federal Reserve started doing the right thing years ago,
buying trillions of dollars' worth of bonds in order to avoid the situation its
European counterpart now faces. You can argue, and I would, that the Fed should
have done even more. But Fed officials have faced fierce attacks all the way."
Paul Krugman in The New York Times.

ROGOFF: The exaggerated death of inflation. "In a world of slow growth, high
debt, and tremendous distributional pressures, whether inflation is dead or
merely dormant is an important question. Yes, massive institutional improvements
concerning central banks have created formidable barriers to high
inflation....Modern central banking has worked wonders to bring down inflation.
Ultimately, however, a central bank's anti-inflation policies can work only
within the context of a macroeconomic and political framework that is consistent
with price stability. Inflation may be dormant, but it is certainly not dead."
Kenneth Rogoff in Project Syndicate.

FIGUERES AND MOLINA: The long view on climate. "The effort is undoubtedly long
term and ambitious but must be seen as the eventual target so that decisions
taken now are taken with the long game in mind. Climate neutrality may seem like
a tall order in 2014 with global emissions still climbing despite the growing
penetration of renewable energy, improved energy efficiency in many countries
and actions to sustainably manage natural assets like forests. But some
countries have already glimpsed the long term and are pointing their economies
in that direction: from Bhutan and Costa Rica to Papua New Guinea, Sweden and
Switzerland." Christiana Figueres and Mario Molina in The Guardian.

SALAM: How the suburbs got poor. "Much of our built environment still bears the
imprint of the postwar era, despite the fact that the families that were
characteristic of that era are no longer dominant. A single-family house built
for a mother, a father, and a pair of kids is not a terribly attractive option
for a single adult, nor is it affordable when we factor in the cost of upkeep.
Such a house might be more appealing to a working single parent, who might
welcome the space, yet he'd either have to carve out the time to maintain his
little slice of heaven, or he'd have to earn enough to outsource the work of
doing so. And then there is the small matter of affording an automobile, and the
inevitable traffic fines that come with it." Reihan Salam in Slate.

REICH: For many, college is a huge waste of money. "This week, millions of young
people head to college and universities, aiming for a four-year liberal arts
degree. They assume that degree is the only gateway to the American middle
class. It shouldn't be. For one thing, a four-year liberal arts degree is hugely
expensive. Too many young people graduate laden with debts that take years if
not decades to pay off. And too many of them can't find good jobs when they
graduate, in any event." Robert Reich in Salon.

CAREY: The economic price of colleges' failures. "On average, college graduates
continue to fare much better in the job market than people without degrees. But
Mr. Arum and Ms. Roksa's latest research suggests that...those who were poorly
taught are paying an economic price. Because they didn't acquire vital critical
thinking skills, they're less likely to get a job and more likely to lose the
jobs they get than students who received a good education. Yet those same
students continue to believe they got a great education....This suggests a
fundamental failure in the higher education market." Kevin Carey in The New York
Times.

FOEGE, MASON AND SATCHER: Why Americans should pay attention to the Ebola
outbreak. "The Ebola outbreak in West Africa serves as a dramatic example of why
it is essential that the United States take the lead in promoting a robust
global health security agenda....While some might question whether we should be
concerned about health issues in other parts of the world, the citizens of our
country need to know that this work is as essential as protecting our nation
from terror-related threats." William Foege, James Mason and David Satcher in
USA Today.

SMITH: Job shortage or stagnation vacation? "Economists are like most people -
they like simple stories. They also like effects that they understand. And the
idea that taxes are an incentive not to work is a simple, uncontroversial idea.
So it's no surprise that many researchers, pundits and politicians would be
attracted to the notion that our long, grinding economic stagnation is a policy
error - that good intentions ended up as bad policies. But there are some
serious problems with this thesis, as even a casual look at the data will
reveal. The main problem is the behavior of wages." Noah Smith in Bloomberg
View.

WILLIAMSON: Abolish the corporate tax. "We need a better, simpler, more
predictable environment for businesses and investors to operate in - and, as
citizens, we should demand that our government not play favorites in the
marketplace. Instead, we have a grotesque swamp of legalized corruption that
doesn't even do a particularly good job of raising tax revenue. If this is how
our so-called leaders are going to treat their corporate tax code, they don't
deserve to have one." Kevin D. Williamson in National Review.

BUCHANAN: How to build roads without destroying the Earth. "A global zoning plan
would allow building to take place in an intelligent way. Inevitably, of course,
it would also mean that some local interests would have to give way to global
demands. Governments, individuals and firms would sometimes be constrained by
the needs of the greater whole. That's what coordination implies, and it's what
we need if we're going to preserve our world and still boost agriculture to meet
the global demand for food, which will likely double by 2050. Will it happen?
The prognosis is not good." Mark Buchanan in Bloomberg View.

Dinosaur interlude: Ladies and gentlemen...introducing Dreadnoughtus.

In stimulus, taxpayers and workers were gouged by labor-law dodge. "A review of
public records in 28 states uncovered widespread cheating by construction
companies that listed workers as contractors instead of employees in order to
beat competitors and cut costs. The federal government, while cracking down on
the practice in private industry, let it happen in stimulus projects in the rush
to pump money into the economy at a time of crisis. Companies across the country
avoided state and federal taxes and undercut law-abiding competitors. They
exploited workers desperate for jobs, depriving them of unemployment benefits
and often workers' compensation insurance. Exactly how much tax revenue was
forfeited on stimulus projects isn't clear. This is: The government enabled
businesses bent on breaking the rules." Mandy Locke and Franco Ordoñez in
McClatchy Newspapers.

It's not just the stimulus. "The problem has entangled exotic dancers, FedEx
drivers, college interns and newspapers....Facing a tight economy, a growing
number of companies have sought ways to cut costs by wrongly classifying regular
employees as independent contractors....The debate shook up college sports this
year when a National Labor Relations Board officer in Chicago determined that
Northwestern University's football players were not just athletes but also
employees under the close direction of their coaches. There's no single test for
determining whether a worker is an employee or an independent contractor."
Franco Ordoñez and Mandy Locke in McClatchy Newspapers.

Immigrants are hit especially hard. "McClatchy's review of payroll records shows
immigrants are most susceptible to misclassification and other exploitation.
Using the records as a starting point, McClatchy found and interviewed hundreds
of laborers and tradesmen. Many, in addition to being misclassified, told
unsettling stories of mistreatment: Companies refusing to provide tax forms that
allowed workers to file tax returns. Bosses forcing workers to pay a fee to use
protective gear such as hard hats and steel-toe boots. Bosses refusing to settle
up on days' or weeks' worth of pay. A workplace injury without any insurance to
take care of it." Franco Ordoñez and Mandy Locke in McClatchy Newspapers.

A solution could be found in New York and Illinois. "While North Carolina and
other Southern states have misclassification rates on publicly financed projects
approaching nearly 40 percent, the reporters in Illinois and New York combed
through payroll records for dozens of projects and found not one instance of a
company wrongly listing its employees as independent contractors. It's no
accident. Illinois and New York have passed hard-nosed laws and formed task
forces to take an aggressive tack toward employers who misclassify their
workers." Ryann Grochowski Jones in ProPublica and Mike Fitzgerald in the
Belleville News-Democrat/McClatchy Newspapers.

Explainers:

6 ideas for curbing worker misclassification and who in Washington can curtail
its use. Franco Ordoñez and Mandy Locke in McClatchy Newspapers.

For the rest of the investigative series: Contract to cheat.McClatchy
Newspapers.

Meanwhile: Would higher fast-food wages make America healthier? "There's yet
another potential side effect in the fight over worker pay: If fast-food wages
rise, and fast-food prices do too, would Americans eat less of it?...This is
important because eating junk food is widely thought to be correlated with
obesity, and tinkering with its price (think soda taxes) is one of policymakers'
favorite ways of trying to 'nudge' people toward health....The takeaway here
might be that the demand for a cheap, convenient meal seems ingrained and
relatively stable. Fast-food chains always seem to find a way to get hungry
customers in the door, price hikes or no." Olga Khazan in The Atlantic.

Existential crisis interlude: This cat realizes he's a cat. (But has he figured
out whether the red dot is the enemy?)

Just what the doctor ordered: U.S. kicks in more funding. "U.S. officials kicked
$75 million more in funding into the fight against the worst Ebola outbreak in
history after the World Health Organization said budget cuts were hampering its
efforts against the disease. The added money brings the U.S. contribution to
$100 million, and will be used to add health workers and provide equipment and
supplies in West Africa....WHO officials have said beating back Ebola could cost
at least $600 million at a time when the agency has a much smaller response
staff than during the 2009 flu pandemic." Simeon Bennett in Bloomberg.

How budget cuts have hurt WHO's disease-fighting abilities. "The Ebola epidemic
has exposed gaping holes in the ability to tackle outbreaks in an increasingly
interconnected world, where diseases can quickly spread from remote villages to
cities housing millions of people. The W.H.O....has been badly weakened by
budget cuts in recent years, hobbling its ability to respond in parts of the
world that need it most. Its outbreak and emergency response units have been
slashed, veterans who led previous fights against Ebola and other diseases have
left, and scores of positions have been eliminated - precisely the kind of
people and efforts that might have helped blunt the outbreak in West Africa
before it ballooned." Sheri Fink in The New York Times.

Explainer: Seven reasons why this Ebola outbreak is so bad. Julia Belluz in Vox.

Interview: WHO chief Margaret Chan on going to war with Ebola.NPR.

A few Ebola cases are likely to end up in U.S., analysis shows. "The authors of
a new analysis say many countries - including the U.S. - should gear up to
recognize, isolate and treat imported cases of Ebola. The probability of seeing
at least one imported case of Ebola in the U.S. is as high as 18 percent by late
September, researchers reported Tuesday in the journal PLOS Currents: Outbreaks.
That's compared with less than 5 percent right now. These predictions are based
on the flow of airline passengers from West Africa and the difficulty of
preventing an infected passenger from boarding a flight. As with any such
analysis, there's some uncertainty." Richard Knox in NPR.

3rd infected U.S. doctor will be treated at special facility in Nebraska. "The
Nebraska hospital expects Sacra to arrive Friday morning. The Biocontainment
Patient Care Unit is one of four of its kind in the United States....The other
two Americans...were brought back to the United States and treated at Emory
University Hospital, which has a special isolation unit....The other two
isolation units are at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda and St.
Patrick's Hospital in Montana....The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
has said that any U.S. hospital that is following CDC's infection control
recommendations and can isolate a patient in a private room is capable of safely
managing a patient with Ebola." Elahe Izadi in The Washington Post.

Related: Amid Ebola epidemic, progress on another disease epidemic. Justine
Drennan in Foreign Policy.

Other health care reads:

More homes go smoke-free, but exposure remains a threat. Nancy Shute in NPR.

Why Walgreen's won't stop selling tobacco like CVS is. Bruce Japsen in Forbes.

Va. lawmaker stabbed by son urges mental-health reforms. Liz Szabo in USA Today.

Democrats borrow GOP idea on health costs. Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar in the
Associated Press.

HealthCare.gov server is hacked, but no personal information threatened. Andrea
Peterson and Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

New Republican pitch to female voters: Over-the-counter birth control. Cathleen
Decker in the Los Angeles Times.

Animal overload interlude: Guy gets smothered by bunnies.

New York summit could prove pivotal to hopes for 2015 climate deal. "United
Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon this month hopes to reinvigorate the
years-long effort to forge a global climate deal, even as concerns grow over
whether the final pact will be rigorous enough to address threats to the
environment. Ban wants heads of state at a Sept. 23 gathering in New York to
outline how their countries will contribute to a mutual goal to contain rising
temperatures...The final deal is due to be signed in Paris in 2015. Hart said
the event will avoid some of the thornier questions surrounding the ultimate
outcome of the Paris summit, but should give a good indication of how serious
countries are." Ben Garside and Valerie Volcovici in Reuters.

Explainer: New York to become a hub of climate hubbub. Here's what it all means.
John Upton in Climate Central.

Aircraft emissions may be next for U.S. climate rules. "Aircraft may be next in
line for U.S. regulation of greenhouse-gas emissions, as President Barack
Obama's administration broadens its climate-change efforts beyond automobiles
and power plants. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said it would study
the health dangers of that pollution...and release its findings by next April.
If it deems aircraft emissions a risk, it said it will begin the process of
crafting rules. Advocates say that won't be a high hurdle....Representatives of
airlines such as Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines Inc. (DAL) and aircraft maker
Boeing Co. (BA), based in Chicago, said they support a global pact on limiting
emissions. " Mark Drajem in Bloomberg.

EPA struggles to account for cross-state emissions reductions in power plant
rule. "As it stands, the proposed EPA rule would not give a state credit for
instituting an energy efficiency program if the emissions reductions occur at a
power plant in another state. Instead, the state hosting that power plant would
receive the benefit, even though it did nothing. That's a problem for states
that import their electricity from others, and it's one they're increasingly
voicing. Failing to address it could discourage states from pursuing energy
efficiency programs, which the EPA is banking on to realize its projected
savings in customers' electricity bills by the time the rule is fully
implemented in 2030." Zack Colman in the Washington Examiner.

Other environmental/energy reads:

Clinton: America can be a clean-energy superpower. Jason Plautz in National
Journal.

Keystone XL route runs through Nebraska court. Andrew Harris in Bloomberg.

Extreme animal sports interlude: This daring goat attempts to ride a skateboard.

Why your fear of medical debt is entirely justified. Jason Millman.

One reason Democrats are so scared of Obama's promise to act on immigration.
Roberto A. Ferdman.

Millennials aren't leaving their jobs - and that's a big problem for the
economy. Jeff Guo.

The states where Americans are the most and least obese. Roberto A. Ferdman.

Obamacare supporters just got some good news from the courts. Jason Millman.

Consumer advocates urge the Department of Education to crack down on student
loan debt collectors. Jonnelle Marte.

What might actually be holding back workers' wages. Ylan Q. Mui.

No kidding? FCC chair says U.S. broadband market isn't competitive. Amy Schatz
in Re/code.

Hill leaders hope for quick September session - and no shutdown drama. Ed
O'Keefe in The Washington Post.

A new push for corporate giving disclosure. Benjamin Goad in The Hill.

How John Lennon affects today's immigration fight. Jim Kuhnhenn in the
Associated Press.

White House taps Google's Megan Smith to take CTO reins. Tony Romm in Politico.

Drones reshape U.S. aviation policy. Keith Laing in The Hill.

America's schools could be more efficient if teachers were paid less, report
says. Joy Resmovits in The Huffington Post.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


