                             2461 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 7:38 PM EST

Iraqi leader says terror plot targets West, but U.S. officials express
skepticism;
Prime Minister says foreign fighters plan attacks on subways, but U.S. officials
are skeptical

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

LENGTH: 660 words


NEW YORK - Iraq has "credible" intelligence that Islamic State militants plan
terrorist attacks on subway systems in the United States and France, Iraqi Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi said Thursday, but U.S. intelligence and other
officials said they are not aware of any such plot.

"Today, while I'm here, I'm receiving accurate reports from Baghdad that there
was arrests of a few elements, and there are networks planning from inside Iraq
to have attacks," Abadi said. "They plan to have attacks in the metros of Paris
and the U.S."

Iraqi intelligence agencies informed Abadi on Thursday about what he described
as an active plot by foreign fighters, including French and American citizens,
he said during an interview on the sidelines of the annual United Nations
General Assembly.

Abadi said he had requested further information, and said the intelligence
assessment was being shared with U.S. and French officials, Abadi said. He said
he did not know whether the planned attacks were imminent.

"This is not plotting that we have yet confirmed," a senior Obama administration
official said Thursday. "We want to seek to corroborate their information."
Separately, U.S. intelligence and law enforcement officials, speaking on
condition of anonymity to discuss threat assessments, said they do not have
information about such a planned attack.

National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden added that the White House
is aware of Abadi's claim.

"We have not confirmed such a plot and would have to review any information from
our Iraqi partners before making any further determinations," Hayden said. "We
take any threat seriously and always work to corroborate information we receive
from our partners. We're obviously very focused on the issue of foreign
fighters."

The senior administration official stressed that Washington continues to assess
that the Islamic State is not yet engaged in "specific plotting" against targets
in the United States. The official added that a threat arising from foreign
fighters cells "tracks with what our concern has been, but again it's premature
to characterize the United States as having a particular confirmation of a
specific plot."

President Obama led a United Nations Security Council session Wednesday focused
on the particular threat posed by radicalized Americans or others who travel to
Iraq or Syria to fight but could easily return home to carry out attacks. The
council approved new rules for nations intended to stop suspects as they travel
to join or return from the militants' fight.

Much of the U.S.-led military and diplomatic strategy to counter the militants
rests on Abadi, who took office just weeks ago. A Shiite, he has pledged to
share power and resources with Sunnis and Kurds and strengthen the country's
internal defense forces, while sending the Iraqi army to fight the militants on
the ground.

Abadi told a small group of reporters Thursday that he is committed to
decentralizing power from Baghdad, but he took a hard line against Kurdish
demands for what he called an unfair share of national oil revenue. He indicated
he would like to renegotiate an oil agreement with the semiautonomous Kurdish
government.

Abadi also said while U.S.-led air strikes against Islamic State targets in Iraq
are crucial to defeating the militants, he will not cede full authority to the
United States.

"I have raised the issue of the sovereignty of Iraq," in discussion with U.S.
and other leaders, Abadi said. "We don't want to happen in Iraq what happened in
Yemen and Pakistan."

The United States has long-running drone operations against terrorism targets in
both those countries. The U.S. operations are highly unpopular, especially among
Pakistanis, and seen as an infringement of national sovereignty.

Terror targets should be coordinated with Iraq, Abadi said, and the air campaign
should be "short and decisive."

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Greg Miller and Adam Goldman in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


