                             2436 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 16, 2014 Tuesday 6:54 PM EST

Ukraine ratifies association with E.U., grants concessions to rebels;
The Ukrainian parliament approved an association accord with the E.U. over
Moscow's objections.

BYLINE: Michael Birnbaum;William Branigin

LENGTH: 1465 words


KIEV, UKRAINE - The Ukrainian parliament ratified an agreement Tuesday to forge
an economic and political association with the European Union and quietly passed
legislation to grant amnesty to pro-Russian rebels and greater autonomy to
regions they control in eastern Ukraine.

In a vote synchronized with the European Parliament in Strasbourg, Ukrainian
lawmakers unanimously approved the association pact over objections from Russia,
which fears the loss of a market for its goods and damage to its economy from an
influx of European products through Ukraine. The rejection of the pact in
November by pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych sparked popular protests
that led to his downfall in February, triggering the current crisis with Russia
and driving relations between Moscow and the West to their lowest point since
the Cold War.

Staged amid great fanfare in Kiev, the televised ratification vote prompted a
standing ovation from legislators, who leapt to their feet to sing the Ukrainian
national anthem. President Petro Poroshenko told lawmakers the vote was a "first
but very decisive step" toward integrating Ukraine with the European Union.

Ukrainians "gave up their lives so that we could take a dignified place among
the European family," he said in his speech, which was published on his Web
site. He referred to the scores of people who died in street protests against
Yanukovych and the estimated 3,000 killed in a five-month-old conflict with
pro-Moscow separatists in eastern Ukraine.

"Since World War II, not a single nation has paid such a high price for their
right to be European," Poroshenko said.

Earlier Tuesday, legislators voted behind closed doors to approve two bills
granting amnesty to rebels and greater autonomy for eastern regions as part of
an effort to consolidate a tenuous Sept. 5 cease-fire and end the fighting in
eastern Ukraine.

The decision on Tuesday to enshrine in law an amnesty and a framework for
self-rule in the east represented a major concession to Russia that in many ways
gave the Kremlin what it had been seeking since early in the conflict, long
before the violence broadened and thousands died.

Any loss of sovereignty in the east complicates Ukraine's chances to join NATO -
a key Russian concern.

In another significant olive branch to Russia, Poroshenko last week delayed key
economic provisions of the pact with the European Union until 2016, soothing the
Kremlin's concerns that low-tariff European products could flood the Russian
market via Ukraine.

The parliamentary votes came a day after Poroshenko proposed a series of major
concessions to end the uprising in the east.

In addition to amnesty and special self-governance status for territories
occupied by the rebels, his proposal also included protections for the Russian
language and would allow the separatist-controlled regions to elect their own
judges, create their own police forces and cultivate deeper ties to Russia -
while remaining part of Ukraine.

It would effectively formalize a concession of power to the rebels after
sweeping military setbacks in August and September forced Poroshenko to sue for
peace. Although Ukraine appeared on the verge of ending the rebel uprising weeks
ago, a reinvigorated separatist campaign - which Ukraine and NATO claim has been
backed by Russian arms and troops - left the Ukrainians facing devastating
losses. Russia denies aiding the rebels.

The proposal fleshed out a cease-fire deal reached with the rebels this month
and provided the most complete view yet of how far Kiev may be willing to go to
end the uprising.

Poroshenko's offer came as the truce was fraying, with intense fighting in
pockets of the east threatening to destroy the cease-fire. On Monday, mortar
rounds continued to strike residential neighborhoods in the city of Donetsk a
day after two vehicles carrying international observers were struck by shrapnel.

Some of the elements of Poro­shenko's plan resembled the so-called frozen
conflicts in which Russian-backed partisans have seized control of territories
in Georgia and Moldova, thus giving Moscow leverage over those countries and
complicating their efforts to join NATO. But Poroshenko defended his proposal,
insisting that despite the broad concessions, it would succeed in maintaining
the rebel-held territories within the boundaries of Ukraine and prevent their
independence.

"There is nothing more important for us than peace," Poroshenko told Ukrainian
political leaders Monday. "These are the key positions that will ensure it."

But the proposal also put Poroshenko on a likely collision course with
pro-Western activists and politicians in Kiev, who think he might be conceding
far too much to the Russian-backed rebels. In turn, some separatists - a band of
aligned militias that have called for creating an independent state called "New
Russia" - offered highly skeptical assessments of the offer, and others
dismissed it outright.

"We will take care of our land by ourselves," Alexander Zakhar­chenko, the
self-declared prime minister of the separatists' Donetsk People's Republic, told
Ukraine's Vesti news Web site. "On our land, it will be our people and our laws.
There have been no discussions about staying within the territory of Ukraine."

Poroshenko called for new local elections Nov. 9 in the rebel-controlled
regions. Miroslav Rudenko, an official with the Donetsk People's Republic, told
the Interfax news agency that such a ballot would "be held only if the situation
at the front becomes stable and if these elections unfold in compliance with the
laws of the people's republics, not Ukraine." He vowed that "neither Poroshenko
nor Ukrainian state institutions will have anything to do with these elections."

Although the special self-governance status would be guaranteed for only three
years, it appeared to allow the separatists a chance to solidify theirpower in
theregions where they have seized control, allegedly with the aid of Moscow.

Poroshenko's proposal - which must still be debated and approved by parliament -
came after a decision by Kiev to postpone Ukraine's full entry into a trade
treaty with Europe, a move that fueled further concerns of  among pro-Western
groups in Ukraine that the government is sacrificing too much. Although
Poroshenko said the worst offenders in the conflict would not be given amnesty,
critics said he was effectively rewarding violence and leaving thugs in charge
in the east.

"This is a bad proposal," said Ekaterina Butko, a leader of the Maidan movement
that toppled Ukraine's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, in February.
"It goes too far. After so many people have died, so many houses destroyed, so
many lives ruined, this would reward the people who did this."

In the east, the fragile truce has been shaken in recent days by escalating
violence. Ukrainian military spokesman Andriy Lysenko accused the rebels Monday
of having attacked checkpoints and other positions in intensified fighting over
the weekend. The Ukrainian military, he said, was forced to respond.

"The attacks of Russian mercenaries have become more active to provoke our units
to retreat from their positions," he said.

For their part, the rebels charged Monday on their Web site that Ukraine had
"repeatedly violated the cease-fire." They said the Ukrainian military fired on
separatist militias as well as residential targets in Donetsk, killing 20.

Russia's envoy to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is observing the cease-fire in Ukraine, accused the Ukrainian
military of shelling rebel and civilian positions. On Sunday, two OSCE vehicles
were damaged when observers were caught in the shelling.

"OSCE observers obtained vivid evidence that the Ukrainian military violates the
cease-fire and shells civilians with heavy weapons," the envoy, Andrei Kelin,
told Interfax.

Lysenko, however, denied that the Ukrainian military had shelled "any
residential areas and settlements" and claimed that rebels had committed
hundreds of cease-fire violations over the weekend, including an assault by more
than 200 rebels near the Donetsk airport.

Ukrainian officials also said two drones were spotted over the weekend, one
traveling toward the strategic port city of Mariupol, where heavy fighting was
recently reported.

Russia still has about 25,000 troops along its long border with Ukraine and more
than 3,000 soldiers inside the country, according to the Ukrainian government.

The United States and other NATO countries started military exercises in western
Ukraine on Monday. Ukraine has recentlysought to join the NATO alliance, but
given the uproar such a move would provoke in Moscow, there is almost no chance
of that happening.

michael.birnbaum@washpost.com

william.branigin@washpost.com

Branigin reported from Washington.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


