                             2474 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      October 2, 2014 Thursday 2:01 PM EST

Getting the Sunni tribes back in the fight

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 503 words


Despite the president's rhetoric about conducting a war from the air and some
right-wingers' uninformed dismissal of  a "political" component to the war
against the Islamic State, it is essential, just as it was in the original Iraq
surge, to gain the cooperation of the Sunni tribes to expunge violent extremists
in their midst. Who recognizes this now? The Obama administration. The
Washington Times reports:

U.S. officials are now engaged in a high-stakes push to convince Sunni Muslim
tribal leaders in Iraq to cooperate with Baghdad and Washington in the fight
against Islamic State extremists in the nation, a strategy that sources say will
likely take as much as a year to come to fruition and still has major challenges
to overcome.

Outside experts involved in the successful surge in the Bush administration are
less delicate. They in effect say the notion we can gain back the trust of Sunni
tribes and get them to risk their lives with little or no U.S. ground component
is preposterous. A former Bush official tells me, "John Allen is a terrific guy,
with lots of relevant experience as deputy commander in Anbar during the surge,
but they are putting more weight on his broad shoulders than even he can bear."
In essence, the U.S. forces "walked out on them in 2011," says the official. "It
is hard to see how we get them back [to fight extremists]."

Fred Kagan of the American Enterprise Institute was instrumental in designing
the surge. He agrees that it is difficult to duplicate the success of the surge
without putting our own people there to assist the Sunni tribes. "We have worked
with Sunni Arabs in Iraq before to fight against al-Qaida in Iraq those groups'
predecessor. We need to find out whether those tribes or other tribes there and
whether Sunni Arabs in Syria are willing and able to stand with us, " he said in
a recent interview. "We're not going to be able to find that out from 30,000
feet." This doesn't mean a hundred thousand troops on the ground. It does,
however, mean, "We need to send Special Forces into the Sunni Arab lands in Iraq
and Syria as quickly as possible to make contact with the people who could have
a decisive effect on this effort and see whether there is a strategy there that
could be successful. That's got to be the priority."

Sooner or later reality trumps ideology on the battlefield. If we want to
destroy the Islamic State, we will not do it from "30,000 feet" or by lecturing
the Sunni tribes to get back in the game. We will do it by our military's
painstaking and brave work. It makes you wonder whether the "not ground troops"
crowd understands how we prevailed before - that is, before Obama threw it away
and pulled out a relatively small but significant force that could have cemented
our gains. Unfortunately, Obama is insistent on ignoring the lessons of the past
while ambitious pols on the far right don't know enough or want to learn enough
to dispel the fiction that a war against the Islamic State can be waged by
drones and airplanes alone.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


