                             2453 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 6:47 PM EST

The U.S. military uses some of the most sophisticated tech on the planet. Like
Windows Media Player.

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 244 words


America woke up Tuesday morning to learn that its military - and a number of
Middle Eastern allies - had dropped bombs and cruise missiles on the Islamic
State. The strikes involved some of the world's most advanced military
technology, including fighters, bombers and drones. It even marked the first
time the F-22 Raptor ever saw combat. But there's one technology the Pentagon
can't seem to retire, even though the rest of us have long since moved on.

It's Windows Media Player.

In a briefing to reporters Tuesday, Pentagon officials showed video of a
targeted air strike against the Islamic State. But the officials showed the
video using a version of Microsoft's venerable media player that dates back to
Windows XP - an operating system that's no longer even supported by the company,
except under certain circumstances. (As an alternative, I'm partial to VLC
player, an open-source program that plays virtually any file format you can
throw at it.)

Breitbart White House correspondent Charlie Spiering caught the moment as a GIF.

While the nation's military clearly has more important things to spend its
resources on than a measly video player, the choice of software is a sign of a
wider challenge for the agency.

@AthertonKD@b_fung When I worked for DoD last year, my desktop ran on XP and
still had a slot for 3 1/2 in. disks...which we still used.

But with apologies to Donald Rumsfeld - you go to war with the media player you
have, not the one you wish you had.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


