                             2471 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 30, 2014 Tuesday 1:47 PM EST

Congress's sorry dereliction of duty;
Lawmakers see it as safer to be armchair generals than to have a war vote on
their record.

BYLINE: Katrina vanden Heuvel

LENGTH: 924 words


In a Washington paralyzed by partisan division, there is apparently one area of
bipartisan agreement: Congress should ignore its constitutional mandate to vote
on war with the Islamic State, a conflict that President Obama admits will take
years.

The president says he'd "welcome" congressional support  but doesn't need it.
Democratic leaders Rep. Nancy Pelosi (Calif.) and Sen. Harry Reid (Nev.) agree.
Republican House Speaker John Boehner (Ohio) argues Congress should postpone any
debate until next year. He allows it might be in the "nation's interest" for
members of Congress to weigh in, but it certainly isn't an imperative. The
leaders of Congress treat their own body as vestigial, offering little beyond
symbolic gesture on the vital question of war and peace.

This bipartisan consensus about expanding the executive's war-making powers
directly contradicts the Constitution of the United States. The Founders gave
Congress, not the president, the power to declare war. Their purpose was clear.
War was the instrument by which kings and dictators consolidated power and
impoverished nations. They feared that the executive by its nature was more
given to war. James Wilson, a delegate to the Constitutional Convention,
summarized the consensus: Giving the power to Congress "will not hurry us into
war; it is calculated to guard against it. It will not be in the power of a
single man, or a single body of men, to involve us in such distress."

The Founders assumed that the Republic would generally be at peace. Except to
repel imminent attack, any decision to go to war would be made by the
legislature, after extended debate. The legislature would debate before the war
started, before casualties were taken, before patriotic fevers spiked.

In an important speech to the National Defense University last year, President
Obama noted that "we must define the nature and scope of this struggle, or else
it will define us, mindful of James Madison's warning that 'No nation could
preserve its freedom in the midst of continual warfare.' " He pledged to engage
Congress in efforts to "refine, and ultimately repeal" the post-9/11
Authorization to Use Military Force (AUMF), and promised not to sign laws to
"expand this mandate further."

That promise apparently is, in Richard Nixon's memorable phrase, "inoperable,"
as the president now invokes the same AUMF as his authority for war on the
Islamic State.

The Founders would not have been shocked at the executive seeking to claim the
war power, but they would be astounded at Congress voluntarily giving it up.

Legislators don't want to vote on authorizing the war for the same reason it is
imperative that they do so: They would be accountable for the decision they
make.

When President George W. Bush geared up to launch the war on Iraq, politicians
with national ambitions lined up in support, many deeming it necessary for their
political viability. But that catastrophic choice came back to haunt them, as
exemplified by Hillary Clinton, who paid dearly for her vote in the 2008
Democratic primaries.

Voting on the war on the Islamic State is unpalatable. A majority of Americans,
spooked by the beheadings and the lurid exaggeration of the threat posed by the
Islamic State, now support the bombing. But most oppose putting U.S. forces on
the ground, and few have any stomach for the long, violent, indeterminate
struggle that an attack on the Islamic State is likely to be. Legislators know
that the shock of the beheadings is but temporary. Continued American bombings
will inevitably increase commitment, upheaval and costs, which will soon turn
Americans sour on the new war. A peace movement has already started to stir and
will grow as the price rises. Some legislators - mostly Democrats - have already
begun to voice skepticism.

Politicians who vote to support what is certain to be a long, and likely losing,
conflict will be at risk. But politicians who fail to vote for the war will be
attacked as undermining forces already engaged in the battle. No wonder leaders
of both parties agreed to punt on the vote until after the election, and likely
until the next Congress. It is far safer to be an armchair general than to have
your vote on the record for a war that turns bad.

This is a sorry dereliction of duty. This is not a partisan or a procedural
matter. This is, as the president has said, about what kind of a country we are.
"The choice we make about war," he told us, "can impact - in sometimes
unintended ways - the openness and freedom on which our way of life depends."

As the "indispensable nation," an America committed to police the world will be
enmeshed in unending conflicts. This president, accused by Republicans bizarrely
of isolationism, is now waging wars in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, intervened
to overthrow a government in Libya, and is dropping bombs from drones in eight
countries. The wars of today will surely generate tomorrow's enemies.

The Founders envisioned Congress, comprised of legislators in close touch with
the people in their states and districts, as a check on this imperial temptation
for the executive. The only way that can happen is for Congress to exercise its
power to declare war - or decide against it. And for voters to hold their
legislators accountable for the choice they make.

 The president had it right in his speech a year ago: "This war, like all wars,
must end. That's what history advises. That's what our democracy demands." Will
Congress stand with the Republic or will its members simply duck and run for
cover?

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


