                             2491 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                The Answer Sheet

                      October 10, 2014 Friday 9:24 PM EST

The amazing thing Malala plans to say if a Taliban gunman approaches her again

BYLINE: Valerie Strauss

LENGTH: 593 words


The Norwegian Nobel Committee just did what it should have done in 2013: Give
the Nobel Peace Prize to Malala Yousafzai, the inspirational 17-year-old
Pakistani who advocates for the right of girls to get a formal education - and
who nearly died after being shot by Taliban gunmen who did not want girls to go
to school.

On Oct. 9, 2012, Malala was returning home from school on a bus when she was
shot in the head by a gunman from the Taliban. The group, in 2009, had banned
girls from going to school in Pakistan's Swat Valley, where Malala lived and was
promoting the right of girls to go to school before she was 10 years old. In
response to the Taliban edict, she gave a speech called "How dare the Taliban
take away my basic right to an education?" Malala survived critical injuries
from the shooting and was taken to Britain where she underwent long and
intensive rehabilitation.

Working to give girls an education is more than a equity issue; research has
shown that educating girls and women leads to more stable and economically
viable communities, and it is seen by many as one of the best long-term
approaches to achieving peace in the world. There are 33 million fewer girls
than boys attending school in the early grades around the world, even though the
female population is larger. Malala has raised to world attention the struggle
that millions of girls and women face every day to get an education despite
opposition from those who, for religious, cultural and/or political reasons,
want females to stay home.

Last year, at age 16, she released her memoir, titled "I am Malala," a phrase
invoked around the world as a symbol for the right of girls to be educated. On a
book tour around the world, she appeared on "The Daily Show" with Jon Stewart
and in the course of the interview, said something remarkable.

Knowing that the Taliban has threatened to shoot her again if given the chance -
a Taliban spokesman has said, "If we get another chance, we will definitely kill
her and that will make us feel proud" - Malala addressed the issue of what she
would say if she was confronted again by a Taliban gunman. She said:

"I'll tell him how important education is, and that I even want education for
your children as well. And I would tell him, 'That's what I want to tell you,
now do what you want.'"

Malala is fearless, not only ready to deal with a gunman if confronted, but also
thoroughly comfortable in telling the world's most powerful leaders what she
thinks. Last year, she had a meeting with President Obama at the White House
and, according to a statement she released afterward, she said:

I thanked President Obama for the United States' work in supporting education in
Pakistan and Afghanistan and for Syrian refugees. I also expressed my concerns
that drone attacks are fueling terrorism. Innocent victims are killed in these
acts, and they lead to resentment among the Pakistani people. If we refocus
efforts on education it will make a big impact.

In 2013 she gave a speech at the United Nations, in which she said:

Dear fellows, today I am focusing on women's rights and girls' education because
they are suffering the most. There was a time when women social activists asked
men to stand up for their rights. But, this time, we will do it by ourselves. I
am not telling men to step away from speaking for women's rights rather I am
focusing on women to be independent to fight for themselves.

That's how important education is to Malala Yousafzai. Fittingly, she was at
school when she found out that she had won the Nobel Peace Prize.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


