                             246 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday

Amazon's Blue-Sky Thinking

BYLINE: ROBERT CYRAN

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 404 words



HIGHLIGHT: Drone deliveries seem as overly optimistic as investors&#8217;
expectations of Amazon overall, the author notes. The company&#8217;s market
value has ballooned to $180 billion despite big profits always hovering in the
future.


Amazon is promising yet more jam tomorrow - this time from drone deliveries.
Jeff Bezos, the online retailer's chief executive, expects to be able to use
unmanned aircraft to deliver small packages within a few years. It's a striking
vision, but it seems as overly optimistic as investors' expectations of the
company overall. Amazon's market value has ballooned to $180 billion despite big
profits always hovering in the future.

Drone technology has advanced tremendously over the past decade because of
improvements in software, robotics and networking. The use of these unmanned
vehicles is already common in the military, and cheap, fast and automated
shipping could benefit all kinds of businesses. Mr. Bezos says Amazon could use
drones within four or five years, delivering goods weighing less than five
pounds inside 30 minutes.

It's perhaps fitting that a long-term thinker like Mr. Bezos should be testing
the boundaries of what's possible. But at best it's a very long way off. The
Federal Aviation Administration may start allowing commercial drones to operate
in 2015, but widespread use is likely to come only many years later. Letting
robots fly freely in densely populated areas poses all kinds of safety, security
and privacy questions - never mind logistical challenges and concerns that
hackers or old-fashioned villains might intercept the vehicles or the packages
they carry.

Mr. Bezos has always made clear that he runs Amazon with the goal of rapid
growth while maximizing profit over the long run. Getting everyone to talk about
his company on Cyber Monday, the most important day of the year for online
shopping, will help accomplish the former. Analysts expect Amazon's revenue to
be around $75 billion this year, 23 percent more than last.

But it's still not clear when Amazon will deliver normal, never mind
supernormal, profitability. The company expects that it will roughly break even
again this holiday quarter. Based on estimates compiled by Thomson Reuters,
Amazon trades at a valuation of 165 times the coming 12 months of earnings,
against 15 times for its peer group.

Like a drone delivering trinkets any time soon, that's a triumph of investor
hope over experience.

Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent
commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.


     ·    In Tax Fight, Amazon Hands Baton to eBay
     ·    In Bitcoin's Orbit: Rival Virtual Currencies Vie for Acceptance


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


