                             2409 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 9, 2014 Tuesday 3:02 PM EST

Battle of the GOP hawks

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 705 words


A Post/ABC News poll confirms that if there was a libertarian moment - and we
have argued it was grossly overblown - it is over. The country as a whole is
more hawkish than at any time in the Obama presidency, and Republicans are the
most hawkish of all.

Overall, 71 percent of Republicans think President Obama has been too cautious
on foreign policy, 74 think he's been too cautious on Iraq and Syria and 60
percent think so when it comes to Russia. By huge percentages, Republicans favor
airstrikes in Iraq (88 percent) and in Syria (74 percent).

In other words, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) seems to have anticipated the base's
foreign policy leanings while Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has a small audience for
his proposition that we need to be less aggressive overseas. The question for
Paul is no longer whether he can persuade voters to follow his more isolationist
stance, but whether he can convince Republicans that he's not an isolationist
after all. Unfortunately, he has left a trail of speeches and writings from his
quest to keep the United States from intervening in the Middle East, to round up
more isolationist voters and to indict as "warmongers" those who have been
advocating the very policies Republicans now support by large margins.

Nevertheless, Cruz, Paul and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) all opposed military
action in Syria to enforce the red line after Syrian President Bashar al-Assad
repeatedly used weapons of mass destruction. They are going to have to explain
that position and why they are not partially culpable for the administration's
passive foreign policy. Had they supported the president and pushed him to
enforce the red line, would the Islamic State be in the same position? What if
they had shown a united front in favor of limited military action sooner even
than that, when many conservative critics of the administration were
recommending, for example, setting up a no-fly zone plus providing lethal aid to
the Free Syrian Army? Until recently, Paul seemed to think that any action in
Syria was going to help the Islamic State (rather than the Free Syrian Army we
actually have been supporting), so he will have to explain why his understanding
of the players in the region has changed so dramatically and so quickly.

It will be interesting to see in future polling whether Paul's other positions -
dismantling the National Security Agency surveillance, comparing Edward Snowden
to Martin Luther King Jr., limiting use of drones against American jihadists
(who now pose one of the most significant threats to the homeland) - go over
with voters. I suspect, as the saying goes, that dog won't hunt. In the real
world, checking out of the world and eschewing responsibility for keeping the
peace and combating aggressors doesn't work. Sooner or later we wind up back in
the mix, but then our foes are stronger and have tactical advantages that would
have been foreclosed if we had acted earlier.

Hillary Clinton has problems of her own. She cheered the president's speech in
September 2013 when he punted on Syria. She failed to negotiate a
status-of-forces agreement in Iraq, then blamed the George W. Bush
administration for the pullout of all troops and now is stuck defending a move
that created the vacuum into which the Islamic State's jihadists flowed. (Paul
also supported withdrawing all troops both from Iraq and Afghanistan.) She, of
course, also is tied in word, deed and photo to the disastrous Russian reset
policy. She may be hawkish enough (or too much so) for the Democratic primary,
but the general electorate may well decide that she has been part of the
problem, not the one to course-correct from the path she and her former boss set
the country on.

Foreign policy should not be dictated by transitory polling. To the contrary, we
have been in favor of much more robust action despite public opinion, but now
that the political winds have shifted and everyone is a born-again hawk, we will
see how the public treats pols who were pandering to what they thought was an
isolationist trend. Candidates with personal maturity, established hawkish bona
fides, military experience or knowledge and the will and spine to return the
United States to its superpower role will have a leg up.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


