                             2460 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 6:18 PM EST

The limits of the 'sectarian' framing in Yemen;
The Houthi's march on the Yemeni capital of Sanaa in September should not be
glossed over as a march on Sunnis.

BYLINE: Stacey Philbrick Yadav

LENGTH: 1684 words


It was 2005 when my Yemeni friends first started talking seriously about their
fears that the Houthis would march on the capital of Sanaa. The Houthis were
never closer than the nearby province of Amran back then. There was a media
blackout, and most of our information came from journalist friends who were in
and around the city of Saada, then the center of the conflict, distributing news
via SMS. Information was not the only thing the regime of former president Ali
Abdullah Saleh sought (and failed) to control: Humanitarian agencies had no way
to reach the civilians who were bearing the brunt of the conflict between
government forces and Houthi militants. In a harbinger of things to come, a
UNICEF employee told me that the only way he could get supplies to Saada was by
partnering with the Islah Charitable Society (ICS), a local aid agency tied to
Yemen's largest Islamist party. He complained that ICS was padding the books and
inflating the numbers of people who had been displaced to gain resources for its
wider evangelical work, but he noted that it was the only non-governmental
agency that he knew of that was granted a permit to work amid the stranded
civilians.

It was in ways like this that the Saleh regime manipulated the "sectarian"
politics of Northern Yemen, seeking to ensure that the two groups were too
distracted by each other to turn their attention elsewhere.

That, of course, was not a wholly successful strategy. Over the past decade,
there have been at least half a dozen military campaigns with the Houthis, a
secessionist movement in the South, the relocation of al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) from Saudi Arabia to Yemen, a popular uprising that lasted 11
months, a fracturing of the armed forces, an externally-brokered transitional
agreement, a dramatic escalation in U.S. drone attacks in different parts of the
country, and a National Dialogue Conference theoretically designed to put all
the pieces back together. So, why think of this as sectarian war? The Houthi's
march on Sanaa in September cannot be easily glossed as "sectarian" just because
they are Zaydi Shiites, and most (though not all) Islahis are Sunnis. The
existence of nominal difference is not by itself a compelling causal story.

The fact that the Houthis are Zaydis does not mean that their movement is aimed
exclusively or even primarily at establishing a Zaydi political order,
reinstituting the kind of imamate that ruled Northern Yemen for hundreds of
years (though some critics will tell you so). Similarly, the fact that Islah's
membership is predominantly Sunni doesn't mean it is working to reestablish the
caliphate, or even that it is willing to cooperate with those transnational
movements that would, though its detractors may allege this. Instead, the
conflict that pits the Houthis against Islah is one several decades in the
making, and rests as much in the structure of the Yemeni North, the hierarchies
of power and privilege among Zaydis themselves, and a state apparatus that
sought to manipulate them.

Charles Schmitz recently contributed an excellent overview of the development of
the Houthi movement as a political force. Additionally, the work of
anthropologists like Gabrielle von Bruck and Shelagh Weir on the cultural
politics of Zaydi/Islahi tension in the North is useful. While their field
research mainly predates the Houthi movement as such, it outlines the
dislocating impact of republican ideology in the North from the 1970s, and two
interrelated developments that form a subtext to the current conflict. In
"Islam, Memory, and Morality in Yemen: Ruling Families in Transition," Von Bruck
maps the ways in which Hashemites (descendants of the Prophet, from whom Zaydi
leaders have historically been chosen) were maligned as "feudal" by new
republican leaders and the ways in which Sanaani Hashemite families consequently
worked to refashion central Zaydi religious precepts as supportive of
constitutional rule and accountable governance, fitting religious concepts into
the discourse of the developing state. Weir's book, "A Tribal Order: Politics
and Law in the Mountains of Yemen," documents the efforts of Sunni evangelists
(who would ultimately align with Islah) to make use of this republican critique
of hierarchy to recruit or "convert" low-status Zaydis in the far North, biting
in to the core Zaydi demographic base. As constitutional checks on presidential
authority and more general political accountability were undermined by Saleh in
Sanaa and his regime supported the expansion of Islah-oriented schools to
advance Sunni recruitment in the North, these new Hashemite discourses of
accountability became more evidently oppositional. The residue of this
ideological refashioning is evident in the Houthi project.

So when I say that this conflict can't be glossed as sectarian, I don't mean to
suggest that religious conviction is irrelevant to the Houthi movement or its
relationship to Islah or to the Yemeni government. Instead, it is important to
investigate the meaning of "sectarian" concepts of good governance and
opposition to corruption, and question whether these are (or, more to the point,
are not) consistent with existing institutions and governing practices by
Yemen's transitional government.

It took a decade for the Houthis to march on Sanaa, but before they did so, they
also sat in its square, participating in a broad-based social movement that
called itself the "Change Revolution." Easily forgotten is that they did so
alongside many members of Islah. Over the 11 months of Yemen's popular uprising,
Houthis and Islahis managed to cooperate on a number of issues, particularly
outside of top leadership circles. In the year that followed, Houthis and
Islahis were co-participants in workshops for Yemeni youth, where they disagreed
on principled grounds, but also carved out spaces of agreement on core issues.
To be clear, this was not an easy relationship, but it was also not one
characterized by implacable sectarian animus.

The transitional agreement brokered by the Gulf Cooperation Council and endorsed
by the United Nations as the blueprint for a new Yemen included provisions that
overrepresented Islah and excluded the Houthis from the transitional "national
unity" government. It did little to address key anti-corruption demands central
to Houthi and non-Houthi protesters alike. It also deferred essential
transitional justice mechanisms that might have brought redress for the
brutality of past military campaigns against the Houthis and civilians in the
North. It moved instead to a direct (and uncontested) presidential election of
someone close to ousted president Saleh and to a National Dialogue Conference
that further overrepresented Islah, even while cementing the importanceof the
Houthi conflict as one of the key questions facing the country.

So when the Houthis marched on the capital - a march that was not entirely
military, but also included large-scale, nonviolent mobilization of protesters
in the weeks that preceded it - there was no reason to interpret this as a march
on Sunnis, sectarian rhetoric notwithstanding. Instead, it appears to be a
campaign to target Islahis as major contenders for institutional power, designed
as a renegotiation of the transitional framework. Islahi media outlets like
Suhail TV have been taken off the air (though it appears that the main Houthi
Web site may have been hacked by Suhail viewers). The homes of prominent Islahis
have been seized or destroyed, as has the home of General Ali Muhsin, who
oversaw the bulk of the military campaigns against the Houthis over the past
decade, and later defected to the opposition during the 2011 uprising. It
appears that his troops bore the brunt of the conflict with the Houthis in
September, while President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi ordered troops from other
commands to stand down.

The ceasefire agreement, rich in detail and very quickly agreed, focuses
primarily on renegotiating powersharing to increase the representation of
Houthis (and the Southern Movement, also a thorn in Islah's side), and to
outline concrete benchmarks for anti-corruption and economic reforms. It calls
for the quick establishment of a technocratic committee of economic advisers
whose recommendations will be binding on the new government. It is not focused
on the kind of "culture war" issues that might characterize a sectarian
conflict, but rather seeks to achieve several genuinely popular reforms
sidelined by the transitional government. That it was accomplished at the point
of a gun speaks as much to the failures of the transitional framework as to
Houthi ideology. Widespread dissatisfaction with slow progress of the
transitional process may help to explain why so many foreign actors have been
quick to support its renegotiation by backing the ceasefire terms.

Worrisome for the medium term stability of Sanaa, however, is the question of
Hadi's relationship to the Houthis. The earliest ceasefire benchmark for a new
government has already passed, suggesting that all may not proceed smoothly.
While the Houthis may have helped to conveniently clip the wings of Yemen's
largest Islamist party in ways that help Hadi consolidate his own position, now
that the deed is done, how long before he decides that the Houthis are more
trouble than they are worth? After all, as vice president, Hadi was at former
president Saleh's knee when he first used Islah to hem in the Yemeni Socialist
Party, and then turned on Islah itself in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The
Houthis will need to quickly cultivate allies from other corners of the
political field if they are to avoid a repetition of that storied past. Their
window for credibly doing so becomes narrower as each benchmark is delayed.

Stacey Philbrick Yadav is the author of "Islamists and the State: Legitimacy and
Institutions in Yemen and Lebanon," and a member of the executive committee of
the American Institute of Yemeni Studies. She is an associate professor of
political science at Hobart & William Smith Colleges in Geneva, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


