                             2441 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 19, 2014 Friday 7:46 PM EST

Will the Obama worldview endure?

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 808 words


He is the master of the straw man ("To those who wish unlimited intervention and
boots on the ground everywhere') and the personal insult ("warmongers"!). He
says he loves Israel - you don't get to be president without saying so - yet he
trusts Secretary of State John Kerry to negotiate a deal with Iran, opposes
conditional sanctions, wants to undercut our support for the Jewish state,
believes U.S. leadership in the world makes things worse ("intervention enhanced
the rise of radical Islam, and ultimately led to more danger for Americans"),
opposed striking Bashar al-Assad to enforce the red line, thought it was a good
idea to bring all the troops home from Iraq, is opposed to sending ground troops
to fight even when American national security interests are threatened and
thinks the Pentagon has more than enough funding.

He wants to accord jihadists rights relevant to American criminal suspects,
deplores data collection by the NSA, blames George W. Bush for the Middle East
mess, thinks we need to nation build at home and wants us out of Afghanistan
entirely. He peddles in defamatory rumors, comes up with phony statistics,
continually gets his history wrong and denies he said what he did (even if it is
captured in print and on video). He hires as a top national security adviser
who was the co-author of the Global Zero plan for unilateral disarmament. He has
a nasty habit of "blaming America first." He demonizes former vice president
Dick Cheney and will acknowledge Hillary Clinton is more hawkish than he.

In this case, I'm not referring to President Obama. No, these are Rand Paulisms.
There is a reason left-wing students applaud his national security
pronouncements and MSNBC sometimes sings his praises. He is the president's
ideological twin and displays the same slippery sleights of hand to attack
enemies and justify his views.

Others have noticed this as well. Robert Kaufman writes:

Paul's views on national security most closely resemble President Obama's. Like
Obama, Paul calls for deep cuts in "America's bloated Department of Defense,"
which Reagan hugely increased. "A less aggressive foreign policy along with an
audit of the Pentagon could save tens of millions of dollars each year without
sacrificing national defense," Paul told CNN. In some ways, Paul is even more
dovish than Obama. Paul led a filibuster against the administration's use of
drones. Paul denounced NSA spying that has continued under Obama as
unconstitutional and likened national security leaker Edward Snowden to Martin
Luther King.

It is true that historically speaking isolationists on the right and left, while
coming from different ideological perspectives, have often converged in seeking
American withdrawal from the world. Even though Rand Paul's pedigree is from the
swamp fever of the far right and Obama hails from liberal academia, then, it's
no surprise their conclusions frequently coincide. Perhaps by chance - or
because they harbor ideologies that inherently create tension between their
views and reality - they both deploy similar tactics (denounce critics, deny
what they've said, deploy straw men) to survive attacks.

This is obviously problematic for Rand Paul's presidential prospects, and
perhaps even for his re-election to the U.S. Senate. A Republican on the Hill
observing his rant on support for the Free Syrian Army remarked, "He still
appeals to a certain constituency. But the party generally has stampeded back
the other way as ISIS has gotten stronger and Obama's foreign policy grown
weaker." And thus, we see Rand Paul at times race to catch up and at other times
fall back into his comfort zone and lash out at critics. David Adesnik of the
American Enterprise Institute remarked to me, "Like Barack Obama, Rand Paul is
lost in a world where passivity is no longer a viable strategy. And when you're
lost, you do offensive and irresponsible things like accusing a fellow senator -
John McCain - of personally meeting with terrorists."

Well, Obama said a lot of things in his campaigns, but acted pretty much in line
with his core beliefs and values. His ideological soul mate would almost
certainly do the same. For now he's flailing, as Adesnik points out, "Sen. Paul
is moving from flip-flopping to incoherence. First he wasn't sure if ISIS was a
threat. Then he wanted to declare war. Now he wants to fight ISIS while
denouncing others who support that position as warmongers."

No one much cares outside the media and political class how a politician reaches
his views; the public rightly focuses on where his views lead. Right now the
potential presidential candidate most likely to reach the results closest to
Obama's foreign policy is Rand Paul. If you like what Obama has done, you'll
likely love Rand Paul, but somehow I don't think that will be on a "Rand Paul
for President" bumper sticker.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


