                             2448 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 2:12 PM EST

The widening war: Here's the latest as the U.S. hits targets in Syria;
The ripples of a volatile situation in Syria were felt in Turkey, Israel and
Iraq.

BYLINE: Swati Sharma

LENGTH: 354 words


The airstrikes in Syria is just one development in the current crisis in the
Middle East. Here is a brief guide to what is happening in the region right now.

Syria: The United States, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Qatar, Bahrain and the United
Arab Emirates participated in airstrikes in Syria that targeted Islamic State
targets. Training compounds, a finance center, supply trucks and more were
damaged or destroyed, according to reports.

The sky is full drones over Raqqa now

International forces also struck the Khorasan Group, an al-Qaeda affiliate based
in Aleppo.

Israel: The Israeli military said it shot down a warplane from Syria that
entered Israeli airspace above the Golan Heights. The Syria pilots ejected from
the jet before it crashed in a Syrian town controlled by al-Qaeda rebels.

Israel captured a portion of the Golan Heights from Syria during the Six-Day War
in 1967. Due to Syria's volatile situation, fighting often pours into the
Israeli-controlled side of the Golan Heights. This is the first time in 40 years
that Israel Defense Forces shot down a Syrian jet.

Iraq:  Up to 500 soldiers may be missing after Islamic State militants attacked
an Iraqi army base in western Anbar province, according to five survivors who
managed to escape from the scene. If the accounts are accurate, this would be
the most devastating day for the Iraqi military since militants captured one of
the country's largest cities, Mosul, back in June.

The Associated Press is reporting that Islamic State militants were parading
those Iraqi troops in Fallujah.

Turkey: As the worst refugee crisis of the Syrian war hits Turkey, the country
closed its border, resulting in massive protests. Turkish troops fired water
cannons and tear gas in attempts to deescalate demonstrations.

In just three days, 130,000 refugees have entered into Turkey due to the Islamic
State's advances, official say. The militants have recently taken at least 60
villages and are battling with Kurdish forces to try and take Ayn al-Arab, also
known as Kobane.

Related: photos from the exdous

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


