                             2407 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 9, 2014 Tuesday 11:09 AM EST

Should Will and Kate take note of these star-studded baby announcements?

BYLINE: Erin C.J. Robertson

LENGTH: 491 words


The world woke up Monday to news that the royal couple is expecting their second
babe. The pithy online statement was rush-delivered before Kate reached the
crucial 12-week pregnancy mark because she's suffering again from severe morning
sickness.

Under better circumstances, we're sure the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge would
have taken note of other celebrity couples' creative and cute baby announcements
and disclosed their exciting news with a bit more pomp. So just in case William
and Kate decide to expand their family even further, we put together a list of
notable baby boom broadcasts.

1.              Chelsea Clinton

The former first daughter announced that she had a little one on the way during
a Clinton Foundation- and Microsoft-sponsored event, "Girls: A No Ceilings
Conversation," on April 17, 2014. She revealed the special news to the audience
alongside her mother, Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was beaming about the
first-time baby news.

2.              Tammy Duckworth

The Illinois Congresswoman - Iraq war hero and double amputee - added the title
of mother-to-be to her list of accomplishments. How did she reveal the news?
Fittingly, on Labor Day - pun intended. Duckworth and her husband are expecting
a baby girl in December. The happy news was unexpected as the representative is
46 years old and has been trying to conceive for the past 10 years.

3. Kelly Rowland

In June, the R&B singer instagrammed an adorable photo of matching daddy and
baby Jordan sneakers with the caption, "I'll be stuntin like my daddy ... "

4.  Jessica Simpson

In 2012, she tweeted a surprise holiday announcement featuring her daughter,
Maxwell, sitting next to a "Big Sis" sign carved in the sand. Simpson and her
husband Eric Johnson welcomed their son, Ace, on June 30, 2014.

Merry Christmas from my family to yours! pic.twitter.com/EjlCoYbq

5.  Torrey Smith

Baltimore Raven wide receiver Torrey Smith and his wife, Chanel, must be fans of
puns and pasta. They instagrammed this corny but cute photo announcing their
coming bundle of joy in October 2013:

6. Fergie

The singer and her hubby, actor Josh Duhamel, turned to Photoshop and childhood
photos to share their bun-in-the-oven news. Fergie and Josh tweeted this
spliced-together picture of the pair as toddlers. The hashtag "mylovelybabybump"
was fitting and alluded to the popular Black Eyed Peas song "My Humps."

Read more Reliable Source:

'Parks and Rec' filmed in D.C. Fans freaked out.

A bipartisan aww: George W. Bush offers Bill Clinton some grandfathering advice

The Department of Defense 'respectfully declined' to participate in new drone
movie

Even more surreal estate, Party Diary and Love, etc: Sign up for The Reliable
Source newsletter. And follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


