                             2494 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                     October 15, 2014 Wednesday 4:36 PM EST

UEFA defends decision to not separate Albania and Serbia in 2016 Euro qualifier,
opens disciplinary hearings on teams

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 383 words


UEFA has defended its decision not to separate Albania and Serbia in the 2016
European Championship qualifying rounds, and instead has decided to levy charges
on both countries' soccer associations.

On Wednesday, UEFA opened up disciplinary cases against both national
associations, UEFA spokesman Pedro Pinto confirmed to the Associated Press. Both
sides have until Oct. 22 to respond to the charges, and on Oct. 23, UEFA is
expected to dole out its punishments, one of which could be making Serbia play
its Nov. 14 Euro 2016 qualifier against Denmark in an empty Partizan Stadium in
Belgrade, the AP reports.

"Football is supposed to bring people together and our game should not be mixed
with politics of any kind," UEFA President Michael Platini said (via the BBC).
"The scenes in Belgrade last night were inexcusable."

The 2016 Euro qualifier between the two countries was abandoned Tuesday because
of brawls involving both players and fans after a drone carrying a pro-Albania
flag flew over the pitch. But did UEFA set the stage for the chaos by not
manipulating the blind draw that put Albania and Serbia together in Group I,
especially knowing that the Balkan states have fought viciously and still
dispute the autonomous region of Kosovo?

Although UEFA has intentionally kept Spain and Gibraltar, Azerbaijan and
Armenia, and Georgia and Russia, apart in matches because of political concerns,
it did not see fit to keep Albania and Serbia from happening. UEFA defended its
decision Wednesday saying Albania and Serbia both met the three criteria that
determines whether its safe for two countries to play. Per the Guardian:

[An] UEFA spokesman said there was 'no clear reason' why the two teams should be
kept apart in the draw and that neither side had made such a request at the time
of the draw.

"The match is then analyzed by UEFA's international committee," the spokesperson
continued (via The Guardian). "When the draw was made there was no negative
reaction from either side at the time. But both associations agreed not to take
their own supporters to away matches. UEFA fully supported this move."

Whether UEFA made the right call or not will remain up for debate, at least
through next week when the decision on punishment will come down on the Albanian
and Serbian soccer associations.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


