                             2449 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 5:16 PM EST

At long last, F-22 Raptor fighter makes its debut in combat over Syria

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 411 words


The multiple airstrikes launched on militant targets in Syria early Tuesday by
the United States and five partner nations in the Middle East included a debut
performance: The Air Force's stealthy F-22A Raptor flew its first combat
mission, dropping bombs on multiple targets.

The fighter jet was used as part of a second wave of strikes, said Army Lt. Gen.
William C. Mayville Jr., director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
It was joined over northern Syria by F-15 Strike Eagles, F-16s, B-1 bombers and
drones launched "from bases across the region" around 9 p.m. Monday Eastern
Daylight Time (4 a.m. Tuesday local time).

Mayville showed media at the Pentagon on Tuesday the effects of the F-22
strikes. Photos depicted a building in Raqqah, in north-central Syria, where the
Islamic State militant group maintained a headquarters. The strike targeted only
the right side, where the "command and control center" was, Mayville said.

Photo shows before and after photos of target by #F22. This was the first time
the F22 was used in a combat role. pic.twitter.com/bMma8rxnsK

The plane, primarily built by Lockheed Martin with support from Boeing and other
contractors, has a history marked by its expensive cost and difficulties with
maintenance. Funding for the program was cut in 2009, resulting in the Air Force
receiving the last of its 187 Raptors in 2012. The program is expected to cost
at least $67 billion.

The first F-22 flew in 1997. The plane was not used over Iraq, Afghanistan or
Libya, and it was mired in controversy after a fighter pilot was killed in a
Nov. 16, 2010, crash in Alaska. Air Force officials attributed the crash to
pilot error, but the Defense Department inspector general later determined that
the service's investigation was riddled with inaccuracies. In 2012, then-Defense
Secretary Leon E. Panetta ordered the Air Force to curtail F-22 flights until it
had installed backup oxygen generators in the plane after pilots complained
about fainting in the cockpit.

Over Syria, the F-22A gives the United States a jet that is hard to see on radar
and that can carry air-to-air missiles and bombs that can be guided on target
with global positioning systems. One concern about flying over Syria is the
country's relatively robust radar and air defense system, but Mayville said
Tuesday that the government's radar could be characterized as passive, a
possible sign that the Syrian regime agreed not to target U.S. and partner
aircraft.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


