                             2417 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 10, 2014 Wednesday 7:18 PM EST

Here's how the U.S. military could carry out strikes in Syria;
U.S. airstrikes in Iraq have set up an operational framework for how they may
expand the mission into Syria.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 520 words


Thirteen months ago, the United States sent Navy ships toward Syria as it
prepared to launch strikes against President Bashar al-Assad's regime following
its use of chemical weapons. Four destroyers carrying about three dozen Tomahawk
missiles each made up the bulk of the force, but the Pentagon also could have
launched airstrikes from bases in Turkey or Europe or submarines that quietly
patrol the sea.

President Obama backed off hitting Assad's regime then, saying he wanted
Congress to vote on the plan. Two weeks later on Sept. 14, 2013, Russia and the
United States agreed to a deal that allowed Syria's declared chemical weapons to
be destroyed at sea this summer by a U.S. crew on the MV Cape Ray, a container
ship specifically outfitted for the mission.

The aborted Syria strikes last year are instructive in considering the options
at the Pentagon's disposal now, as Obama prepares for a speech Wednesday night
in which he is expected to make the case for expanding action against the
Islamic State. The militant group has taken control of portions of both Syria
and Iraq, seized weapons from both Syrian and Iraqi government forces and killed
hundreds of civilians, if not more, across the two countries.

The strikes in Syria under consideration could be launched from a number of
bases in the Persian Gulf from which the United States is operating to hit
Islamic State targets in Iraq. U.S. military officials have not identified those
bases, citing diplomatic sensitivities with the countries involved. But they
likely include al Udeid Air Base in Qatar, Ali al Salem Air Base in Kuwait and
al Dhafra Air Base in the United Arab Emirates, as this Washington Post story
last month outlined. Predator drones and other U.S. aircraft also are likely
flying from Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, and the U.S. military also visits
Jordanian bases on occasion.

The U.S. has carried out an average of five airstrikes a day  in Iraq over the
last month, setting an operational framework for how the mission could be
expanded into Syria. But Syria's closer proximity to the Mediterranean Sea may
provie some other options, including fighter jets or AC-130 gunship planes
taking off from military bases in Europe.

In addition, the U.S. Navy has a number of ships in the region, a Navy official
said. If Tomahawk missile strikes are used this time, they could be launched
from the USS Cole, a destroyer currently in the Mediterranean. Fore operations
in Iraq, the United States also continues to fly planes from the USS George H.W.
Bush, an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf.

U.S. military action in Syria could raise complicated issues with the government
in Damascus. Assad's regime warned last month that the United States should not
carry out airstrikes in Syria without the consent of the Syrian authorities.

Syria's military is also using its air force to target the Islamic State, a
campaign that accelerated last month as the militant group won a series of
victories in northern Syria's Raqqah province. The militants stormed the Tabqa
airfield, and may have seized a number of shoulder-fired surface-to-air
missiles.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


