                             2410 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 9, 2014 Tuesday 5:05 PM EST

Benedict Cumberbatch thinks we need a female president. After that, a gay one.

BYLINE: Emily Heil

LENGTH: 374 words


Benedict Cumberbatch isn't a brilliant detective, though he plays one on TV as
the titular star of the BBC's "Sherlock." And the British actor isn't a
political prognosticator, either, though he tried out that role in a new
interview with the Daily Beast.

Cumberbatch thinks the United States needs to elect a woman president the next
chance we get (is this an early celeb endorsement for Hillary Clinton?), and
follow that by electing a gay president (so, Barney Frank for president in
2024?). Got that, America?

"You need to have a female president next, and then after that, a gay
president," Cumberbatch told the Daily Beast. "That's the full journey from
Obama's legacy onwards."

And forget data-crunching (sorry, Nate Silvers of the world). Cumberbatch says
the prophecy for the U.S. presidency was actually written by an eccentric
British rocker more than a decade ago.  From the interview:

There's a great Morrissey lyric from "America Is Not the World" from "You Are
the Quarry" that goes, "In America, the land of the free, they said / And of
opportunity, in a just and truthful way / But where the president is never
black, female or gay, and until that day / You've got nothing to say to me, to
help me believe." It's quite an old song from before Obama took office, but
you've done black, then you need to do female, then the next, gay.

Elementary!

Cumberbatch is promoting his new movie, "The Imitation Game," in which he
portrays Alan Turing, a gay World War II codebreaker who played a crucial role
in the Allies victory but later committed suicide after being convicted of
"indecency."

Read more Reliable Source:

Should Will and Kate take note of these star-studded baby announcements?

'Parks and Rec' filmed in D.C. Fans freaked out.

The Department of Defense 'respectfully declined' to participate in new drone
movie

Even more                             surreal estate,
Party Diary                              and                             Love,
etc: Sign up for                             The Reliable Source newsletter. And
follow us on                              Facebook
and                             Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


