                             2415 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                    September 10, 2014 Wednesday 3:31 PM EST

The angry industry

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 744 words


Angry, angry, angry. A Google search or scan of the headlines suggests just
about everyone is angry at someone.

There are "Incumbents vs. Angry Voters." We are in the "Year of the Angry
Voter." Sometimes the anger is specific ("In town halls, U.S. lawmakers hear
voter anger over illegal migrants.") Sometimes is it more generalized. ("The
anger at Obama that motivates Republican voters is a more powerful force than
the threat of a Republican majority or promise of legislation that might help
the middle class, both of which are possible election outcomes that might
motivate Democratic voters.") Sometimes it seems like an angry contest. One
pollster opined that "anger toward their own candidates coupled with anger for
the opposition leaves little for voters to get particularly excited about." Even
the ever-cheery Chuck Todd told The Post, "I'm as pissed off as anybody else is
at Washington ...  Most political journalism is insular to the Acela corridor,
and my job is to channel that frustration of the rest of America."

Somehow the old bumper sticker ("If you're not angry, you're not paying
attention") has come to define voters, and in turn encourage pols and media
figures to show solidarity in being angry. We should keep a few things in mind
when considering the angry phenomenon.

For starters, telling people to be angry or encouraging anger is the oldest
trick in the book for gaining ratings (especially in the angry land that is talk
radio) and getting voters to throw out incumbents. ("I'm as angry as you about
... "). So part of the anger phenomenon is a manipulation tool for those with a
vested interest in getting people engaged to listen, watch or vote. It's a sad
reality that the anger-mongers don't have a message inspiring enough to motivate
their audience. The angriest pols are often the ones with the fewest solutions
and the most obstructionist, thereby feeding the anger over gridlock and
dysfunction.

Anger has also become a way of self-identification as someone clever, cynical
and cagey enough. Only fools and those ripping us off (as the talking heads
would tell us) aren't angry, right?

I don't want to suggest that some people aren't genuinely angry about something.
Anger can be a motivating force to target injustice, abuse and unresponsive
government. However, it is not an end unto itself and cannot become the defining
feature of a candidate or movement without becoming corrosive.

To the extent people are angry - rather than depressed, turned off or hopeless
about politics - the anger-mongers are partially to blame. The president derides
his opponents and openly displays his contempt for them. ("So sue me," he
declared.) The hotheads in the opposition engage in counterproductive stunts
fueled by anger and have a perpetual scowl. Screaming is the default volume. The
phalanx of right-wing money-making organizations fundraise off anger and peddle
a sense of betrayal to gain attention. Then social media revels in a cesspool of
anger. It becomes a self-perpetuating cycle.

Nevertheless, it is a truism that in an emergency you want to be or find the
calmest person in the room. It's fashionable to identify with anger (like
Hillary Clinton claiming to be broke to get some populist bona fides), but it's
not, of course, productive and, I suspect, not really what voters want. It was
just six years ago that people bought into the "hope and change" message. The
problem was President Obama didn't deliver, but that does not invalidate the
message. Every great president and inspirational leader essentially carries that
message, however it is phrased. ("We can do better," "It's morning in America,"
etc.)

Let me suggest that in 2014 and certainly 2016 that voters look for the calmest,
happiest and most optimistic candidates they can find. They need not be
cheerleaders for the status quo. Certainly not. But the way to fix what everyone
is supposedly angry about is not to wallow in anger. It rather is to be
constructive, focused, mature and motivated to address real problems. The pols
who fan paranoia (the government will drone you, listen to your calls, tyrannize
you) are the worst people to invest with authority. They would rather pander to
ignorance and the lowest common denominator.

We have serious and numerous problems at home and in the world, some of which
are in the purview of government and some are not. But the angry fetish doesn't
help. It's a sign of intellectual and moral vapidity. Enough already.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


