                             2430 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 12, 2014 Friday 7:56 PM EST

House moving toward vote on Syria amendment

BYLINE: Paul Kane

LENGTH: 565 words


House Republican leaders expect to approve President Obama's request for
authority to train and arm pro-Western rebels in Syria as part of an amendment
to a larger measure that funds federal agencies, according to senior GOP aides.

With no decision expected to be finalized until Monday, leaders heard widespread
opposition from members in both parties to the initial request by White House
officials to insert the measure into the spending bill and have one vote on the
entire package. That was also the initial preference of Senate Democratic
leaders, who have heard similar objections their rank and file to holding just a
single vote to address both issues.

The likely route now would involve House Speaker John A. Boehner (R-Ohio)
setting up a process where supporters of attacking Islamic State forces would
offer an amendment to the government funding bill, Republican aides said. At
this point, there appears to be wide bipartisan support for the Obama proposal
to train Syrian rebels who would be fighting on the ground against both Islamic
State forces and those aligned with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

Republican critics of Obama's strategy to counter the Islamic State -- which
includes a sustained round of airstrikes by U.S. military jets and drones -- say
he is not going far enough to battle the terrorist group that has seized wide
swaths of territory in Iraq and Syria. Boehner has told those critics that they
need to first approve this modest request and then consider their options in the
months ahead.

"Please rest assured that I will work with my colleagues in the House of
Representatives to ensure your government has the support from the United States
that it needs to prevail against the terrorists," Boehner wrote Friday in a
letter to the new prime minister of Iraq, Haider al-Abadi.

House Minority Whip Steny H. Hoyer (D-Md.) also predicted a majority of
Democrats would support the initiative to train the rebels. Hoyer is pushing for
a broader debate on authorizing broader military action in the lame-duck session
after the Nov. 4 midterm elections.

Holding two separate votes on the military plan and the funding for federal
agencies would accomplish two goals. It would allow those lawmakers who support
the attack on Islamic State but oppose the funding bill for other reasons to
cast votes making their position clear. The approach would also give a much
clearer bipartisan mandate for Obama's foreign policy than the single vote,
which would've been muddled.

There a few different parliamentary approaches being considered for the
amendment vote, but Republican leaders hope to give final approval Tuesday night
or Wednesday, sending the measure to the Senate. There, it's unclear if Majority
Leader Harry M. Reid (D-Nev.) will allow any amendments or just move to a final
vote on the entire package.

However, Sen. Christopher Murphy (D-Conn.) and some other liberals -- who
otherwise support the funding bill to keep the federal government up and running
-- are pushing for a vote specifically on the Syria plan. If the House clears
the legislation early enough next week, it's possible that they would be allowed
to offer an amendment to try to strip the language from the funding bill. That
effort would likely fail, but would allow the Senate to also be specifically on
the record on a vote that some lawmakers consider a matter of conscience.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


