                             245 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday

Amazon Floats the Notion of Delivery Drones

BYLINE: DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 440 words



HIGHLIGHT: On &#8220;60 Minutes&#8221; Sunday night, Jeff Bezos of Amazon showed
a video of a tiny helicopter seizing a package from a warehouse and airlifting
it to a house.


[Video: Amazon's promotional video for a future drone delivery system, Prime
Air. Watch on YouTube.]
Jeff Bezos, as always, is thinking outside the box - way, way outside.

Sunday night on "60 Minutes," Mr. Bezos, the Amazon founder, floated the notion
of using drones to deliver packages. He showed Charlie Rose a video of a tiny
helicopter seizing a package from a warehouse and airlifting it to a house. The
drone then took off again.

Amazon has already named  its future delivery system  Prime Air. "I know this
looks like science fiction. It's not," Mr. Bezos said.

Still, even the hyper-optimistic Mr. Bezos cautioned that there were "years of
additional work from this point." He told the show the hardest challenge would
be convincing the Federal Aviation Administration that this is a good idea.

Well, the F.A.A. and everyone else. The commercial use of drones was legalized
early in 2012, but there has been a good deal of outcry about drones possibly
being used surveillance. Some communities are banning local police from using
drones. How receptive they would be to e-commerce applications is unclear.

An Amazon promotional page for Prime Air, however, said the delivery system was
practically a done deal.

"From a technology point of view, we'll be ready to enter commercial operations
as soon as the necessary regulations are in place," the company said. It said
that could be two years away.

No mention was made of what would happen if you live in an apartment. Or whether
you would get your money back if your neighbor shot down your delivery.

Or, as Mr. Bezos said:  "The hard part here is putting in all the redundancy,
all the reliability, all the systems you need to say, 'Look, this thing can't
land on somebody's head while they're walking around their neighborhood'...
That's not good."

If Amazon could do it, so presumably could Walmart and the many other retailers
trying to do same-day delivery. It might bring a whole new meaning to the phrase
"e-commerce wars."

The general reaction among Amazon-watchers, however, was that Amazon had scored
a significant P.R. coup. "60 Minutes" had teased the revelation over the
weekend, setting Twitter afire.

"Does @Amazon sell pets? I would savor the irony of ordering a bird that is
delivered via flying robot," wrote @scottEweinberg.

"Next, Amazon fulfillment centers in your basement," speculated @delrey.

That did seem about the only innovation left.


     ·    Amazon Raises Threshold for Free Shipping
     ·    The Price of Amazon
     ·    Google Is Testing Same-Day Delivery for Shoppers
     ·    Amazon Starts a Shopping Site for the Environmental Crowd
     ·    E-Commerce Sites Cater to Procrastinators by Extending Free Shipping


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


