                             247 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 29, 2013 Sunday

Disruptions: Coming in 2014: Extremely Smart Watches and Wearable TVs

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 1037 words



HIGHLIGHT: The new year may bring vast improvements in a variety of gadgets,
including smart watches and prototypes of flexible TV screens that can be worn.



For technological innovation, 2013 was a remarkably boring year. Apple, often
the hotbed of "new," mostly just updated familiar devices in different colors
and with crisper screens. Social media companies fought over who had better
photo filters. And Silicon Valley start-ups offered more of less, with slight
iterations on existing products.

But 2014 has a lot of promise.

Predicting the future is a lot more difficult than evaluating the past, but you
could wake up on Jan. 1, 2015, in a different digital winter wonderland.

No, you won't lie in bed while your humanoid robot helper makes you bacon and
eggs and walks the dog - which is also possibly a robot, made by Google. That's
more of a 2035 prediction. But you might wake up to the call of a watch on your
wrist - not your cellphone on your night table. This year we've seen some
efforts at smartwatches, like those made by Pebble; next year, these gadgets
could look a lot better.

"Smartwatches, which connect to your smartphone, are going to create an entirely
new category of computing in the coming year," said Sarah Rotman Epps, a former
Forrester analystwho specializes in wearable computing. She noted that the
long-awaited Apple smartwatch, which is expected to be announced in 2014, could
change the way we engage with our wrist in the same way Apple changed the
cellphone industry in 2007.

Smartwatches will allow us to peer at messages without having to pull cellphones
out of our pockets or purses. They will make it easier to monitor our health
with heartbeat and movement sensors, recording daily how much we have exercised,
or how much we haven't.

According to Citigroup, the global watch industry generated $60 billion in sales
in 2013. Numerous research estimates expect the smartwatch industry to generate
billions more in revenue for consumer tech companies in 2014.

Your cellphone next year will look almost exactly the same as the one in your
pocket today - though slightly larger and a little slimmer. But the software on
it will be a bit smarter because of improved location sensors. Rather than your
having to look at your phone all the time, your phone will start letting you
know when you need to look.

Foursquare, the location-based social network, is at the forefront of this
innovation. Its app works in the background to corral different pieces of
information - including your location, the time of day and where your friends
have been - and then makes suggestions for what to do. "It looks like you're
near the Sightglass Coffee," the company's app says if I walk by a coffee shop
in the morning, "Your friend Dennis has been there and recommends the
cappuccino."

Now imagine all your apps start doing this? Twitter could tell you when a news
event happens near your house. Facebook could let you know if your friends are
saying "congratulations" to someone's specific post - and you should too. Your
phone automatically could keep emails, texts and phone calls at bay while you're
sitting down for dinner with the family, all by sensing that your spouse and
children's phones are in the dining room at the same time in the evening.

Smartphones are also expected to get other kinds of unusual sensors next year.
Benedetto Vigna, a general manager at STMicroelectronics, a company that creates
sensors for mobile devices, said 2014 would be when we would start to see
mood-detecting sensors in phones. Imagine playing a video game that determines
your excitement level and adjusts the experience accordingly, he said.

What about the home?

Until now, television screens have been pretty standard sizes and shapes:
rectangular. While that won't change in 2014, we will probably see prototypes of
something different.

"We've been working on flexible displays for more than a decade and this past
year we finally came up with solutions," Peter Bocko, the chief technology
officer for Corning Glass Technologies, said earlier this year. This means
screens could wrap around clothing we wear, or the packages we buy.

In our homes, this flexible technology could translate into wallpaperlike
screens that can be stuck to a wall.

But don't be alarmed if you sit down to enjoy a nice cup of tea in front of your
new flexible display and hear a buzzing sound outside: That's probably your
neighbor's drone inspecting the back garden to see if his grass is greener than
yours.

Till now, drones have been mostly used by hobbyists and photographers, but the
Federal Aviation Administration is expected to issue rules for expanded
commercial drone use by January.

Jonathan Downey, the chief executive of Airware, which makes drones, said we
will then start to see people use these vehicles for agriculture and farming, or
to reach places that are dangerous for human workers today. Rooftop inspection,
for example, could be done with high-resolution thermal imaging sensors attached
to a drone.

Mr. Downey predicted that any privacy concerns about drones would abate.

"When GPS first came out from the government, people saw it as something that
could track them and they said absolutely not," Mr. Downey said. Yet now, we all
have GPS in our cars and smartphones. "I think we'll see something very similar
happen with drones."

This year we did see the improvement of 3-D printers that can make physical
objects from digital files. In 2014, we could start to see these devices become
a fixture in our homes just as inkjet printers became a norm in the late 1980s.

According to Gartner, the research firm, consumers and companies will spend more
than $600 million on 3-D printer-related products in 2014.

What will you use these for? Maybe you'll make your own iPhone covers rather
than buy them from stores, print out new salt and pepper shakers, or download a
pattern and print a new part for your drone.

And who knows, if you do get a 3-D printer next year, maybe you could start
downloading the parts for your very own humanoid robot helper that can make your
breakfast and walk your dog in 2015.


     ·    After Fighting Mobile Trend, Intel Now Embraces It
     ·    Daily Report: F.A.A. Supports Easing Rules for Electronic Devices
     ·    The Wristwatch May Be Making a Comeback, but With Some Smarts
     ·    Samsung Unveils Galaxy Gear Smartwatch
     ·    With Microsoft-Nokia Deal, Competing in the Smartphone Market


LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


