                             2445 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 23, 2014 Tuesday 12:18 AM EST

Meet the winners of the Sammies, the civil service's version of the Oscars;
The "Sammies" honor exceptional civil servants. The top winner this year is a
CDC employee.

BYLINE: Joe Davidson;Lisa Rein

LENGTH: 594 words


Hundreds of federal leaders and employees gathered Monday night at the Oscars of
the U.S. government, an annual celebration to honor the achievements of the
civil service.

The 13th Samuel J. Heyman Service to America Medals, better known as the
Sammies, were announced at a black-tie gala at the Andrew W. Mellon Auditorium
in downtown Washington.

The achievements of this year's medalists range from helping paralyzed veterans
to recovering close to $1 billion stolen from the Medicare system.

The crowd at the award presentation ceremony was a who's who of the federal
government, including Supreme Court Justice Elena Kagan, Attorney General Eric
H. Holder Jr., Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald and NASA Administrator
Charles Bolden.

The top medal, the Federal Employee of the Year, went to Rana Hajjeh of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and her colleagues for work on a
global vaccination campaign. Edwin Kneedler, a career deputy in the solicitor
general's office who has argued 125 cases before the Supreme Court, won the
Career Achievement Medal.

The other 2014 Sammies winners were:

William Bauman and Ann Spungen of the Department of Veterans Affairs for
developing "innovative medical advances and novel drug therapies" to aid
paralyzed veterans.

Omar Pérez Aybar, Reginald France, Joseph Beemsterboer, Dan Bernstein, Randy
Culp, Joseph Jeziorski and colleagues in the departments of Homeland Security
and Justice for uncovering hundreds of Medicare fraud schemes.

Sean Young and Benjamin Tran, Air Force engineers, for leading the development
of sensors on drones to identify and destroy improvised explosive devices.

Alan Lindenmoyer, a NASA program manager, for helping launch "a new era of
private-sector orbital transportation" while "dramatically reducing the costs to
taxpayers of building and deploying rockets and spacecraft."

Sara Meyers of the Department of Housing and Urban Development for setting up
systems to analyze data to evaluate the performance of programs dealing with
homelessness, public housing and rental subsidies.

Michael Byrne, a former geographic information officer with the Federal
Communications Commission, for creating interactive, searchable online maps that
put information about broadband availability in the hands of the public and
policymakers.

"The Service to America Medals are a powerful illustration of the good that
government workers do every day and their impact on our lives," said Max Stier,
president and chief executive of the nonprofit Partnership for Public Service,
which awards the medals, said that "to get the best from our government, we need
to focus on what's right instead of what's wrong."

Speaking before announcing the award winners, he said, "We have to reward the
people who dare to challenge the status quo, and take risks."

Several winners said in interviews that they hoped the attention to their work
would inspire other federal employees to reach high.

"The big thing to me is this shows them there's still the ability to make a
difference in federal work and federal service," said Young, the engineer who,
with Tran, won the award for national security and international affairs.

Hajjeh, the top winner who will fly to Africa next week with a team that will
help health-care workers who have not been affected by the Ebola virus prepare
for a possible outbreak, said federal employees are "not used to getting
recognition for our work."

"Sometimes we don't realize the impact we're having," the CDC researcher said.

joe.davidson@washpost.com

lisa.rein@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


