                             2405 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      September 8, 2014 Monday 7:05 PM EST

'Parks and Rec' filmed in D.C. Fans freaked out.;
The reaction from fans who missed spotting the cast and crew? Tears. Nausea.
Existential crises.

BYLINE: Emily Heil

LENGTH: 493 words


The cast and a crew from the NBC show "Parks and Recreation" filmed some scenes
in Washington this weekend, something the show's producers wanted very badly to
keep under wraps.

A publicist for the show tells us that details about the shoot are practically
classified information, since they fear that even the tiniest detail might serve
as a spoiler for the sitcom's seventh and final season, slated to air in 2015.
The last season ended with a time jump that found main character Leslie Knope,
played by Amy Poehler, as a regional director for the National Park Service - so
a Washington backdrop seems fitting.

Despite the lockdown, Twitter (of course!) provided us a few clues about what
the "P&R" gang got up to, including that actor Adam Scott (and possibly Poehler)
were on hand. The backdrop for at least one shot appears to be an apartment
complex in Foggy Bottom.

Beyond that? If they told us, they'd have to kill us, apparently.

Turns out, the cloak-and-dagger routine might have been a good strategy, judging
from the reaction on Twitter from those who missed spotting the cast and crew
for themselves. Tears, appeals to deities, and even a "I want to die" from those
who'd missed out? That's a lot of drama for a comedy. Imagine the descending
hordes.

Sounds like Leslie Knope and company have fans whose histrionics make One
Direction's tween devotees look like amateurs. Here's a sampling:

Nausea!

they are filming parks and rec across from the elliott school i'm gonna throw up

Tears!

Amy Poehler why can't you just get a twitter so I can learn in advance that
you'll be filming in DC?? I'm legitimately crying right now - LG (@glaserface)
September 7, 2014

Hyperbole (we hope)!

Amy Poehler was just filming for Parks and Rec on campus and I missed her.
Someone please come light me on fire.

Existential crises:

PARKS AND REC WAS FILMING DOWN THE STREET AND I MISSED IT. WHY ME, GOD, WHY ME?
- Emily Clott (@EmClott) September 7, 2014

I can't believe I missed the filming of parks and rec I want to die

Not everyone went away disappointed, or harboring a death wish. A few fans got
lucky and spied the crew at work:

Parks and rec filming a block from my dorm Amy poehler's there
pic.twitter.com/xR1xadtjvd - tristan (@tstevensking) September 7, 2014

One even got a pic with one of the actors.

So exciting to meet @mradamscott! What an awesome guy...missed @amypoehler
#parksandrec #smirnoff #bffs pic.twitter.com/pTAX3IQGLe - Rabia Khan
(@rabia_bmore) September 8, 2014

 Read more Reliable Source:

The Department of Defense 'respectfully declined' to participate in new drone
movie

Six ripped-from-the-headlines films coming to a theater near you

What Washington wears: Costume designers from 'The Americans' and 'House of
Cards' dish

E                ven more surreal estate, BOLO and Love, etc: Sign up for
The Reliable Source newsletter. And follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


