                             2496 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 16, 2014 Thursday 5:22 PM EST

U.S. airstrikes in Syria are now dwarfing those in Iraq, thanks to the fight for
one town

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 402 words


The Syrian border town of Kobane is still in danger of falling to the Islamic
State, more than a week after the U.S. military began launching airstrikes on
militants there regularly. Hundreds of fighters have been killed, the Pentagon's
press secretary said Wednesday, but even more are swarming the area.

How frequently is the U.S. military dropping bombs around Kobane? This graphic,
developed for Checkpoint, gets at the raw numbers of airstrikes in Syria
recently, and compares them with what is occurring against the Islamic State in
Iraq:

The graphic shows the number of airstrikes in both Iraq and Syria each day since
Sept. 23, when they began in Syria. The initial night of 14 airstrikes in Syria
was complemented with an additional eight strikes that included a total of 47
cruise missiles. But the United States and its partners have been dropping bombs
and missiles at a rate in recent days not seen in the entire campaign against
the Islamic State.

In the last three days, the United States has launched 54 airstrikes in Syria,
53 of them around Kobane. The latest wave of 14, announced by U.S. Central
Command on Thursday morning, struck 19 buildings, two command posts, three
fighting positions, three sniper positions, one staging location and one heavy
machine gun, U.S. military officials said.

In Iraq, meanwhile, the airstrikes have slowed considerably. Five were announced
Wednesday, but there were none on Monday and Thursday and one on Tuesday.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said Wednesday that the
number of airstrikes in Kobane has risen for a couple of reasons, primarily the
level of Islamic State activity there.

But he added that the number of airstrikes is down in Iraq recently because of a
spate of bad weather in the central part of the country. While U.S. planes can
fly in it, the weather has limited the military's ability to perform aerial
surveillance and reconnaissance missions, like drone flights.

Kirby said the U.S. will continue to launch airstrikes in Iraq as necessary. The
air war around Kobane is centered on denying the militants an area they clearly
want as a sanctuary, the admiral said.

"The more they want it, the more resources they apply to it, the more targets we
have to hit," Kirby said. "And part of what we're trying to do is put pressure
on them, and the strikes against them and their positions in and around Kobane
allow us to do that."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


