                             2488 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 9, 2014 Thursday 9:13 PM EST

Amazon is reportedly opening a physical store. Here's what that could reveal
about the future of retail.;
It's perhaps the most vivid example yet that retailers believe an "omnichannel"
strategy is critical to winning today's shoppers.

BYLINE: Sarah Halzack

LENGTH: 470 words


Amazon.com is reportedly planning to open its first physical store, a move that
could mark a key strategic shift for a retailer that has been a pioneer of
e-commerce.

The Wall Street Journal reports that Amazon will open a brick-and-mortar shop in
Midtown Manhattan in time for the holiday shopping season and that it will be a
place for customers to return products, make exchanges or pick up their online
orders.  The Journal's report says it is possible the outpost will also act as a
showroom for flagship Amazon products such as the Kindle or Fire smartphone.

If Amazon opens the site, it would be one of the most vivid examples yet that
retailers are intensely focused on building what's known an "omnichannel"
strategy, one that relies on both brick-and-mortar and digital presences that
are seamlessly integrated.

E-commerce-only retailers have plenty of cost advantages over brick-and-mortar
ones, namely that they are able to maintain lower overhead and a smaller labor
force. And yet in the past two years, e-commerce darlings such as Bonobos, Rent
The Runway, Birchbox and BaubleBar have pushed to hawk their goods and promote
their brands in physical shops. These moves, the retailers have said, is an
acknowledgement that for all of e-commerce's convenience and power, the physical

 store may still offer customers a unique and important value proposition.  For
some items, it seems, consumers still want to touch them or try them out before
committing to a purchase.

When asked by The Washington Post about the report of a forthcoming store in New
York, an Amazon spokeswoman said in an e-mail, "We have made no announcements
about a location in Manhattan."

Sean Whitehouse, an analyst with retail consultancy Kurt Salmon, said a physical
site could allow Amazon to build a more personal connection with its shoppers.

"It's the customer experience they can offer, like an Apple Store," Whitehouse
said.

Whitehouse also said such an outpost could have logistical benefits, serving as
a convenient place for Amazon to store its inventory for same-day delivery
items.

Amazon has previously experimented with various physical formats before. It had
a pop-up Kindle shop last year in San Francisco; it has also tested Kindle
vending machines in shopping malls and other locations.

Amazon is working on a host of new ways to bring its goods to consumers.  In
several large cities, it is testing a grocery delivery service known as Amazon
Fresh.  Last holiday season, chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos revealed in a "60
Minutes" segment that the company is trying out drone technology for deliveries.
(Bezos owns The Washington Post.)

It is not clear whether Amazon may seek to open multiple stores, nor how long
the New York site the Journal points to could be open.

Amazon's stock was down about 2 percent in afternoon trading.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


