                             2462 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 10:50 PM EST

Before Libya evacuation, Marines were concerned about ambassador's plan;
A Marine colonel said Thursday that he would have favored an aerial evacuation
rather than convoying out of the country.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 906 words


Marines in Libya ahead of the July 26 evacuation of the U.S. Embassy in Tripoli
expressed concern about using a ground convoy instead of aircraft to leave the
country amid  violence, but acquiesced to the plan favored by Ambassador Deborah
K. Jones, they said Thursday.

The mission withdrew at least 156 military and diplomatic personnel from
compounds that had recently received upgrades prompted by the September 2012
attacks on U.S. compounds in the Libyan city of Benghazi that killed U.S.
Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans.

The operation highlights the complicated planning required between the military
and the State Department, especially following the Benghazi attacks and the
proliferation of militant groups across northern Africa.

Col. Kenneth M. DeTreux, who led the Marine Corps' crisis-response task force
for the region, said Thursday that he favored an aerial evacuation, but could
understand Jones's concerns about showing a large military presence while
pulling out. The withdrawal came as fighting between Libyan militias threatened
the U.S. facilities, one of which had been hit by a mortar round, Marines said.

"I would have done something different, and it would have been just as
successful," DeTreux said Thursday at the Pentagon. "But it was her call for a
ground convoy movement, and I think as a military guy you understand that there
will be political and diplomatic lenses that are being looked through. We just
have to remain flexible, agile and responsive, and I think that's what we did in
this case."

A State Department official familiar with the ambassador's thinking said she saw
the ground convoy as the most practical option to minimize risk in an area where
rockets and mortars were being fired regularly. U.S. officials also had reached
a deal with two local militias to allow U.S. personnel safe passage, and it
would allow the United States to recover numerous armored vehicles, which are
valued at about $250,000 each.

The ambassador also was concerned about a lack of clarity she saw in how the
aerial evacuation would have been pursued, the source said. U.S. options were
curtailed in part because fighting between the militias had closed the airport
in Tripoli just days before. Without it, it's likely that the United States
could have withdrawn only what could be carried by helicopters.

The evacuation ultimately rolled through Libya with 39 armored Chevy Suburban
and Toyota 4Runner sports utility vehicles owned by the State Department. It
began early July 26 and continued for more than six hours northwest before
crossing the border into Tunisia without major incident, Marines involved said.

There were concerns, however. While an agreement had been reached with the
militias near the Tunisian border, there were still concerns that a fighter
along the road somewhere did not receive the message and would have opened fire,
said Capt. Jim Oliveto, commander of India Company, 3rd Battalion, 8th Marines,
the unit deployed at the embassy at the time to provide security. The Marines
wore civilian clothes with their body armor at the request of the State
Department to keep a lower profile, he said.

"We did encounter a number of known checkpoints, but there was no hostilities at
those checkpoints," Oliveto said.

The convoy received additional security from a number of military elements.
Among them, a special-purpose task force established by the Marines in 2013 to
provide security in crises in northern Africa following the Benghazi attacks
deployed two MV-22B Ospreys carrying Marines in case a quick-reaction force was
needed.

Two Air Force F-16 fighter jets also stayed overhead in case bombs needed to be
dropped, and the Navy supplied at least one drone to provide surveillance, the
Marines said. Special Operations troops with U.s. Africa Command also provided
undisclosed support.

After crossing the border into Tunisia, the convoy was escorted by the Tunisian
national guard another 10 hours to an airfield, Oliveto said. The Americans were
picked up by aircraft and taken across the Mediterranean to Naval Air Station
Sigonella, from which Marines had been monitoring the operation. Eighty-one of
the people evacuated were Marines and sailors.

DeTreux said that the Marines understood that they were the supporting the State
Department on the mission, and received good cooperation from them. The
colonel's concerns were "alleviated in a very short time" once he had a better
sense for the ambassador's preferred plan, he said.

"She wanted to quietly slip the mission out, and nobody can knock the plan
because it was successful," DeTreux said.

State Department officials said in July that the embassy would be closed only
temporarily, but it has not reopened and was taken over by the Dawn of Libya
militia group afterward, the Associated Press reported. Moussa Abu-Zaqia told
the AP that embassy personnel were welcome back with "no troubles at all" and
that his militia wanted to clean up the compound after it was battered with
rockets and other weapons.

Video of militia men swimming in the embassy's pool surfaced online in August.
Jones, the ambassador, said on Twitter that it appeared to be legitimate. She
and her staff have been working since the Tripoli embassy's closure from Malta,
an island in the Mediterranean, officials said.

@AmCo15 The YouTube appears to be a residential annex of the US mission but
cannot say definitively since not there.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


