                             2455 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 23, 2014 Tuesday 7:41 PM EST

With photos and videos, Pentagon shows effects of Syria strikes

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 293 words


The Pentagon detailed its overnight military strikes in Syria on Tuesday with a
variety of video and still images, saying they were conducted in three waves
beginning around 8:30 Eastern Daylight Time.

They began with 47 Tomahawk missile cruise strikes in eastern and northern
Syria, primarily against facilities run by the Khorasan group, a relatively
unknown affiliate of al-Qaeda that defense officials said was plotting attacks
against the United States.

The second wave of attacks began around 9 p.m. EDT, and included strikes by F-22
Raptors, F-15 Strike Eagles, F-16 Fighting Falcons, B-1B Lancer bombers and
drone aircraft in northern Syria. They primarily targeted training camps,
vehicles and other facilities under the control of the Islamic State militant
group, said Army Lt. Gen. William Mayville, director of operations for the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

The third round of strikes began shortly after midnight Eastern Standard Time,
and incorporated F/A-18 Hornets from the USS George H.W. Bush, an aircraft
carrier in the Persian Gulf, and F-16s flying from unnamed bases in the Middle
East. They primarily dropped bombs in eastern Syria.

Arab partner nations participated in the second and third rounds of strikes.

Mayville showed the following images during a news conference Tuesday, showing
what he said were militant facilities before and after they were hit with
strikes by the United States and partner nations.

Photo shows before and after photos of target by #F22. This was the first time
the F22 was used in a combat role. pic.twitter.com/bMma8rxnsK

Image of before and after photos of the finance center hit with Tomahawk
missile. pic.twitter.com/HbgLoHzZ6u

The Defense Department also released numerous videos of the strikes. Here are a
few:

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


