                             2429 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 12, 2014 Friday 4:32 PM EST

Concerns about national security boost GOP, especially its hawks

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 828 words


A variety of data points suggest that while Republicans are riding a wave of
anti-Obama opinion, the collapse of President Obama's foreign policy and
international chaos are shifting the electorate toward pro-defense candidates
who can reassure a nervous public.

We have seen the data showing that the GOP now holds a double-digit lead over
Democrats on national security, while the president's standing on national
security has plunged to the low 30s. Quite striking is the shift in priorities.
The Pew poll reports: "Six-in-ten (62%) are very concerned about the rise of
Islamic extremism around the world, which is the largest share dating back to
2007. . . . In a reversal from last year after Edward Snowden's [National
Security Agency] leaks, 50% today say they are more concerned that government
anti-terrorism policies have not gone far enough to protect the country, while
35% are more concerned that the policies have gone too far in restricting civil
liberties. In July 2013, 47% said their greater concern was that government
policies had gone too far in restricting civil liberties, while fewer (35%) said
their bigger concern was inadequate security."

Meanwhile, we see that the GOP has opened a lead - rare for Republicans who even
in good years may trail on this measure and make it up on turnout - in many
generic congressional polls at a time the Islamic State crisis has come to a
head. In battleground states, the numbers are even more striking. In the most
recent Fox poll, voters in key battleground states (Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia,
Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, North Carolina,
New Hampshire, South Dakota and West Virginia) favor a Republican over a
Democrat by a margin of 47 percent to 37 percent. It is also striking how many
hawkish nominees with military backgrounds Republicans have nominated (e.g. Rep.
Tom Cotton in Arkansas, Joni Ernst in Iowa, Dan Sullivan in Alaska) or
re-nominated (e.g. Lindsey Graham in South Carolina).

There is also some evidence that the swing toward Republicans and, specifically,
Republicans who happen to be hawkish, is due to national security. Amy Walter of
Cook Political Report reports on focus groups of  "Walmart moms" in Arkansas and
Iowa:

While economic anxiety is still an ever-present concern among these women
("prices of everything go up but we get further behind," complained one mom in
Little Rock), physical security has taken on a more salient role than it has in
recent years. When asked by the moderator to describe "how things are going" in
the country, the women in these groups used words like scary, unstable and
unsettled. Concerns about violence, from ISIS to school shootings to the riots
in Ferguson, were top of mind for these women. One woman in Little Rock remarked
that life felt like "a box of chocolates... where you never know what you are
going to get" day to day. From Ebola to ISIS to Ferguson, this summer has been
both unpredictable and predictably unstable. . . .[M]any Walmart moms express
specific concern about ISIS is "unusual for swing voters and not a common theme
we have heard in previous groups." . . There is an anxiety about safety and
security like we haven't seen since 2001.

Walter warns, "Democrats, who had been hoping that a strong populist economic
message could win them some key races, must now contend with the reality that
voters - even those who normally tune out international crises - are deeply
concerned about the threat of terrorism and a sense of unraveling here at home."

Given this, it also makes sense for Republicans to eschew passivity in foreign
policy and not cater to paranoia about drones and the government "listening to
your calls." However, voters want someone calm, dependable and reasonable. ("In
the words of one Des Moines mom, they are looking for the candidate who can
provide a 'more stable future'"). That doesn't sound like they want yellers,
obstructionists, grandstanders or polemicists. (Nor does it sound like they want
hand-wringing over whether the police are too well-armed.)

Understanding that early polls are not predictive but do reflect current
opinion, recent polling in Iowa shows genial and calm characters (Mike Huckabee
at 21 percent, Rep. Paul Ryan at 12 percent) surging, while non-interventionist
Sen. Rand Paul (7 percent), once thought to be the "frontrunner" and recently
under fire for his foreign policy stances, is far back. (It may also explain the
wave of Mitt Romney nostalgia. And, no, his time is past and he shouldn't run
again.) Those known for fiery personalities and high-visibility stunts (e.g. the
shutdown, perpetual yellers) should be forewarned: Hotheads are not comforting
to voters and don't win presidential elections. Likewise, projecting gravitas
and stability may be more effective than advertising one's youth and
inexperience (e.g."outsider" status). The strong-on-defense, knowledgeable
grown-up may be the ideal candidate this time around.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


