                             248 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            February 4, 2014 Tuesday

How Many Non-Combatants Are Killed by Drones?

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 397 words



HIGHLIGHT: The government won&#8217;t release the numbers.


Adam Schiff, a Democratic congressman from California, urged the nation's
intelligence leaders today to get behind an important idea: The Obama
administration, he said, should publish an annual report on American drone
strikes, showing how many combatants and especially how many non-combatants are
killed by unmanned aircraft each year.

The United States doesn't release those figures now, and in fact doesn't even
officially acknowledge that the C.I.A. operates drones over Pakistan to kill
terrorists. (It does acknowledge the Pentagon's drone program in Afghanistan.)
But last year, the United Nations conducted an investigation that found that 400
of the 2,200 people killed by American drones in Pakistan over the last decade
were civilians.

In his speech on the subject last May, President Obama said "there must be
near-certainty that no civilians will be killed or injured" before any drone
strike is conducted. At the moment, however, no one outside a closed circle of
military and intelligence officials knows whether that standard is being upheld.

Mr. Schiff made the proposal at a hearing of the House Intelligence Committee
today while questioning John Brennan, the C.I.A. director.

"That seems to me a limited value in terms of information to our adversaries,"
Mr. Schiff said, "but in terms of public accountability, and being able to
correct the record at times when there are misleading claims about civilian
casualties, it might be beneficial as well."

Mr. Brennan was, unsurprisingly, non-committal, essentially telling Mr. Schiff
to take it up with the White House.

"There is a lot of debate about what is the basis of those determinations and
those numbers," Mr. Brennan said, "and so it is something that I would defer to
the Administration on."

Mr. Schiff introduced this proposal as an amendment to the Intelligence
Authorization Act last fall, but it failed. He said in an interview today that
he hopes the idea has more support in the White House than it does on the
intelligence committees or in Congress.

Mr. Obama has called for greater transparency in this area, and it's hard to
imagine anything more important for the public to know than how many terrorists
the nation has killed from the skies, and how many civilians.


     ·    On Drones, Keeping the Public in the Dark
     ·    In Praise of Hopeless Causes
     ·    Congress Pushes Back
     ·    Are We Still at War?
     ·    The 'Signature Strikes' Program


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


