                             2425 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 11, 2014 Thursday 11:36 AM EST

Can Radioshack save itself by redesigning its stores?

BYLINE: Sarah Halzack

LENGTH: 1064 words


In recent years, RadioShack has made a long list of changes to try to save its
ailing electronics business:  In 2009, it tried unsuccessfully to rebrand as
"The Shack," in hopes that ditching the name of a dated technology would up its
cool factor. About four years ago, the company pivoted its focus to smartphones,
only to face headwinds as the market for those gadgets became more saturated.

Now, for its latest turnaround efforts,  RadioShack is hoping that giving
customers a hands-on experience will convince them to linger in stores longer
and open their wallets.

Surging technology usage has made for choppy waters for RadioShack. Evidence of
the company's struggle has been plentiful: Sales at stores open at least a year
were down 14 percent in the most recent quarter; in last year's crucial holiday
season, they declined 19 percent. RadioShack's stock has plunged about 96
percent over the last decade, most recently trading at 94 cents a share after
falling as low as 55 cents in August.  The company, headquartered in Fort Worth,
Tex., announced in March that it planned to close 1,100 stores, only to have to
scale back that plan as its lenders would not approve closure of more than 200
stores per year over the next three years.

While many analysts have questioned how much longer the company can hang on,
RadioShack is racing to overhaul itself by remaking some of its outposts into
"highly experiential concept stores" that allow customers to have a more
hands-on experience with its merchandise.

RadioShack is pitching the remodeled stores as "interactive," a word that seems
to ubiquitous these days as many brick-and-mortar retailers try to create a
unique experience in their shops to help ward off online competitors. At the
outpost on Seventh Street NW in the District's bustling Gallery Place
neighborhood, the company has added a sleek headphone demonstration station
where customers can try out gear from brands such as Beats by Dr. Dre and
Skullcandy.  A "speaker wall" allows customers to sample many of the speakers
sold in the store by controlling them from an iPad.  Gadgets such as the iPhone
and iPad are also displayed so customers can play with them, a set-up that marks
a change from before, when the shop only showed printed renderings of what the
devices looked like when taken out of the box.

"It's really just all about improving the customer experience and delivering on
their expectations for us as a brand," said Jennifer Warren, RadioShack's chief
marketing officer.

While these additions might mark a step forward for RadioShack, the ability to
test gadgets has long been available at competitors such as Apple and Best Buy.
Also, RadioShack only plans to remodel 100 stores by the end of the year - a
small fraction of its 4,000 stores.

"They're right now effectively catching up to what others have done," said Will
Frohnhoefer, an equity research analyst at BTIG.

RadioShack says  its new concept stores have already seen higher-than-expected
revenue growth for mobile phone and higher sales of items including headphones
and portable speakers.

"Are [the new stores] interesting? Are they better? Certainly.  But they have a
small number of them," said Anthony Chukumba, senior equity research analyst at
BB&T Capital Markets. "They don't have nearly enough of them in terms of their
overall result."

Chief executive Joseph C. Magnacca said during the company's most recent
earnings conference call that the Fix It Here stations are also showing early
promise.

In a corner near the front window of the Gallery Place store, a technician
sporting a white lab coat sits behind the new Fix It Here kiosk.  Here, experts
can fix problems such as a cracked cellphone screen, broken phone battery, or a
malfunctioning button on a tablet. For $39, they'll make the repairs in under an
hour. (They're not equipped to handle more complex problems, such as a damaged
motherboard.)

"Stores with this service are outperforming the chain on sales and profit, and
we believe Fix It Here drives new traffic to our stores based on customers using
this service and the number of calls our stores are receiving," Magnacca told
investors in June.

Fix It Here is offered in 500 stores; the company says it plans to expand that
to 700 stores by the end of 2014.

RadioShack has long sought to position itself as a destination for
do-it-yourself tinkerers, and the redesigned stores show they are doubling down
on those efforts.  Store Manager Ray Stevens said they are now offering
customers project ideas.  In a nod to modern do-it-yourself ethos, the new
stores also give prominent display to a 3D printer.  In the Gallery Place
outpost, the $1,400 printer sits in a glass cube, and store associates program
it to churn out items such as cellphone cases and figurines of Pokemon
characters so shoppers can see how the cutting-edge technology works.

"It's something that our customer is very interested in," Warren said. "They
might not be ready to go out and buy one tomorrow, but they're interested in
seeing how it works."

The revamped stores are one pillar of a broader strategy the company is
undertaking to improve its business. This year, it launched RadioShack Labs, a
joint venture with hardware developer and manufacturer PCH to allow start-ups to
bring innovative products into its stores more quickly. For the holiday season,
the company is promising a "more comprehensive gift strategy," one that includes
app-based toys and a line of drones.

In August, Bloomberg News reported that RadioShack could soon receive a "rescue
financing package" from Standard General, a cash infusion that might help
prevent the electronics retailer from filing for bankruptcy. RadioShack declined
to comment on the report.

The company is set to report its second-quarter earnings results Thursday
morning before the stock market opens. Earlier this week, an analyst with
Wedbush Securities issued a report saying that he believed a bankruptcy for
RadioShack was "imminent."

Still, analysts say the new efforts and additional cash might not be enough for
RadioShack to mount a comeback. "It's rearranging the deck chairs on The
Titanic," Chukumba said. "It's not enough to move the needle."

Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that RadioShack
currently has 300 stores with Fix It Here services. It has 500 stores offering
this option.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


