                             2403 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      September 5, 2014 Friday 5:27 PM EST

Obama has never understood our enemies

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 1005 words


If the current cease-fire holds in Ukraine, we will be one step closer to the
dismemberment of Ukraine and a humiliation for the West. The Post reports: "The
measures appeared, at least initially, to be a first step toward a peace plan
envisioned by Russian President Vladimir Putin that would effectively freeze the
conflict in a manner similar to other long-running territorial disputes in
former Soviet republics. The Kremlin has used those other conflicts, in Moldova
and Georgia, to exert pressure on their governments and to complicate their
chances of joining the NATO defense alliance."

Meanwhile, in a pale imitation of the Iraq war coalition that President George
W. Bush assembled of some 49 countries, the Obama administration managed to
wrangle nine countries into joining with us against the Islamic State. But to do
what?

If you listen to the president, it is to make the terrorist state "manageable."
If you listen to Secretary of State John Kerry, he says, "Contrary to what you
sort of heard in the politics of our country"- from the president (!) - "the
President is totally committed; there is a strategy that is clear, becoming more
clear by the day. And it really relies on a holistic approach to ISIL. That is
to say that we need to do kinetic, we need to attack them in ways that prevent
them from taking over territory, that bolster the Iraqi security forces, others
in the region who are prepared to take them on, without committing troops of our
own, obviously." Obviously not, because we're totally committed up to the point
where we are not. After all, Kerry says, "that's a redline for everybody here,
no boots on the ground." Not the Islamic State's beheading of American
journalists or slaughtering of Christians or terrorizing of the population, but
U.S. ground troops are the red line. Is there any wonder aggressors around the
world have pounced?

Kerry assures us: "There is no containment policy for ISIL. They're an
ambitious, avowed genocidal, territorial-grabbing, Caliphate-desiring, quasi
state within a regular army. And leaving them in some capacity intact anywhere
would leave a cancer in place that will ultimately come back to haunt us. So
there is no issue in our minds about our determination to build this coalition,
go after this." Unless, of course, this means boots on the ground.

Now contrast the diplomatic minuets and double talk with the only good news
internationally today, as The Post reports: "Ahmed Abdi Godane, a co-founder of
a network blamed for its brutal tactics in Somalia and for the attack on an
upscale Kenyan shopping mall last year, was killed Monday in an attack carried
out by U.S. drones and other aircraft, the Pentagon said." Now, there is some
atrocity prevention.

The lesson here is not that diplomacy is always meaningless. It is rather that
we need to be clear-eyed about whom we are dealing with and understand that with
determined foes it is military action or the threat of military action (or
economic penalties) that can usually move the needle in our direction.

From the get-go, this president seemed to believe that he could shame our
adversaries into good behavior or ingratiate himself with those who don't care
how we behave, only that we are nonbelievers.

The Israeli writer Ruthie Blum insightfully summed up Obama's moral confusion:
"What Obama has never been able to get through his community-organizer brain is
that it is not enough for him to empathize with the grievances of his enemies,
particularly not the genocidal maniacs in question. Without actually swearing
allegiance to the interpretation of Islam whose objective it is to catapult the
modern world into the Dark Ages, there is no way to avoid beheading. And given
the nature of internecine Islamist strife, even doing so does not guarantee
immunity from bloodletting."

This is why his "outreach" to Iran, repudiation of enhanced interrogation
techniques, the Cairo speech, condemnation of an anti-Islamic video (that had
nothing to do with the Libya attack), excoriating our ally Israel for failing to
make peace with Palestinians (who never take "yes" for an answer), commitment to
a Palestinian state and finger-wagging at Israel when it takes on terrorists
militarily (which inevitably causes civilian casualties) have earned us nothing
- zero, zilch good will - either from Iran and its allies or from the Islamic
State. What works is showing resolve to destroy jihadists. What doesn't work is
bailing out of Iraq, leaving no troops in Afghanistan, flip-flopping on the red
line in Syria and letting a genocidal war drag on for three years. What doesn't
work is slashing our military while threats increase.

Obama and Hillary Clinton likewise tried to stay in Russian President Vladimir
Putin's good graces. They began reset, let Russia into the World Trade
Organization and tried to slow down human rights sanctions. When that didn't
stop Putin from pursuing his ambitions to re-create the Russian empire, the
administration was taken aback. The nice words and political appeasement were
worthless (!?!) as were the half-hearted sanctions which we now decide to
increase after a cease-fire has cemented Russia's victory. Declaring that he is
so 19th-century and offering "off ramps" were meaningless. Not even telling
Putin he was really losing made a difference.

In the end, totalitarians and terrorists want what they want. The way to stop
terrorists is to destroy them, preferably early on before they experience
victory, kill hundreds of thousands and plant themselves in nation states. In
dealing with rational foes who calculate the costs and benefits of actions,
convincing them that they will pay a penalty far greater than what they can hope
to obtain through aggression is essential. If you are not ready to do either,
you have the Obama foreign policy - chaos, bloodshed, instability and diminished
fear of and respect for the United States. In short, we either choose to
confront our foes or we choose decline. Maybe the next president will choose the
former.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


