                             2435 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 16, 2014 Tuesday 6:22 PM EST

Cracks emerge in GOP support for Obama's Syria strategy;
At least 15 tea party Republicans in the Senate could oppose the measure to
train rebels to fight Islamic State

BYLINE: Robert Costa

LENGTH: 565 words


House Republicans continued Tuesday to rally around the GOP leadership's plan to
arm and train rebels in Syria, but tensions within the ranks over the specifics
of U.S. efforts in the region were evident at a morning meeting.

Several conservatives vocally opposed the proposal and House Speaker John A.
Boehner's embrace of President Obama's strategy, leaving Boehner little room for
error as he counts votes.

"I stood up and said the president's plan is a plan to fail," said Rep. Mo.
Brooks (R-Ala.) "It does not use the amount of force that is necessary to
procure victory against the Islamic State."

"Here we go again," said Rep. Walter Jones (R-N.C.), a war-weary libertarian.
"We need to let these other countries take control of their own region."

Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-Tex.) handed out a six page flier, detailing his
reservations.

Other members of House's hard-right bloc said at least 15 tea party Republicans
could oppose the measure. Many of them met Monday for a private dinner on
Capitol Hill where they groused about the party's march toward passage.

"It could be higher," Jones said.

Topping the list of their concerns are fears of getting too deeply involved in
the Syrian civil war, whether it would be better to arm the Kurds, and questions
over congressional power, with some calling for the president to seek
Authorization for the Use of Military Force before engaging U.S. military
personnel in a conflict.

Still, House leadership allies were confident that, in spite of the grumbling,
they would be able to build a majority coalition of hawkish Republicans and some
Democrats in the coming days.

At the breakfast, FA chair Rep. Ed Royce (R-Calif.), chairman of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, said he spoke about the historic nature of the
mission and the necessity of dealing early with terrorist threats.

"We shouldn't discount what airpower and armed drones can bring to the
battlefield," he said. "We do not want to allow a sanctuary there."

House Armed Services Committee Chairman Buck McKeon (R-Calif.), a key player in
writing the amendment, said he has worked to tighten the legislation and answer
the questions from conservative skeptics in recent days. GOP leaders "narrowed
it down," he said. "We'll get a better feel for it today when there are a few
hours of debate on the floor."

"At the end of the day, I don't think we'll say no to very specific training for
Syrian rebels," said Rep. Richard Hudson (R-N.C.). "People are frustrated with
the president but the votes will be there."

Republican whips will be meeting later Tuesday to map out the vote and start to
tally GOP support.

Knowing that they may need Democratic support to bolster the vote, House Maj.
Leader McCarthy has been in close touch with Democratic Whip Steny Hoyer, and
met with him on Monday afternoon at the Capitol. Hoyer has been working directly
with the White House to encourage Democratss to back Obama's plan.

"It's time to get our work done and that's what we're doing," said Rep. Greg
Walden (R-Ore.), the National Rrepublican Campaign Committee chair, when asked
whether the continuing resolution bill to keep the government funded and the
Syria amendment will both pass. A year after shutdown, he said there is
widespread interest, and the political will, to avoid messy public standoffs on
any issue, even as the party, at times vigorously, deliberates its path ahead on
various issues.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


