                             244 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (Sinosphere)

                           November 6, 2013 Wednesday

New Chinese Drone Unveiled in Video

BYLINE: GERRY DOYLE

SECTION: WORLD; asia

LENGTH: 325 words



HIGHLIGHT: The body of the new drone resembles that of the United States&#8217;
Global Hawk.


[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
This week, the Internet lit up with an annotated video, above, of what appears
to be China's latest (or at least most recently unveiled) drone design.

The body resembles the United States' Global Hawk, although perhaps a bit
smaller. Its standout external features, though, are its joined wings - a sort
of diamond shape formed by forward-swept wings mounted in the rear and
backward-swept wings mounted in the front.

This concept offers some advantages over a traditional wing, including less
drag, increased strength and the potential for greater maneuverability. These
advantages, however, are often minimal and may be offset by the cost and
difficulty of manufacturing this type of wing.

A notation in the video suggests that the large bulge on top of the drone's back
houses satellite uplink equipment, while a synthetic aperture radar is mounted
below. The aircraft's size implies that it is designed for long-range, "high
endurance" missions that involve staying in a target area for many hours.

Pictures of a similar design by the Chengdu Aircraft Industry Corporation,
called the Soar Dragon, surfaced nearly two years ago. This video appears to
show a smaller drone with a much different tail, but the same joined-wing
layout. And like the Soar Dragon, its fuselage seems to be informed by the
layout of American drones - a fact that, as my colleague Edward Wong noted in
September, may be linked to Chinese hacking of American defense contractors.

China has been working diligently to create new drone designs, many of which
will be marketed overseas, as Mr. Wong and Nicola Clark pointed out in their
wide-ranging look at the country's defense industry last month.


     ·    Hugh White on 'The China Choice'
     ·    One Place Where the U.S. Can Rest Easy About China's Influence?
     ·    Strident Video by Chinese Military Casts U.S. as Menace
     ·    Chinese Leader Gets a Cartoon Makeover
     ·    As China Mocks U.S. Debt Fight, Its Loyalty to Treasuries Remains


LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


