                             2434 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 16, 2014 Tuesday 4:27 PM EST

Obama reneges on his foreign-policy promises;
The commitment to attack the Islamic State is his latest disappointing decision.

BYLINE: Katrina vanden Heuvel

LENGTH: 1128 words


President Obama's commitment to go into Iraq and Syria to "degrade and
ultimately destroy" the Islamic State, the brutal terrorist group that vows to
carve a "caliphate" out of Iraq and Syria, should be seen for what it is: a
capitulation to bellicose folly.

Obama was elected in no small part because he challenged the catastrophic "war
of choice" in Iraq, and pledged to bring an end to U.S. entanglements in Iraq
and Afghanistan. Slowly, against the bluster and macho posturing of the
opposition, he tried to introduce a modicum of common sense and prudence into
our foreign policy.

The United States, the president has explained in the past, faces few genuine
threats to its national security. Many of these - catastrophic climate change,
global economic stagnation - aren't susceptible to military solution. Nor can
the United States afford to police the world. "Why is it," he observed in April,
"that everybody is so eager to use military force after we've gone through a
decade of war at enormous costs to our troops and to our budget?"

And a month later in a commencement speech at West Point, he elaborated: "Some
of our most costly mistakes came ... from our willingness to rush into military
adventures without thinking through the consequences - without building
international support and legitimacy for our action; without leveling with the
American people about the sacrifices required."

Now Obama has announced a "strategy" toward the Islamic State that rushes into a
military adventure without sufficient thought of the consequences, and without
building robust international support. Arguing that he doesn't need
congressional approval, he is taking us into a war we don't need to fight.

His strategy may well "degrade" the Islamic State, a loathsome, brutal, vicious
group, but, according to U.S. intelligence, the organization already poses no
immediate threat to the United States. Unlike al-Qaeda, from which the Islamic
State has split, it is focused on the spreading sectarian wars in the Middle
East, not on targeting the United States.

The president calls for U.S. bombing of Islamic State positions in both Iraq and
in Syria (scorning international law in the process). To provide the foot
shoulders for the battle, the president pledges yet more training and arms for
the Shiite-dominated Iraqi military, while arming the Shiite militia, the Sunni
tribes and the Kurdish pesh merga in Iraq, and so-called "moderate" rebel forces
in Syria. The United States will try to enlist Sunnis against the Islamic State
even as we bomb Sunni villages that the Islamic State holds. We'll try once more
to create a more inclusive government in Baghdad, something that proved
impossible when we had thousands of U.S. forces on the ground there. We'll
enlist reluctant pro-Sunni allies - Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates - to fight the Sunni-dominated Islamic State, although Saudi sources
are leading funders of the Islamic State's predecessors and Turkey has refused
to cut off the group's black market oil revenues. We will stiff pro-Shiite
adversaries - Syria and Iran - that are already enlisted in the fight against
the Islamic State.

Our interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan should have made one thing clear: We
have neither the patience, the resources nor the willingness to wreak the
violence needed to suppress the regional sectarian conflicts. For more than a
decade, we have spent trillions, sacrificed lives and rained bombs on assorted
targets from Pakistan to Libya. And the civil wars, tribal rivalries and
sectarian violence have only increased.

The conflicts will stop only when the people who live in these many countries,
and the powers that fuel the proxy wars, decide the violence must end. The
United States can't create peace by military force. We can only add to the
destruction.

Instead, the president is surrendering to three forces: first, a media lathered
into a war fever, parading an endless array of armchair warriors to inflate the
threat, demand military response, and scorn patience and diplomacy. The Islamic
State's gruesome beheadings of two American journalists helped increase the
drumbeat for war, finally moving public opinion to support bombing - but not
troops. "We're going to war because we've been spooked," Joshua Landis, a Syrian
specialist at the University of Oklahoma, noted.

Second, he is yielding to the "indispensable nation" crowd of liberal
interventionists, seized with moral outrage at the horrors of terrorists like
the Islamic State, but blind to the innocents killed and displaced in our
military response. They drove us into Libya to forestall a humanitarian disaster
and left a spreading violent sectarian and tribal conflict in their wake.

And finally, the president is capitulating to the mindless bellicosity of his
opposition. The neo-conservatives who drove us into Iraq and learned nothing
from the debacle lead the chorus for war. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and his
wingman, Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), who have a terrible track record on
foreign policy, now accuse Obama of "reactive half-measures," while ruling out
"unilateral invasion, occupation or nation building," suggesting that
Afghanistan - the United States' longest war, which will leave chaos behind -
should be our model. We are ill served by Republicans like Sen. Marco Rubio
(Fla.), who preposterously accuses the president and former secretary of state
Hillary Clinton of advocating "isolationism," while saying we should "not rule
anything out" in the fight against the Islamic State. To accuse this president
of isolationism after he has deployed drones to bomb in eight countries,
increased troop levels into Afghanistan, intervened in Libya, and dispatched
ships to police the South China Sea in Asia exhibits the mindless macho
posturing that the president rightly warned us against.

Needless to say, this decision to wade back to war in Iraq and Syria should be
debated and voted upon by the Congress. Sadly, the arrogance of the imperial
executive has too often been reinforced by the cowardice of the Congress. The
decision to postpone deliberation until after the election, for a lame debate in
a lame duck Congress, is a sad testament to that. And the president's
capitulation virtually ensures that muscle flexing will supplant common sense in
that debate.

President Obama is neither peacenik nor isolationist. He has disappointed those
who trusted his promise to end the wars, stop the torture and rendition, close
Guantanamo Bay, respect the Constitution, and curb the excesses of the national
security state. But he did seek to limit our folly. He suggested a sensible
organizing principle: "Don't do stupid stuff." It is tragic for him and for this
country that he has succumbed to doing just that.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


