                             2467 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 29, 2014 Monday 7:16 PM EST

The growth of "partyism" and the decline of the antiwar movement;
Cass Sunstein argues that "partyism" - prejudice against supporters of the
opposing political party - is on the rise in America. In addition to hating
partisan adversaries, partyists are also often inclined to excuse behavior by
their own party leaders that they would condemn if done by the opposing party.
This phenomenon may account for the decline of the antiwar movement in the age
of Obama.

BYLINE: Ilya Somin

LENGTH: 771 words


In a recent op ed, Harvard law professor Cass Sunstein points out that
"partyism" - prejudice against supporters of the opposing political party - is
on the rise in America:

If you are a Democrat, would you marry a Republican? Would you be upset if your
sister did?

Increasingly, we assume that supporters of the rival political party are not
just misguided about political issues, but also untrustworthy or malevolent
people in general. Some of this hostility is due to "rational irrationality,"
the tendency of people to make poorly reasoned knee-jerk judgments about
political issues. It is closely related to the broader problem of rational
political ignorance, which results in an electorate that often ignores the
complexities of political issues, and tends to assume that those who disagree
with their views must be evil, selfish, or stupid.

The growth of partyism in recent years is likely related to the rising
polarization between the two parties, with conservatives increasingly "sorting"
into the GOP and liberals into the Democratic Party. In  the 1960s and 1970s,
the correlation beween partisan affiliation, ideology and social values was much
weaker than it is today. There were still many liberal Republicans and
conservative Democrats. Today, such exotic beasts are few and far between. As a
result, partisan divisions are far more closely correlated with wide divergences
in values and ideology. That trend likely exacerbates partisan hostility. Unlike
in 1960, if you meet a supporter of the opposing party today, he or she is
likely to have widely divergent values from your own.

Whatever the cause, the growth of "partyism" is  a dangerous  trend. It makes
partisans even less willing to  be open-minded about ideas opposed to their own
than they would be otherwise.

"Partyism" may also reinforce the tendency of political partisans to tolerate
behavior from their own party leaders that they would never accept from those of
the opposing party. The more you believe that the opposing party and its
supporters are malevolent or stupid, the more reluctant you will be to   give
them ammunition by criticizing the bad behavior of your own party.

That tendency may help explain the decline of the antiwar movement in the age of
President Obama, a phenomenon recently analyzed  by David Boaz and  Dana Milbank
of the Washington Post. With the campaign against ISIS, Obama is now waging his
second war without congressional authorization. He has reneged on promises to
close down the Guantanamo detention facility for suspected terrorists, and used
drone warfare far more aggressively than George W. Bush did.

If a Republican president had behaved the same way, antiwar liberals would have
been up in arms. In fairness, some prominent liberal legal scholars have
denounced Obama's actions.  But most grassroots progressives have either
supported the president, engaged in only muted protest of his wars, or kept
quiet about the subject altogether. Milbank suggests that many liberals have
given Obama a pass because "they view him as a lesser evil than the Republican
alternative." Anti-Obama leftists whom he interviewed also believe that partisan
bias is a major factor:

"If George W. Bush were launching wars with Congress out of town, oh, it would
be flooded," longtime liberal activist David Swanson said, looking across mostly
empty Pennsylvania Avenue [during a tiny antiwar demonstration,] "They would be
screaming."

Left-wing Democrats are not the only ones who tolerate behavior from their own
party that they condemn when the opposition does it.  Many Republicans tolerated
or actively supported George W. Bush's massive expansion of federal spending and
regulation, including the creation of the biggest new entitlement program since
the 1960s. As their reaction to Obamacare suggests, they would never have
tolerated similar behavior by a Democratic president.

Partisan prejudice of this type can sometimes be beneficial. It occasionally
allows a president of one party to adopt valuable reforms that the other party
would be unable to push through because it would encounter too much resistance.
For example, Bill Clinton was able to push through welfare reform and free trade
agreements much more easily than a GOP president. His status as a popular
Democrat quiesced much of the liberal opposition that these policies would
otherwise have encountered.

In general, however, partyism is more likely to be pernicious than useful. By
adding another layer of bias to the already severe problem of political
ignorance and irrationality, it further reduces the quality of public opinion on
political issues.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


