                             2504 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 21, 2014 Tuesday 7:13 PM EST

Amid protests, "Klinghoffer" takes Met stage and offers - anticlimax.;
"The Death of Klinghoffer" brought protests, and anticlimax, to the Metropolitan
Opera Monday night

BYLINE: Anne Midgette

LENGTH: 1050 words


NEW YORK: After months of increasingly vocal protests, and amid the largest
police presence I've ever seen at Lincoln Center, John Adams's opera "The Death
of Klinghoffer" finally made it to the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night. The
work, based on the 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship "Achille Lauro" and the
attendant murder of a wheelchair-bound passenger, has been called anti-Semitic
by some, and a masterpiece by others. Monday's strongly sung and played
performance may not have changed anybody's mind either way; it proved, like the
protests, somewhat inconclusive.

Along Broadway, in front of Lincoln Center, the protesters had been lining up
since afternoon, many of them in wheelchairs as a gesture of solidarity with
Klinghoffer. Rudolph Giuliani, New York's former mayor was among the speakers
("it's a factually inaccurate and extraordinarily damaging piece"); others were
less well-known, and less restrained in their comments. But though everyone was
braced for disruptions during the performance, and one person was arrested for
disorderly conduct, there were, in the event, only a few catcalls. At one point
in Act I, a man began shouting, "The murderer of Klinghoffer will never be
forgiven!" over and over, with a kind of desperate driving monotony, as if
channeling the patterns of so-called Minimalist music. He was presumably
responding to the idea that the opera is supposed to be favorable to the
terrorists, but since the scene that had just played showed nothing but
terrorist brutality, his point was rather lost in the execution.

By intermission, most of the protesters seemed to have dispersed, and the opera
was ultimately greeted with ovations: justified accolades for the fine musicians
who had braved a lot of heat, and even threats, to make sure that the show went
on. (Given the tenor of the debate before the opening, being a dark-skinned
singer playing a terrorist - Sean Panikkar, Ryan Speedo Green, Aubrey Allicock,
or Maya Lahyani - must have been a particularly daunting assignment, and all
four of them excelled.) Alan Opie, who was moving and crusty as Klinghoffer, and
Michaela Martens, warm and deep-voiced as his wife Marilyn, were, not
surprisingly, crowd favorites, as was Paulo Szot, the ship's
captain-cum-narrator. Colorful in supporting roles were Maria Zifchak as the
Swiss grandmother, Christopher Feigum as the first officer, and Theodora
Hanslowe as the woman who stayed hidden in her cabin for the whole hijacking.
There were ovations for David Robertson, the elegant and sometimes overpowering
conductor, and even a roar of approval for Adams, who was surely braced, when he
walked out on stage, for a more mixed reaction.

Yet the best performances in the world couldn't make up for the work's
considerable flaws. Adams's score has moved from the kinetic, colorful zaniness
of "Nixon in China," the first "docu-opera" he wrote with the director Peter
Sellars and the librettist Alice Goodman, to a richer and more nuanced
vocabulary. "Klinghoffer's" music is filled with moving instrumental solos
intertwining with the voices, and shining choruses pregnant with tension. But
it's also a lot more static. This isn't entirely Adams's fault. Even the
strongest music in the world cannot redeem a libretto as diffuse and full of
blather as Alice Goodman's tedious "Klinghoffer" text. It drones on and on
without actually being sure of what it wants to say, obfuscating rather than
clarifying its points in the name of "poetry" and "art," neither of which it
serves.

Goodman was already guilty of this in "Nixon in China," but it's more obvious in
"Klinghoffer," because the subject is more incendiary and the pacing is much
slower. You have plenty of time to notice, in other words, that the opera lacks
a strong point of view. It throws out a lot of ideas, and takes refuge behind
the mantle of art from actually thinking them through (the Palestinian scenes,
in Tom Morris's Met production, were a lot more pointed and incendiary than the
Jewish ones). Sellars's original production, indeed, aimed at a kind of
abstraction, with singers in simple white garments; by contrast Morris, and his
costume designer Laura Hopkins, offered 1980s-vintage tourist resort wear. The
production even projects explanatory texts on the wall to clarify what actually
happened at moments when the libretto's "poetic" moments are opaque.

There are a number of reasons why people claim this work is anti-Semitic, but
the loudest protesters seemed to focus on the most banal of them. The notion
that we should prohibit all works of art that allow the bad guys a point of view
would decimate the Western canon; while the idea that audiences might blindly go
out and emulate the behavior they see on stage is a canard that I've heard
applied to Wagner's "Ring" with equal ludicrousness - at least, I've not
encountered any real-life cases of sibling incest following "Die Walküre"
performances. Warts and all, "Klinghoffer" has survived for 23 years for a
reason: it still represents a level of originality, certainly musically, that
lifts it above much of the herd of carefully workshopped, safe contemporary
American operas.

Banning "Klinghoffer" from the stage is not the right answer. Neither is
celebrating it as a perfect work. Sadly, the debate surrounding this production
has not left room for much middle ground between the "pro" of fully endorsing
art's right to say whatever it wants, and the "con" of not allowing art
unfettered access to the historical record, particularly if there are living
relatives to consider (the Klinghoffer daughters have come out strongly against
the opera, and wrote a statement that the Met printed in the program). Alas,
neither side has emerged with much understanding of the other, and the martyrdom
of Leon Klinghoffer has blurred into the martyrdom of "Klinghoffer," the opera.
Which means that either you celebrate or castigate the Met for putting it on,
and that the company, despite putting its best foot forward, once again provides
a polarizing example of opera's distance from the city it hoped, with this
production, to engage.

"The Death of Klinghoffer" continues through November 15th.  The Met has set up
a special site and forum for audience reactions to the show at
klinghoffer.metopera.org.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


