                             2519 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 28, 2014 Tuesday 11:42 AM EST

The Islamic State's 'Call of Duty' allure;
Why the Islamic State makes all their videos look like "Call of Duty."

BYLINE: Terrence McCoy

LENGTH: 724 words


The video begins with an aerial shot of Kobane and spooky white noise. You then
hear the gunfire, see the black Islamic flag fluttering in the corner and listen
as a message chirps on to the screen: "Drone of Islamic State Army." Then
appears a red light blinking like a beacon. Then the gunfire gets closer.
Another flashing light. More gunfire. Then you see him: John Cantlie, a British
hostage of the Islamic State, here to star in video both real and surreal.

The Washington Post's video team suspects the beginning of video, which was
released on Monday and shows Cantlie speaking from Kobane, is doctored in some
way. The suspicions are well-founded. The video, like many of the Islamic
State's clips and magazines, looks like a scene from "Call of Duty."

It highlights what analysts say has become one of the more salient
characteristics of Islamic State media - "gamification," as the Intercept put
it- apparent both in the fighters' language as well as in their videos. They
show balls of flame, fancy graphics and masked fighters who look like they
should be on the cover of an X-Box game. One British fighter named Abu Sumayyah
al-Britani even told American Journalist Jonathan Khron his life in Syria is
more satisfying than in the United Kingdom because now it "is better than that
game 'Call of Duty'" as he can shoot guns without concern.

"If current trends persist, al-Qaeda will become known as 'your father's
terrorist group,' an organization that has gone out of style," stated an article
in the Clarion Project, a nonprofit anti-extremist organization. " ... The new
generation of jihadists has a different style than one the West is used to
seeing. It's hard to envision Osama bin Laden in a rap video, telling an
off-color joke or openly indulging in American entertainment."

And that, experts say, is part of the appeal - and why the terrorist
organization, which is battling for Kobane and threatening Baghdad, will
continue releasing videos like Monday's starring John Cantlie. If a video can be
the "real-life evocation" of a video-game fantasy, it may draw more recruits
than scripture or religious fanaticism.

"For many young people, it's probably not too difficult to relate," wrote the
New Yorker's Jay Caspian King. " ... It's worth wondering how much further their
reach can extend. How many frustrated kids whose only outlets for aggression are
Call of Duty, sports, or hip-hop will take a disastrous step into illogic and
see [the Islamic State] as the real-life evocation of those fantasies?"

This theme was perhaps most noticeable with the recent release of what appears
to be a "Grand Theft Auto"-esque video game by a group allegedly linked to the
Islamic State lionizing the exploits of a militant. In it, the Islamic State
"player" runs around, lifts cars, gets into a lot of gunfights - all of it to
the lilting sound of a jihadist song. "The Islamic State was already well known
for its sophisticated film making, and many of the scenes depicted in the video
appear to be a 'gamification' of previous Islamic State propaganda footage,"
according to the Intercept. " ... It appears that the [Islamic State] media war
is continuing to evolve in new and weird directions."

Other fighters have picked up the motif by tweeting, "This is our Call of Duty
and we Respawn in Jannah," using the gamer word "respawn" to signify rebirth.

"This is our Call Of Duty and we Respawn in Jannah" #Jihad4Jannah #TeamKhilafah
pic.twitter.com/blaDcgcCDA

Political analyst Abdullah Hamidaddin said such imagery refutes the notion that
the Islamic State's recruitment tactics have anything to do with religion. It
instead pitches youths in the same way video games do, by whetting the appetite
for adventure. "The videos [are] clearly not a call to jihad," Hamidaddin wrote
in Al Arabiya News. "This is a call to adventure and adventure in the minds of
many youths is in risk and destruction."

But the success of the strategy is less in the idea's conception than its
execution, John Horgan, a terrorist expert at the University of Massachusetts at
Lowell, told New York Magazine. He said much of the imagery does rival "Call of
Duty." "They are carefully composed, well-edited videos that capture both the
nobility and urgency of joining the fight, juxtaposed with pulse-pounding images
and slo-mo videos of adventure in battle," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


