                             2527 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     October 31, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

During Maliki trip, balancing act for U.S.

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1029 words


An alarming spike in sectarian violence in Iraq is pinning the Obama
administration between its goal of strengthening Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki
in his fight against Sunni extremists and pressuring the Shiite-led government
to stop what the United States considers the political mistreatment of Sunnis.

As Maliki makes his first visit to Washington in more than two years this week,
security concerns have largely eclipsed Washington's political quarrels with
him.

Although administration officials insist that they are holding Maliki
accountable for his failure to govern inclusively, the rapid strengthening of
al-Qaeda militants and the collapse of security along Iraq's long border with
Syria are the main focus of his discussions with U.S. officials. He is spending
much of his time this week lobbying Congress to free up security money and
unfreeze weapons sales that the administration has already approved.

Maliki's Oval Office meeting with President Obama on Friday may yield an
announcement of wider U.S. cooperation to help Iraq confront a resurgent and
well-armed al-Qaeda affiliate.

"There are quite urgent requirements from Iraq's security situation," Lukman
Faily, Iraq's ambassador to Washington, said in an interview.

"We will be waiting for fuller responses from our American friends to tell us
what they can offer."

The network once known as al-Qaeda in Iraq is blamed for suicide bombings
against Shiite civilians. It also represents a threat to the U.S. goal of
democratic change in Syria and beyond. The group now calls itself the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria, with a growing presence in the neighboring country.

Killings in Iraq are now on pace to match the levels of 2008, the year that
sectarian violence bordering on a civil war began to abate. A rise in violence
that began in the spring has eclipsed the security gains made in the past five
years.

The old Sunni-Shiite split has reemerged as the main internal threat in Iraq,
overtaking a separate division between Kurds and Arabs. Nearly 600 people have
been killed in sectarian attacks across Iraq this month; more than 5,300 Iraqis
have been killed this year.

Maliki met for two hours Wednesday with Vice President Biden, long the
administration's leading voice on Iraq. Maliki made an urgent case for U.S.-made
Apache attack helicopters, asking for Biden's help in overcoming congressional
opposition to sale of the aircraft, which can shoot precision munitions like
those fired by drones and track enemy movements with powerful cameras.

Bipartisan skeptics in Congress are holding up a possible Apache sale, in
protest of Maliki's political decisions and out of concern that his forces might
turn the Apaches on internal opponents who are not affiliated with al-Qaeda or
other terrorist groups. Congressional critics also accuse Maliki of turning a
blind eye to Iranian aircraft flying over Iraq to supply Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad with weapons and fighters.

As Maliki arrived Tuesday evening, six influential senators blasted his
government as beholden to Shiite Iran's "malign influence" and said Maliki's
"mismanagement of Iraqi politics" risks tipping the country back toward civil
war.

Democrats Carl Levin (Mich) and Robert Menendez (N.J.) and Republicans John
McCain (Ariz.), James M. Inhofe (Okla.), Bob Corker (Tenn.) and Lindsey O.
Graham (S.C.) urged Obama to take a hard line with Maliki on political
reconciliation.

If Maliki adopts a new, inclusive strategy, the United States would be ready to
provide support to help that strategy succeed, the senators wrote.

Maliki knows he will get an earful from leaders of the House and Senate foreign
affairs panels, Faily said.

"We are aware of that, yes," he said dryly. "We've done our homework."

In addition to his private assurances to Congress, Maliki will speak Thursday at
the U.S. Institute of Peace about political reconciliation.

The Obama administration is quietly supporting the Apache sale, because of the
aircraft's unique counterterrorism capabilities, U.S. and Iraqi officials said.
The administration is also exploring other ways to help Maliki confront
militants, including increased surveillance and intelligence cooperation.

U.S. officials point to a stunning jailbreak in the summer as part of the
rationale for expanding counterterrorism help to Maliki. More than 500 suspected
militants were freed in the well-planned assault on the Abu Ghraib prison,
reversing years of U.S. and Iraqi efforts to round up leaders of the al-Qaeda
affiliate.

"This is really a major and increasing threat to Iraq's stability, it's an
increasing threat to our regional partners, and it's an increasing threat to
us," a senior administration official told reporters in a briefing on Wednesday.

"It is a fact now that al-Qaeda has a presence in western Iraq, and it has a
presence in terms of camps and training facilities and staging areas that the
Iraqi forces are unable to target effectively," the official said, noting that
this is partly because the militants are increasingly equipped with heavy
weaponry from Syria.

The official spoke on the condition of anonymity under ground rules set by the
administration.

The main argument to Congress, U.S. and congressional officials said, is that
strengthening the Iraqi government's hand against militants makes the whole
region safer and helps protect U.S. economic and security interests in Iraq and
elsewhere.

The administration's argument to Maliki is that the counterterrorism support is
of a piece with U.S. demands that he continue what administration officials cite
as initial progress in repairing some of the political rift with Sunnis and
Kurds.

"We are saying to him clearly, 'Yes, we want to help you out as much as we can,
but this is not a one-dimensional situation,' " a senior State Department
official said.

"Part of solving the security situation is solving the political situation."

The official spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe internal
discussions.

Maliki is joined on this visit by his Sunni defense minister and Kurdish foreign
minister, in a symbolic show of unity that the delegation hopes can help
overcome congressional doubts.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


