                             2503 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 21, 2014 Tuesday 3:00 PM EST

Amid protests, "Klinghoffer" takes Met stage and offers - anticlimax.;
"The Death of Klinghoffer" brought protests, and anticlimax, to the Metropolitan
Opera Monday night

BYLINE: Anne Midgette

LENGTH: 1171 words


NEW YORK: The protesters started gathering in the early afternoon. Everyone knew
they were coming. The sidewalks around Lincoln Center were thick with police,
who kept the protesters cordoned off behind riot fences, away from the main
plaza and the arches of the Metropolitan Opera. The protesters had microphones,
and dozens of wheelchairs, because they were protesting an opera about a man in
a wheelchair who was killed, John Adams's "The Death of Klinghoffer," which was
having its first performance at the Metropolitan Opera, 23 years after it was
written. Some of the protesters were famous, like the former mayor Rudolph
Giuliani, who spoke in the afternoon ("it's a factually inaccurate and
extraordinarily damaging piece"). Others were lay speakers. All of their voices
bounced off the empty steps up to the plaza, where police stood guard.

After months of build-up and increasingly heated debate, "Klinghoffer" finally
made it to the Met last night. The opera - based on the 1985 hijacking of the
cruise ship "Achille Lauro" and attendant murder of a wheelchair-bound passenger
- has drawn charges of anti-Semitism since it was written; others have hailed it
as a masterpiece. On Monday, both the performance and the protests proved
inconclusive. One person was arrested for disorderly conduct, and at one point
in Act I, inside the auditorium, a man began shouting, "The murderer of
Klinghoffer will never be forgiven!" over and over, with a kind of desperate
driving monotony, as if channeling the patterns of so-called Minimalist music.
He was presumably responding to the idea that the opera is supposed to be
favorable to the terrorists, but since the scene that had just played showed
nothing but terrorist brutality, his point was rather lost in the execution.
There were a few other catcalls, but no actual disruptions, and the protesters
outside had largely dispersed by intermission.

The opera, meanwhile, was greeted by well-deserved ovations from the audience,
justified accolades for the fine musicians who had braved a lot of heat, and
even threats, to make sure that the show went on. (Given the tenor of the debate
before the opening, being a dark-skinned singer playing a terrorist - Sean
Panikkar, Ryan Speedo Green, Aubrey Allicock, or Maya Lahyani - must have been a
particularly daunting assignment, and all four of them excelled, as did Jesse
Kovarsky, the dancer who played the terrorist Omar.) Alan Opie, who was moving
and crusty as Klinghoffer, and Michaela Martens, warm and deep-voiced as his
wife Marilyn, were, not surprisingly, crowd favorites, as was Paulo Szot, the
ship's captain-cum-narrator. There were ovations for David Robertson, the
elegant and sometimes overpowering conductor, and even a roar of approval for
Adams, who was surely braced, when he walked out on stage, for a more mixed
reaction. Yet the best performances in the world couldn't make up for the work's
considerable flaws.

Adams's music in this piece has moved from the kinetic, colorful zaniness of
"Nixon in China," the first "docu-opera" he wrote with the director Peter
Sellars and the librettist Alice Goodman, to a richer and more nuanced
vocabulary, with moving instrumental solos intertwining with the voices, and
shining choruses pregnant with tension. It's also a lot more static. That isn't
entirely his fault. Even the strongest music in the world cannot redeem a
libretto as diffuse and verbose and full of blather as Alice Goodman's tedious
"Klinghoffer" text. It drones on and on without actually being sure of what it
wants to say, and obfuscating rather than clarifying its points in the name of
"poetry" and "art," neither of which it serves.

Goodman was already guilty of this in "Nixon in China," but it's more obvious in
"Klinghoffer," because the subject is more incendiary and the pacing is much
slower. You have plenty of time to notice, in other words, that the opera lacks
a strong point of view. It throws out a lot of ideas - the piece is modeled on a
Bach passion! There is a careful balance between Jewish and Palestinian
choruses! - and takes refuge behind the mantle of art from actually thinking
them through (the Palestinian scenes, in Tom Morris's Met production, were a lot
more pointed and incendiary than the Jewish ones). Sellars's original
production, indeed, aimed at a kind of abstraction, with singers in simple white
garments; Morris's production, by contrast, reflects what appears to be a
current operatic trend with its dogged literalness, offering 1980s-vintage
tourist resort wear, and even projecting explanatory texts on the wall to
clarify what actually happened at moments when the libretto's "poetic" moments
are opaque.

The work's flaws do not fully justify the protests, some of which verged on the
bizarre. The notion that we should prohibit all works of art that allow the bad
guys a point of view would decimate the Western canon; while the idea that
audiences might blindly be led to go out and emulate the behavior they see on
stage is a canard that I've heard applied to Wagner's "Ring" with equal
ludicrousness - at least, I've not encountered any real-life cases of sibling
incest following "Die Walküre" performances. Warts and all, "Klinghoffer" has
survived for 23 years for a reason: it still represents a level of originality,
certainly musically, that lifts it above much of the herd of carefully
workshopped, safe contemporary American operas.

Banning "Klinghoffer" from the stage is not the right answer. Neither is
celebrating it as a perfect work. Sadly, the debate surrounding this production
has not left room for much middle ground between the "pro" of fully endorsing
art's right to say whatever it wants, and the "con" of not allowing art
unfettered access to the historical record, particularly if there are living
relatives to consider (the Klinghoffer daughters have come out strongly against
the opera, and wrote a statement that the Met printed in the program). Alas,
neither side has come out with much understanding of the other, and the
martyrdom of Leon Klinghoffer has blurred into the martyrdom of "Klinghoffer,"
the opera. As a result, the work has emerged in New York not as the springboard
for productive debate - as it did, for example, at the Opera Theater of St.
Louis, where it was produced without protest in 2011 - but as a further
polarizing example of opera's distance from the city the Met hoped, with this
production, to engage. Nonetheless, the company offered its best, and a lot of
fine performances - including Maria Zifchak as the Swiss grandmother,
Christopher Feigum as the first officer, Theodora Hanslowe as the woman who
stayed hidden in her cabin for the whole hijacking, and Lahyani as a moving,
impassioned Palestinian woman - in this production. It's a shame it won't be
seen more widely to spur actual debate.

"The Death of Klinghoffer" continues through November 15th.  The Met has set up
a special site and forum for audience reactions to the show at
klinghoffer.metopera.org.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


