                             253 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 6:54 PM EST

National Park Service: Drones are not welcome, for now

BYLINE: Niraj Chokshi

LENGTH: 316 words


There aren't a whole lot of things you can't do in national parks, but flying
drones is now among them.

National Park Service Director Jonathan Jarvis on Friday signed a policy memo
instructing park superintendents to ban drone operations - launching, landing,
flying - within federal park boundaries.

"We embrace many activities in national parks because they enhance visitor
experiences with the iconic natural, historic and cultural landscapes in our
care," Jarvis said in a statement. "However, we have serious concerns about the
negative impact that flying unmanned aircraft is having in parks, so we are
prohibiting their use until we can determine the most appropriate policy that
will protect park resources and provide all visitors with a rich experience."

Drones have already been banned in some national parks and created disturbances
in others. Concerned for visitor safety, park rangers confiscated an unmanned
aircraft that flew over visitors at Mount Rushmore in September. In April, a
loud drone disrupted "a quiet sunset" before crashing in the Grand Canyon and
another disturbed a herd of sheep in Zion National Park. Last month, Yosemite
announced its ban on drones. Now it's universal over the lands and waters
administered by the National Park Service, which oversees 401 areas covering
more than 84 million acres.

In a statement, Jarvis stressed that the policy is temporary - a stopgap until
the organization can develop a set of regulations. Permits previously doled out
for the use of unmanned aircraft will be suspended until re-reviewed and
approved. Previously authorized use of model aircraft may continue. The NPS
itself reserves the right to use drones for search and rescue, fire operations
and scientific study, it said in the statement.

(Correction: This post previously misidentified the park that banned drones last
month. It was Yosemite.)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


