                             2556 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     December 4, 2013 Wednesday 8:13 PM EST

U.S., NATO warn Kabul that troop plan is in peril

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 683 words


Kerry blames Karzai for security deal delay       U.S., NATO warn Afghan troop
plan is in peril

The U.S. and NATO warn that the Afghan military commitment is in jeopardy if
Karzai rebuffs the pact.

BRUSSELS - Time and patience are running out for countries planning to help
support Afghanistan's military after NATO-led troops depart, NATO and U.S.
officials warned Tuesday.

Meeting in Brussels with Afghanistan's interior minister and its senior
diplomat, NATO officials made clear that they cannot leave even a small
contingent of forces behind without guarantees that Afghan President Hamid
Karzai is refusing to give.

"This is not fooling around. This is serious business. There are over 50 nations
who are engaged here through NATO in trying to help Afghanistan," Secretary of
State John F. Kerry told reporters. "Those nations have budget cycles; those
nations have planning requirements. Those nations have equipment requirements;
they have deployment requirements. All of those things are best managed through
planning."

Karzai balked last month at signing a security deal with the United States that
governs U.S. support and obligations after most international forces leave next
year. A similar agreement covering NATO forces was expected to piggyback on the
U.S. deal, which Karzai has suggested he won't sign before spring. The Obama
administration wants it signed by Dec. 31.

"It is clear that if there is no signature on the legal agreement, there can be
no deployment, and the planned assistance will be put at risk," NATO Secretary
General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said.

Rasmussen declined to specify a deadline for a NATO decision but said planning
for troop commitments takes time, money and, in some cases, parliamentary
approval.

"I have to remind everybody that there are certain realities on the ground," for
nations that would send forces, he said. "Those facts on the ground make it
necessary to sign that legal framework very soon."

U.S. officials have said that the United States and NATO could keep 8,000 to
12,000 troops in Afghanistan after 2014. The U.S. contingent would be partly
responsible for training and advising Afghan forces and partly focused on U.S.
counterterrorism priorities.

National security adviser Susan E. Rice traveled to Kabul last week to tell
Karzai that there was no room for delay or renegotiation of a deal that has been
a year in the making. She came away empty-handed, and Karzai has appeared to
harden his opposition despite overwhelming approval of the pact by a tribal
council he helped select.

Kerry was meeting with the Afghan officials alongside other NATO foreign
ministers over two days of talks here. His frustration was clear seven weeks
after he made an emergency trip to Kabul to negotiate the bilateral deal with
Karzai. Kerry laid blame on Karzai for changing the terms afterward.

"I don't believe in renegotiating unilaterally," he said. "And I don't think
President Obama appreciates, [after] the amount of sacrifice that has been made
by our troops, by the American people, to contribute to the future of
Afghanistan, that this stuff now is being left in doubt at this critical
moment."

Also Tuesday, the Pentagon announced that the U.S. military has temporarily
halted ground shipments of cargo leaving the war zone along a primary supply
route into Pakistan. Spokesman Mark Wright said military logisticians decided to
stop the shipments through the Torkham Gate border crossing because local
drivers working for the U.S. military were being targeted by Pakistani
protesters angry about American drone strikes.

Wright said he did not expect any "long-term impact" on the drawdown of military
equipment from Afghanistan. The U.S. military also moves smaller amounts of
ground cargo via another border checkpoint, in southeastern Afghanistan, as well
as by air. The ground routes are far cheaper, however. Wright said the Pentagon
expects to resume traffic through the Torkham Gate "in the near future."

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Craig Whitlock in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


