                             2550 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 29, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 273 words


Peaceful holiday in the country Four grateful families celebrated Thanksgiving
at a retreat for wounded warriors that opened this year in western Loudoun
County. B1

Karzai accusation The Afghan president said a U.S. drone strike killed a child,
and he won't sign a pact if such attacks continue. A14

THE NATION

Discrepancies have been detected in Medicare spending on post-hospital care. A3

SCIENCE

Comet ISON, the celestial body dubbed "the Comet of the Century," didn't appear
to survive its close shave with the sun, scientists said. A2

Gut feelings may be able to predict whether a marriage will be bliss  -  or a
miss. A7

THE WORLD

Iran is inviting U.N. nuclear experts to visit its heavy-water plant in the Arak
for the first time in two years. A10

A Malian wantedin the fatal carjacking of a U.S. official in Niger in 2000 is
arrested in northern Mali. A16

Cuba's shutdown of consular servicesafter its U.S. bank closed its account
illustrates the roadblocks as the countries seek a thaw in relations. A15

the economy

The Securities and Exchange Commission is working to combat the manipulation of
"microcap" stocks. A23

THE REGION

The brother of "Renoir Girl" tells a different story from hers about a painting
that was reported stolen in 1951. B1

The District's largest gas-station owner continues battling Costco, accusing it
of evading a law against a business selling both fuel and liquor. B1

STYLE

Tre, the local go-go hero who stepped onto the national stage, returns home to
ponder his next move. C1

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


