                             2533 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

LET THE CAR DO THE DRI VING

BYLINE: Ashley Halsey III

SECTION: Metro; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 1091 words


There is a vision of the future you may have heard about: Computer-controlled
cars whizzing around the Beltway at the speed limit, still bumper to bumper, in
rush hour. ¶ Add to that two realities. ¶ The future may arrive so soon it will
leave your head spinning. ¶ But before it does, there are a whole lot of issues
that people - including you - have to address.

The era of the automated car, something akin to having an onboard computer
perform as your chauffeur, awaits its moment like a morning sun just below the
horizon. There are prototypes on the streets, states that allow test models on
the highway and projections that you will be surrounded by them - or inside one
- in little more than a decade.

A pair of assessments last month - a comprehensive review of autonomous vehicles
by the D.C.-based Eno Center for Transportation, and an essay by Robert W. Poole
Jr. of the Reason Foundation - provide a crystal-ball glimpse of the barriers
and benefits ahead.

"I appreciate the potential of autonomous vehicles," Poole wrote. "But I am
amazed and appalled at some of the hype about likely benefits being spread by
people who should know better."

He goes on to question predictions of a dramatic drop in car ownership, reduced
need for parking, the rapidity with which the new vehicles will win the hearts
of American drivers, the cost to taxpayers of equipping highways with necessary
electronics and the notion that drivers will be able to nap or play games during
the commute to work.

The Eno Center study,                                        co-authored by
Daniel Fagnant and Kara M. Klockelman of the University of Texas at Austin,
dissects the promises and potential pitfalls.

Autonomous vehicles, also known as AVs, already are on the road. Those test
models will evolve into production cars by 2020 - Volvo, Toyota, Ford, General
Motors, Volkswagen and Nissan are working on them - and be on the mass market a
couple of years later. Nevada, California and Florida have taken fledgling steps
toward regulating AVs.

The story of exactly how they work must wait for another day, but consider how
much of the technology already is coming off the assembly lines. Each year, more
cars are produced with sensors that detect lane changes, backup distances and
measure the space between your car and the one just ahead.

If you've moved much beyond the Studebaker era, your car was built with a
computer that keeps track of all that and a great deal more. Before you know it,
your computer will be communicating directly with the computers on vehicles
around yours via short-range transmitters that use dedicated bandwidth to send
and receive information 10 times per second about where the vehicles are and
what they are doing.

That technology works - there was a test demonstration near National Harbor this
year - and only needs radio hookups and public policy decisions before it rolls.

Once cars and trucks begin a robust conversation about where they are and what
they're  planning to do - along with chit-chat that draws in stuff like traffic
lights, congestion reports and some road conditions - do they really need you to
boss them around?

Maybe not, but maybe so.

On the plus side, the Eno Center report points out, 40 percent of fatal crashes
involved alcohol, and an AV can't drive drunk. Overall, more than 32,000 people
died in collisions in 2011, and AVs would reduce that number by a lot.  A
computer-linked systems of AVs could also reduce congestion and air pollution.

AVs would increase mobility for the disabled, elderly and young people (soccer
moms might be replaced by soccer AVs).  After dropping off passengers, cars
could be sent to park themselves in more remote, less expensive places.

Before you get giddy with excitement, however, consider a minefield of caveats
extrapolated from the Eno report.

Would you fly in an airplane without a pilot? Why not? The "pilots" of drones
mounting attacks in Afghanistan, Pakistan and elsewhere are sitting a half world
away. Commercial planes can be flown the same way. Are you ready to take a
figurative - and maybe literal - back seat in your own car?

How much are you willing to payfor chauffeur-like luxury? There are all sorts of
estimates, but it might add $25,000 to $50,000 to the sticker price in the early
years of production. After a decade, the best guess is that might fall to an
added $10,000. (There might be savings on insurance and fuel costs to help
balance that out.)

Are you ready to trust a bunch of computerswith your life? Is that a deer, an
empty cardboard box, a child, a cyclist or a pedestrian that the sensor is
warning your computer about? Should the computer decide what to do or should
you?

Ethicist Patrick Lin says its a variation on a classic case study.

"On a narrow road, your robotic car detects and imminent head-on crash with a
non-robotic vehicle," Lin wrote.  Is it "a school bus full of kids, or perhaps a
carload of teenagers bent on playing 'chicken' with you, knowing that your car
is programmed to avoid crashes?"

The computer decides to swerve to avoid the collision, hits a tree and you die.

"At least with the school bus, this is probably the right thing to do," Lin
said, "to sacrifice yourself to save 30 or so school children. The automated car
was stuck in a no-win situation and chose the lesser evil. . . . It's one thing
when you, the driver, make a choice to sacrifice yourself, but it's quite
another for a machine to make that decision for you involuntarily."

What will the jury decide? In a lot of situations, drivers are not held at fault
if they make less than the best decision in a split second under duress. Will
the legal system be just as forgiving of a computer that's using an array of
sensors and software to inform its decision?

What happens if this vast computer networkthat controls every vehicle on the
road gets hacked? The evidence du jour seems to suggest that few computer
systems in the world are immune from penetration. Could al-Qaeda get into the
network and instruct all vehicles to accelerate to 70 mph and swerve left?

Will computers in cars put an end to hanky-panky? Will all that data being
pumped about your whereabouts from your car into somebody's cloud be Nirvana for
divorce lawyers? And those who follow a more moral path also have a right to
know where the gathered information of their travels will be stored, who might
have access to it and how it might be used.

The Eno Center report sums it up: "The proliferation of autonomous vehicles is
far from guaranteed."

ashley.halsey@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


