                             2557 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     December 5, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

U.S. seeks solution to Afghan impasse

BYLINE: Anne Gearan;Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1063 words


BRUSSELS - The Obama administration is looking for ways to work around Afghan
President Hamid Karzai's new demands concerning a key security agreement with
the United States, a senior U.S. official close to the negotiations said
Wednesday.

"One of the things we're trying to do quietly is design, engineer, imagine ways
that we could get ourselves out of this fix," the official said in an interview,
speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to describe
the emerging strategy on the record. "One of those ways might be to find a
mechanism, a technique where Karzai could abide by his loya jirga pledge not to
sign it but still give us the document we need."

Secretary of State John F. Kerry suggested this week that someone other than
Karzai might sign the security deal. Possibilities include the top Afghan and
U.S. defense officials, although U.S. officials played down that option after
Kerry spoke.

But in Washington on Wednesday, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel also suggested to
reporters at the Pentagon that the signature of an Afghan leader other than
Karzai might suffice.

"The issue of who has the authority to speak for the sovereign nation of
Afghanistan, I suppose the lawyers can figure that out," he said. "Whether it's
the minister of defense or the president, someone who has the authority to sign
on behalf of Afghanistan, . . . I suspect that would fulfill the kind of
commitment we need."

Karzai's spokesman, Aimal Faizi, on Wednesday dismissed suggestions that anyone
besides the Afghan president could sign the agreement.

"You cannot get a bilateral agreement signed between two states if one of the
states still has its conditions for its signing," Faizi said. "It has to be
signed by two sovereign states when it is mutually acceptable to both
countries."

Faizi reiterated that Karzai's demands - including an end to U.S. military raids
on  Afghan homes, a reduction in American drone strikes and the launching of a
U.S.-brokered peace process involving the Taliban - must be met before he will
sign the agreement.

"We are certain that the U.S. can meet our conditions in practical terms within
days or weeks," Faizi said. "As long as Afghan demands are not accepted,
President Karzai will not authorize any minister to sign it."

Faizi's comments coincided with a visit to Kabul by James F. Dobbins, the Obama
administration's special envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan, for talks with
senior Afghan officials. It was widely expected that Dobbins would meet with
Karzai, although neither the U.S. Embassy in Kabul nor Faizi would comment on
whether such a meeting took place Wednesday.

In the coming days, Karzai is scheduled to leave Afghanistan for talks with
Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. Karzai will also travel to Tehran, where
he will meet with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani.

Iran's government is calling on Karzai to reject the security agreement, and
some analysts in Kabul say they think Iranian opposition is influencing his
reluctance to sign it.

U.S. officials are talking to other Afghan officials apart from Karzai, the
senior official said, and asking: "How can we help back Karzai off the ledge on
this? And can we give him an out?"

Kerry joined other NATO foreign ministers here Wednesday in urging Afghanistan's
interior and foreign ministers to get the agreement signed quickly. A NATO plan
to keep a small contingent of troops alongside U.S. forces in Afghanistan hinges
on the same legal framework now in limbo.

The Afghan ministers told the NATO diplomats that they shared the sense of
urgency and appeared optimistic that the deal could be signed soon, another U.S.
official said without elaborating. The official, who was traveling with Kerry,
spoke on the condition of anonymity to provide a summary of the closed-door
session.

NATO countries and other nations that have pledged money or troops for the
ongoing support of the Afghan military all face potential political, budgetary
and logistical problems fulfilling those commitments if the U.S. security deal
continues to languish, Kerry and other officials said during the two-day NATO
meeting here.

U.S. officials working on the security agreement worry that a long delay or a
failed agreement will give nations on the fence about an ongoing commitment in
Afghanistan a reason to walk away, the senior official said.

That concern makes solving the Karzai puzzle even more pressing, he said.

"Our concern is that what might be best for Hamid Karzai and his legacy could
well defeat the international effort to secure our gains in Afghanistan," the
official said.

U.S. officials failed to anticipate Karzai's late opposition to signing the deal
on what the Americans thought was an agreed-upon timeline. Now they are trying
to better understand why Karzai changed his mind and how they can address at
least some of his concerns and still get the deal signed quickly.

"We didn't foresee all these antics, new conditions and all that," the senior
official said, but adding that it was anticipated that negotiations would be
clouded by politics as the election approached. That meant getting the deal done
in 2013, even though that has now left Karzai room to hold it hostage.

The second official later added that the United States considers the security
agreement "a closed document" to which no further changes would be made,
especially now that the Afghan tribal council, or loya jirga, has approved it.

The senior U.S. official said Karzai's balk is an entirely political maneuver
born of Karzai's objectives for his final six months in office and beyond. Any
solution to the impasse will have to take his political aims into account,
including his desire for political influence now and after an Afghan election to
replace him in April, the official said.

"He sees he has two levers to pull," the official said. The bilateral security
agreement, or BSA, is one. Holding out on the deal gives Karzai leverage with
the United States that will evaporate later, the official said.

The other lever is Karzai's influence over the scheduled presidential election,
the official said. Being seen as a tough negotiator with the Americans gives
Karzai continued credibility and sway as the vote approaches, the official said.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

tim.craig@washpost.com

Craig reported from Kabul. Craig Whitlock in Washington contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


