                             2587 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 8, 2014 Wednesday 8:14 PM EST

Iraq is our concern

BYLINE: James Jeffrey

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 722 words


Iraq is at a  decisive impasse . An al-Qaeda threat able to operate as a
quasi-conventional military force has  seized large portions of western Iraq ,
including parts of Ramadi and Fallujah, two major cities in  Anbar province .
While the main reason for the growth of al-Qaeda in Iraq  , a faction which is
calling itself the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria,    is the unbridled war in
neighboring Syria, the Maliki government's spiteful actions toward Sunni Arabs
have contributed.

In recent days, news reports of Sunni tribes in Anbar cooperating loosely with
the Baghdad government against al-Qaeda, and expedited U.S. military assistance
and intelligence, gave reasons for hope. But then came Sunday's news conference
by Secretary of State John Kerry. Although the secretary spoke about the dangers
of al-Qaeda gaining ground in Iraq and the countermeasures the United States was
taking, he stated no fewer than four times that this fight was not ours but the
Iraqis'. This, combined with an immediate denial of a suggestion that no one is
even making - that the United States put troops on the ground - undercuts all
the good commitments he made.

Surely the secretary's words were not very reassuring to the Sunni tribesmen the
United States hopes will battle hardened al-Qaeda forces, or even to the
government of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, our partner despite all his
foibles. Iraq has hundreds of thousands of troops, lavishly armed by the United
States, some well trained and experienced in combat. But they need not only the
U.S. "multipliers" the secretary intimated are being sent - more drones,
accurate air-to-ground missiles, intelligence and some remedial training in
counterterrorism operations and coordination - but also moral support. How will
Maliki, a Shiite, respond to U.S. admonitions that he take a different tack with
Sunni Arab Iraqis if we take pains to emphasize that this is his fight, not
ours?

In purely realpolitik terms, this is our fight. A destabilized Iraq with a
western region overrun by al-Qaeda is obviously not in U.S. interests if we want
a calm Middle East and a secure homeland. Nor if we hope to see a functional
Iraq export the 6 million barrels of oil the International Energy Agency
estimates it could provide to world markets daily by 2020.

As is often the case in the Middle East, the Obama administration is taking the
right actions. But, as also often happens in this region, the administration is
sounding an uncertain tone, seemingly signaling to everyone that its top
priority is to not get the United States into any sort of military engagement -
that it wants to not just avoid a new Vietnam but even a new cruise missile
raid, or small continuing military presence in Afghanistan, or the dispatch of a
few dozen uniformed U.S. counterterrorism experts to advise Iraqis on how to
take down al-Qaeda in Fallujah. The result has been an extraordinary collapse of
U.S. credibility in the region despite many commendable administration steps.

To be fair, the underlying problem - an obsessive focus on the domestic
political and media aspects of any foreign policy move - is not unique to this
administration. In this and in other recent instances - such as the ambivalence
the president   expressed in his  September speech on Syria  and the historic
U.S. role in global security, and his expression of concern, in an interview
last   June,  about a slippery slope   should   the United States take
military action in Syria - the goal appears to be to inoculate the
administration against criticism that it "didn't finish the job" against a
particular enemy or that it is reversing its policy of "ending America's wars."
As was the case with previous administrations, what's missing from such a focus
is empathy for the impact that U.S. words have on foreigners - our allies,
partners and foes around the world. They are also an audience, and the first two
keep "voting with their feet," from  turning down seats  on the United Nations
Security Council to their criticisms of U.S. policies   in Tel Aviv  news
conferences  . Until this focus changes, chaos will continue to threaten us in
the Middle East and elsewhere.

The writer is a distinguished visiting fellow at the Washington Institute for
Near East Policy. He served as ambassador to Iraq from 2010 to 2012.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


