                             2574 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 27, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

Family Filmgoer reviews 'The Secret Life of Walter Mitty' and 'The Wolf of Wall
Street'

BYLINE: Jane Horwitz

SECTION: ; Pg. T28

LENGTH: 873 words


8 and older           and older

Walking With Dinosaurs (PG). Full of humor, adventure and information, this
animated 3-D adventure will entertain kids 8 and older very well. Some of the
dangers in the story make "Walking With Dinosaurs" a bit too much for viewers
younger than 8, though seeing it in 2-D could tame it a bit. Our dinosaur hero
and his herd face fires, predators, violent rivalries and the loss of parents.
These are not too graphically rendered, but still are not for kids younger than
8. The young dinosaur hero is Patchi, a perky pachyrhinosaurus who is the runt
of his litter. His big brother, Scowler, teases and bullies him, but he's
befriended by a colorful bird named Alex, our narrator. Alex follows the spunky
little dinosaur as the herd goes on its annual migration, loses members in a
vicious forest fire and nearly drowns while treading on ice that gives way.
Patchi and Scowler's parents die, but not on screen.

THE BOTTOM LINE:The humor includes dinosaur poop, vomit and flatulence jokes.
The forest fire, predatory attacks and a scene in which some of the herd fall
through a frozen lake are scary. Most of this is more implied than graphic, but
in 3-D it's intense.

10 and older           and older

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (PG). Kids 10 and older, especially if they can
enjoy quieter films, will find great pleasure in Ben Stiller's gentle update of
James Thurber's classic story. Stiller's Walter Mitty is a 40-something drone in
Life Magazine's New York office. His co-workers chuckle at his tendency to zone
out. He adores a new employee but he can't summon the nerve to ask her out.
Instead, he imagines himself as an action hero, rescuing her and sweeping her
off her feet. Word comes down that Life is downsizing, and it is Walter's job to
provide the negative for the final print cover, sent in and specified by
photographer Sean O'Connell. But Walter can't find the negative. Desperate, he
decides to go after the notoriously elusive O'Connell.

THE BOTTOM LINE:Walter goes up with an intoxicated helicopter pilot and outruns
a potential volcanic eruption. The script includes mildly crude expressions and
very mild sexual innuendo.

PG-13           13

Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom. A solid emotional core and a lot of information
are packed into this film, based on Nelson Mandela's memoir. It may, however,
depict too much realistic violence for middle-schoolers. For high-schoolers who
lack prior knowledge of South Africa and the policy of racial segregation and
white supremacy that Mandela and his fellow dissidents fought to end, this film
could be a revelation. Actor Idris Elba brings his powerful presence to a
convincing and nuanced portrait of Mandela. The movie traces Mandela's life from
his early days as a lawyer to his arrest and 27-year imprisonment, his 1990
release, his plea for peace and forgiveness, and his 1994 election to the
presidency.

THE BOTTOM LINE:Reenactments of violence are depicted with restraint, but they
are upsetting. We see bodies in the streets with dead children among them. The
PG-13 rating also reflects a couple of sexual situations that are steamy, but
not graphic.

R

Her. Filmmaker Spike Jonze has created a memorable fable about a future in which
emotions and technology merge, but it is too sexually explicit and profane to
recommend for anyone younger than 17. Theodore lives in Los Angeles in the
"slight future." Lonely and sad because he's going through a divorce, he works
as a letter-writer for people who can't express their feelings in words.
Theodore  decides to buy a much-hyped new operating system for all his devices.
The OS can talk, and he chooses a female voice. "Samantha" logs on as a witty,
fun, brainy personality, and Theodore falls in love with her.

THE BOTTOM LINE:The film includes a couple of very steamy, and at times even
explicit, phone and/or virtual sexual situations, as well as a couple that are
live and in-person. The script features occasional very strong profanity and
graphic sexual discussions.

The Wolf of Wall Street. This Wall Street horror story, based on Jordan
Belfort's memoir, is over the top and not for anyone younger than 17 - not for
anyone younger than 21, really. We meet Belfort as a young broker in the 1980s,
schooled in the ways of fleecing clients by a chest-thumping broker. After the
1987 crash, Belfort lands in a penny-stocks operation. He easily sells the
worthless stocks to people who can't afford them, while pocketing 50 percent
commissions. Soon he can start his own company and hires a like-minded oddball,
Donnie Azoff, to work with him. High on drugs and booze and partying with
legions of prostitutes, Belfort, Azoff and the company make a fortune by
committing fraud, while an FBI guy waits to pounce.

The bottom line:This movie depicts many scenes of hard-partying that include
drug abuse and heavy drinking. There are multiple graphic and semi-graphic
sexual situations with nudity. The script contains highly profane and sexually
explicit language, plus a use of the N-word and a homophobic slur.

goingoutguide@washpost.com

Horwitz is a freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


