                             2530 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 1, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 401 words


Gadget-friendly skiesThe FAA plans to allow gate-to-gate use of personal
electronic devices, expecting to lift its ban by 2014. A3

Verdict tossedVirginia Tech had no legal duty to warn students after the first
killings in 2007, the state Supreme Court ruled. B1

the nation

President Obama's campaign advisers             explored the possibility of
replacing Vice President Biden on the ticket with Hillary Rodham Clinton, a book
said. A5

Senate Republicans blocked President Obama's nominees to oversee the home
mortgage industry and to serve on a powerful appellate court. A3

A federal appeals court blocked a ruling that the New York police's
stop-and-frisk policy was discriminatory and took the judge that issued it off
the case. A3

Thousands of federal employees and contractors approved for security clearances
owed millions in back taxes in 2012, the GAO said. B4

Most of Texas's tough new abortion restrictions can take effect immediately, a
federal appeals court ruled. A2

the world

International inspectors said Syria has destroyed its declared chemical-weapons
production facilities. A10

The chief political leader in a Pakistani province threatened to choke off NATO
supply routes if U.S. drone strikes continue. A8

The starved bodies of 92 migrants were recovered along a known trafficking route
in Niger's Sahara Desert. A8

A "60 Minutes" broadcast has helped propel a new round of partisan conflict over
last year's attacks in Benghazi, Libya. A10

the economy

Tension with Germany mounted as a U.S. Treasury report criticized Berlin's
economic policies. A12

The "cash for clunkers" program was fairly inefficient as economic stimulus, a
new analysis said. A14

the region

The Washington area will be hit hard when the food-stamp program loses $5
billion on Friday. B1

Terry McAuliffe has raised double what his opponent has in the Virginia
governor's race after racking up $510,000 in contributions in one day. B1

More than 2,000 people attended a memorial service for 10-year-old Gabriella
Miller, who became an advocate for pediatric cancer research. B1

A man fatally shot by Fairfax County police outside a homeless shelter "was
fighting everyone," a witness said. B1

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


