                             258 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 16, 2014 Wednesday 7:01 PM EST

Suspected U.S. drone strike kills militants in northwestern Pakistan;
Deadliest U.S. strike on Pakistani soil in at least a year

BYLINE: Tim Craig

LENGTH: 694 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - A suspected U.S. drone strike killed at least 15 people in
northwestern Pakistan on Wednesday, the deadliest such attack in at least a
year.

The strike targeted a house in North Waziristan - where the Pakistani military
is engaged in a month-old battle against the Pakistani Taliban and other
militant groups - as well as a vehicle that was passing nearby, local
intelligence officials said. The strike killed at least 15 people, although some
officials said at least 20 people died.

"The compound was being used by foreign militants, and some local terrorists
were present in the vehicle that got targeted," said one senior intelligence
official, who asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to speak
to the media.

The attack near Pakistan's border with Afghanistan took place in an area
suspected of housing fighters affiliated with the Afghan Haqqani network as well
as Islamist militants from Uzbekistan, local officials said. One villager said
he saw the drone fire at least four missiles.

The last time 15 or more people were killed by a U.S. drone was on July 3, 2013,
when a missile strike killed 16 people, according to the London-based Bureau of
Investigative Journalism.

Wednesday's attack is believed to have been the third U.S. drone strike in
Pakistan since the country launched a military operation in North Waziristan a
month ago. The operation is designed to drive  the Pakistani Taliban and other
militants from North Waziristan, which terrorists have been using as a base to
carry out attacks in both Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Most senior militant leaders are believed to have escaped before the operation
began. But Pakistani military commanders say their offensive will permanently
disrupt the ability of terrorist groups to congregate in the country's restive
tribal areas.

Both U.S. and Pakistani officials have denied that the two countries are
coordinating military activities in North Waziristan.

After a suspected drone strike killed several people last week, Pakistan's
Foreign Ministry condemned it, saying in a statement that the strike would have
"a negative impact on the Government's efforts to bring peace and stability" to
the country.

But Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and other leaders have generally
appeared more tolerant of the CIA  drone campaign since the North Waziristan
operation began.

Though the number of drone strikes on Pakistan continues to decline, President
Obama has said such strikes will keep targeting those who threaten American
troops or interests  in Afghanistan. The suspected U.S. strike on Wednesday
occurred not far from the site of Tuesday's suicide bombing at a busy market in
Afghanistan's eastern Paktika province.

Also on Wednesday, a Pakistani airstrike killed 35 suspected terrorists in North
Waziristan who were trying to flee from the area, military officials said. Since
the start of the North Waziristan operation, at least 450 militants have been
killed, they added.

It is difficult for foreign journalists to independently verify Pakistani
military claims because foreigners are generally not permitted to travel to
tribal areas. For weeks, Pakistan's military has also refused to identify those
who have been killed in the operation.

But on Tuesday, Pakistani intelligence officials said senior Pakistani Taliban
leader Adnan Rashid was captured over the weekend in South Waziristan. Rashid,
who was apparently injured during recent fighting in North Waziristan, was
apprehended as he tried to flee the area, the officials said.

Rashid had been previously arrested in 2004 on charges that he conspired to
assassinate then-president Pervez Musharraf. In 2012, however, he escaped from
prison along with 400 other militants.

Last year, Rashid made international headlines when he wrote a personal letter
to Malala Yousafzai expressing regret that a Pakistani Taliban militant shot her
in 2012.

Yousafzai, who was 16 at the time of the shooting, was targeted after she began
publicly  pressing for more  educational opportunities for girls in Pakistan's
western Swat Valley.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Aamir Iqbal in Peshawar contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


