                             2526 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Style Blog

                    October 29, 2014 Wednesday 11:00 PM EST

The month's best music: Sam Hunt, Dej Loaf, Ex Hex, Tinashe and more;
A ranked selection of October's best albums.

BYLINE: Chris Richards

LENGTH: 693 words


A ranked selection of notable new recordings we heard in October.

1. Sam Hunt, "Montevallo"

In the case of country music's hot new thing, his hotness and newness are
self-evident. But this thing he's got going - this hybridization of country and
hip-hop that's so elegant against all odds - is deceptively phenomenal. Hunt's
major-label debut is a lean 10 songs, each one of them fantastic, all of them
poised to raise Nashville's temperature more than just a few degrees.

2. Rich Gang, "Tha Tour: Part 1"

Wowee. Together as Rich Gang, Atlanta babble-masters Young Thug and Rich Homie
Quan aren't just creating the most thrilling and mystifying rap music around -
they're testing the tensile strength of the English language itself.

3. Dej Loaf, "Try Me" and "Sell Sole"

This young Detroit singer-rapper uses her teeny-tiny voice to issue massive
boasts, ugly threats, sly jokes and vivid revenge fantasies. Sweet and menacing,
her breakout hit "Try Me" - which appears on her new mixtape, "Sell Sole," in
remix form - could go down as the most magnetic song of the year.

4. Ex Hex, "Rips"

With her killer new power trio, D.C. rock hero Mary Timony tempers glam whimsy
with punk moxie, acing all of her guitar solos along the way.5. Kindness,
"Otherness"

Wait, a British R&B singer in a funk who actually has the funk? Yes, please. On
his second album as Kindness, Adam Bainbridge drapes wilting soul songs over
various clattering pulses, frequently to glorious effect.6. Tinashe, "Aquarius"

Terrific songs, tough questions: Will Tinashe continue the work that Janet
Jackson and Aaliyah started? Or, after dropping this fine debut, will she
promptly slide into R&B oblivion the way Cassie did a decade ago?7. Little Big
Town, "Pain Killer"

The coed country quartet's latest sounds like an identity crisis - but, y'know,
in a good way. Here's a cheat sheet: "Day Drinking" sparkles, "Things You Don't
Think About" roars, "Silver and Gold" is refreshingly breezy, "Girl Crush" is
refreshingly psychotic.8. Steve Gunn, "Way Out Weather­"

A child of hair metal and a student of drone, Gunn is sounding more and more
like a guitar guru for a new age.9. Jessie Ware, "Tough Love"

Ware spends plenty of her sophomore album plucking flower petals, wondering if
he loves her or if he loves her not. Her voice melts into her quiet-stormy
ballads with such rousing melancholy that you might find yourself selfishly
hoping the flower has an even number of petals.10. T.I., "Paperwork"

Don't call it a comeback! (Okay, fine, call it a comeback, but as mid- to
late-career rap albums go, few are brimming with slick-talk that's as energized
as what T.I. is blurting out right now.)11. DJ Quik, "The Midnight Life"

Don't call it a comeback! (For real, don't. Is there a more consistently cool,
innovative, casually hilarious presence in hip-hop than DJ Quik?)12. Maggie
Bjorklund, "Stranded­"

The Danish steel guitarist has made music with Jack White and members of X, but
here she is a global cowgirl vaguely channeling Leonard Cohen at the cosmic
rodeo, and doing it quite well.13. Angaleena Presley, "American Middle Class"

Presley always had the slightest voice in Pistol Annies, her supergroup with
Miranda Lambert and Ashley Monroe - she got invited to the party because she
writes good songs. And her new solo album bears that out, offering an array of
zingers, daggers, land mines and heavy truths.14. Diamond District, "March on
Washington"

At a glance, this D.C. rap trio - Oddisee, Uptown XO and yU - come across as
boom-bap nostalgics, but closer listens to their strong new album posit them as
craftsmen. And they're getting better all the time.15. Jesse Charles Hammock II,
"The Fall"

Hammock, the snarly frontman of the underrated and ­under-loved Southern rock
band Powder Mill, may have gone solo, but he's still singing about rotten
romances and bad drugs in an ornery twang that's equally tough to get out of
your system.

chris.richards@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


