                             2541 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 15, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

FBI chief sees online attacks emerging as a top security threat

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 772 words


FBI Director James B. Comey testified Thursday that the risk of cyberattacks is
likely to exceed the danger posed by al-Qaeda and other terrorist networks as
the top national security threat to the United States and will become the
dominant focus of law enforcement and intelligence services.

Appearing before the Senate Homeland Security Committee, Comey said he expected
Internet-related attacks, espionage and theft to emerge as the most consuming
security issue for the United States by the end of his 10-year FBI term.

"We have connected all of our lives - personal, professional and national - to
the Internet," Comey said. "That's where the bad guys will go because that's
where our lives are, our money, our secrets."

The warning underscored the growing sense of alarm among officials in Washington
over the nation's vulnerability to online attacks as well as the diminished
ability of al-Qaeda to mount plots against the United States after more than a
decade of CIA drone strikes and other counterterrorism operations.

Comey was among three of the nation's top security officials to testify Thursday
that the risk of a major terrorist attack in the United States is seen as lower
now than at any time since before the strikes on Sept. 11, 2001.

The threat has diminished overall but "is more dispersed geographically" because
of al-Qaeda's ability to gain footholds in Syria, North Africa, Yemen and
elsewhere, said Matthew G. Olsen, director of the National Counterterrorism
Center. As a result, Olsen said, the terrorism risk "has become more significant
from a geographic perspective and more complicated from an intelligence
perspective."

The officials cited a spate of seemingly unrelated attacks over the past 14
months that were linked to al-Qaeda or aligned groups but not orchestrated by
its leadership core in Pakistan. Among them were the mass shooting at a shopping
mall in Kenya, the seizure of a petroleum plant in Algeria and the assault on
U.S. compounds in Benghazi, Libya.

In Syria, Olsen said, the intelligence picture for U.S. counterterrorism
officials has been clouded further by a "blurring of the line" between
terrorist, insurgent and criminal groups that have collaborated to varying
degrees in that country's civil war.

Rand Beers, the acting homeland security secretary, said his agency is working
with European allies to identify and track militants from Western nations who
may travel to Syria and then seek to return.

Despite that potential danger, officials said that the main terrorist threat
inside the United States is that U.S. citizens or residents could adopt militant
ideologies and develop plans for domestic attacks without communicating with
terrorist networks or traveling overseas.

Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, ethnic Chechen brothers accused of carrying out
the bombings at the Boston Marathon this year, had "no formal or direct ties to
al-Qaeda" but had embraced aspects of the terrorist group's ideology, Olsen
said. He added that cooperation with Russian intelligence services has improved
since the Boston attacks.

The officials said counterterrorism efforts had been damaged by leaks of U.S.
intelligence operations by former National Security Agency contractor Edward
Snowden, and they warned of the impact of the budget cuts known as
sequestration. Comey said the FBI is in the process of eliminating 3,500
positions because of budget pressures.

Despite concern about "homegrown extremists," Comey said that he had concluded
after just two months on the job that cyberthreats are likely to be more
worrisome in the long term.

"That is why we anticipate that in the future, resources devoted to cyber-based
threats will equal or even eclipse the resources devoted to non-cyber-based
terrorist threats," Comey said.

On a separate issue, Comey said he had no objection to congressional testimony
by survivors of the Sept. 11, 2012, attack in Benghazi.

The Justice and State departments have resisted congressional requests for
testimony by Diplomatic Security officials who were present at the attack,
saying that their appearance could compromise possible future prosecution of the
perpetrators.

Under subpoena, two DS agents provided sworn depositions last month to the House
Oversight and Government Reform Committee. The majority of U.S. personnel
present that night were from the CIA, assigned to an intelligence annex near the
diplomatic site. Among a total complement of two to three dozen State
Department, CIA and contractor personnel at the two locations, four were killed
in the attacks, including the U.S. ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens.

millergreg@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


