                             2524 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 29, 2014 Wednesday 6:52 PM EST

These ant queens compete with other species by becoming 'sperm parasites';
The males of each species are constantly having their sperm stolen to produce
the others' sterile drone workers.

BYLINE: Rachel Feltman

LENGTH: 676 words


Two species of ants in the Arizona desert are at war -- and they're fighting
their battles in the bedroom. The ant queens are employing devious tricks to
steal the sperm of their rival species' males, in an ongoing inter-species
battle of the sexes.

Usually sex is a competition between males of the same species. They fight to
impress their target females, and the winner gets to pass on his sperm -- and
genes -- to the next generation. That is, after all, the biological definition
of success.

But in some cases, the competition gets murkier.

According to a new study published Wednesday in Proceedings of the Royal Society
B, two species of Pogonomyrmex harvester ant engage in a complicated mating war,
with males of one species butting heads with the females of another.

The males of one of these ant species will often mate with the queens of the
other (and vice versa) producing sterile offspring. These sterile hybrids (or
mules) aren't totally uncommon in other insects and animals. But in most cases,
said Sara Helms Cahan, a University of Vermont biologist who co-led the study
with her graduate student Michael Herrmann, these mules are a biological
mistake. They're incapable of passing along the genes of either parent to a new
generation, so they don't benefit either species.

But in species like these ants, who need a certain number of sterile colony
members to work without reproducing, mules do just fine. There are at least four
species of ants who commonly steal sperm from rival species.

"They're already producing lots of things that don't reproduce on purpose,"
Cahan said, "so it gives them a unique opportunity to turn into parasites. They
can take those hybrids and put them to work. But it has the result of creating
this huge conflict between males and females."

It's in every queen's best interest to get rival males to mate with her -- she
gets her hybrid workers, and the rival queens have less sperm available to them.
The males, on the other hand, would be wise to avoid these foreign queens. If
they reproduce with their own queen, they may luck out and be the father of a
reproducing insect. With the rival queen, they have no chance of continuing
their genetic lineage -- and their limited supply of sperm is wasted.

Cahan and Herrmann wanted to better understand why these males mate with the
wrong queens in the first place. Herrmann tracked down the ants mating swarms,
which occurred in 0nce-a-year free-for-alls after summer monsoon rain.

In the hedonistic swarms, it seemed that the males just didn't know which queens
where which -- until they were close enough to sense their chemical signals, at
which point they were already mating. But Herrmann isolated pairs to take close
observations of them in the act, and then froze them so he could take
measurements of their sperm.

It seemed like the males mated exactly the same way with either queen -- they
gave each the same amount of their precious sperm.

But that the null result was actually masking intense strategy on either side.

"The males were certainly doing something," Cahan said, "but you just couldn't
see it overall."

As it turns out, the males slowed down when they realized they were mating with
rival queens. It seems that they attempt to get away with a slower release of
sperm, probably so they can pull away and use whatever's left somewhere else.

But the queens won't have it: In both species, queens held onto the slowing
males until they'd released all of their sperm.

"Both males and females have power in this relationship, and they're working at
cross-purposes," Cahan said. "So we saw what looked like nothing, but that
'nothing' was actually masking a lot of effort on either side."

We're only catching a current snapshot of the way these two species interact.
Like any antagonistic relationship between species, Cahan said, this rivalry has
driven evolution on either side. Every time a male of one species adapts to
protect themselves from this sperm theft, the queens of the other will adapt to
out-do them -- and so on and so forth, ad infinitum.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


