                             2515 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 26, 2014 Sunday 12:16 PM EST

Confidently pick home contractors with these tips

BYLINE: Katie Aberbach

LENGTH: 983 words


In his 15 years of working as a home contractor, Michael Holmes has heard it all
-including the tale of a homeowner who was blindsided when a basement renovation
she had submitted an $8,000 down payment for turned out to be a scam.

"The contractor dropped off his tools and never came back," says Holmes, the
owner of Northeast Washington-based Holmes Handyman. "In his toolbox were a
brick and a rusty hammer."

There's always risk involved when you hire a stranger to work in your home.
Residential contractors - individuals who do repairs and renovations to
properties, often with a special focus such as electrical work or plumbing - are
hired on a job-by-job basis, so it's sometimes difficult to predict what the
experience might be like. When selecting someone new, a few key considerations
will help you choose the right person for the right purpose.

Research and plan

Unless it's a simple repair or appliance fix, figure out exactly what type of
work you want and need, before you contact any professional, says Joe Normandy,
executive director of the Metro D.C. chapter of the National Association of the
Remodeling Industry. A plan in your head won't cut it (nor will a collection of
Pinterest photos). "You have to sit down and sculpt out the project on paper,"
Normandy says.

Be as specific in writing down your plan (or even sketching it) as you can. Get
answers ready for the questions you'll inevitably be asked, says John Biechman,
an Alexandria homeowner who is currently in the middle of a home addition.

"The size of your windows, the size of your doors, which wall you want the
shower head on," Biechman says. "The contractor's not going to make it up. He's
going to ask you."

Having everything written down on paper and agreed-upon in advance is also
crucial when putting together a contract - the more details you have outlined,
the less chance of disappointment (and the better protected you'll be if things
don't go as planned).

You can use online resources to estimate the amount of materials that will be
needed and their cost; it'll be helpful as you compare bids.

And speaking of money, "this is not the time to be shy," says Cheryl Reed, the
director of communications at Angie's List, a members-only site with
user-submitted reviews of an array of home renovation and repair professionals.

Discuss payment upfront, and be honest about what you expect to spend and the
timeline you hope for. Better to realize now that your eyes are bigger than your
wallet, rather than after your project has run thousands of dollars over budget.

Seek recommendations

Ask friends, family and neighbors to recommend professionals. Your next-door
neighbor could be especially helpful, says Gregory Drone, an electrician who
owns Allegro LLC, in Alexandria, who worked on Biechman's house. If the
contractor is already familiar with your hood (and if homes in your area are
similar), he or she might be better prepared for troubleshooting your project.

If family and friends come up empty or you simply need more options, visit
online listing sites such as Angie's List and Porch.com.

Most real estate and construction experts advise considering at least three
contractors for each job (so avoid the temptation to stop after interviewing
just one); face-to-face meetings are best.

Ask plenty of questions about experience and working style, Reed says, and trust
your gut.

"You need to have a good rapport with them," she says.

After all, they'll be in your home on a regular basis for the project's
duration.

Make sure it's official

Before making a final decision, verify that the professional has credentials.
That means holding a license and the proper amount of insurance and/or bonding
required by your community.

You can ask the contractor for a copy of his or her license, or look it up
online in your state's database.

Permits for certain projects (such as installing a deck or backup generator)
vary by state, city, and sometimes even neighborhood or condo association, so
it's important that your pro is familiar with local regulations.

It's a lot to confirm at once, but worthwhile, experts say. If a contractor
doesn't obtain the proper permit before beginning work, for instance, a building
inspector can halt your project immediately. And if a contractor is hurt on the
job but doesn't hold insurance, you could be stuck paying the medical bills.

"Being cautious and careful and thoughtful is really the way to go," Normandy
says.

While neighbors, friends and relatives can be great resources for finding
contractors to work on your house, websites also offer useful information when
you're researching. Here are a few to add to your go-to list.

Houzz:Houzz is a bit like Pinterest and the Yellow Pages rolled into one
website. Homeowner- and contractor-uploaded photos of real kitchens, bathrooms
and closets offer inspiration, while the "Find a Pro" section lets you connect
directly with professionals in your area (many of whom have been reviewed by
fellow Houzz users).

NARI Metro DC: The local chapter of the National Association of the Remodeling
Industry conducts thorough background checks (including verifying license
numbers and Better Business Bureau reports) on each of its professional members,
who are then listed - as a free resource for consumers - on NARI's Online
Directory.

Porch: Another free site, Porch lets you keep up with the Joneses (or whoever
your neighbors are) by revealing professionals who've been hired and reviewed in
your area. The site also offers advice and inspiration photos for remodeling
projects.

Angie's List: This members-only site gives access to contact information and
user-submitted (and Angie's List-vetted) reviews for hundreds of home repair and
renovation services. A one-year "basic" membership in the D.C. area costs $10.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


