                             2575 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 27, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

World Digest: Dec. 26, 2013

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 764 words


SOUTH SUDAN          African leaders seek talks to curtail crisis

Fighting persisted in parts of South Sudan's oil-producing region as African
leaders tried Thursday to facilitate peace talks between the country's president
and political rivals he accuses of attempting a coup to seize control of the
world's newest nation.

Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta and Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam
Desalegn had "a constructive dialogue" with South Sudanese President Salva Kiir,
according to Kiir's foreign minister. But the fugitive former vice president who
now leads renegade troops was not represented, and no political breakthrough
emerged.

The next round of meetings will be held in the Kenyan capital, Nairobi, where
regional leaders under a bloc known as IGAD are to meet Friday, South Sudanese
Foreign Minister Barnaba Marial Benjamin said.

Kiir agreed "in principle" to stop hostilities and to negotiate with former vice
president Riek Machar, Benjamin said. Machar's whereabouts remain unknown.

Government troops are trying to retake control of Bentiu, the capital of Unity
state, from forces loyal to Machar. Fighting was also reported in Malakal,
capital of Upper Nile state. Upper Nile and Unity make up the country's key
oil-producing region.

- Associated Press

IRAQ          U.S. sends missiles to help in al-Qaeda fight

The United States has sent Hellfire air-to-ground missiles to Iraq's air force,
which is using them in a campaign against the country's branch of al-Qaeda,
officials in Washington and Baghdad said.

Two intelligence officers and a military officer said that 75 of the missiles
arrived Dec. 19 and that more will be shipped in the future.

They said the missiles are being used by four Iraqi King Air propeller planes
during a large-scale military operation in the western desert near the borders
with Syria. An intelligence official said the missiles were proven "successful"
and were used to destroy four militant camps.

Jen Psaki, a State Department spokeswoman, confirmed the missile shipment and
said the United States was planning on sending ScanEagle drones.

"The United States is committed to supporting Iraq in its fight against
terrorism through the Strategic Framework Agreement," she said, referring to a
2008 bilateral pact. "The recent delivery of Hellfire missilesand an upcoming
delivery ofScanEagles are standard foreign military sales cases that we have
with Iraq to strengthen their capabilities to combat this threat."

- Associated Press

Russian scientists say radiation did not kill Arafat: A Russian probe into the
death of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has found no trace of
radioactivepoisoning, a determination that comes after a French probe found
traces of the radioactive isotope polonium and a Swiss investigation said the
time frame of his illness and death was consistent with that of polonium
poisoning. Vladimir Uiba, head of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency,
said that Arafat died of natural causes and that the agency had no plans to do
further tests. Palestinians have long suspected Israel of poisoning Arafat,
which Israel denies.

Thai government rejects calls for election delay: Thailand's election commission
called for upcoming elections to be delayed as street battles between security
forces and protesters seeking to disrupt the ballot left a police officer dead
and nearly 100 people injured, dealing fresh blows to the beleaguered
government. The government quickly rejected the call. Prime Minister Yingluck
Shinawatra wants the Feb. 2 vote to take place as scheduled, in the apparent
belief that she will win handily and renew her mandate.

Air pollution worsens in Shanghai: Shanghai warned children and the elderly to
stay indoors as smog enveloped China's commercial hub, sending levels of the
worst pollutants surging to more than 15 times World Health Organization
guidelines. The level of particles smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter - deemed
the most dangerous - reached 395.7 micrograms per cubic meter at 3 p.m., city
officials said. The WHO recommends exposure of no more than 25 over a 24-hour
period.

Piranhas injure dozens of bathers in Argentina: A surprise attack by a school of
carnivorous fish identified as "a type of piranha" injured 70 people bathing in
a river in the Argentine city of Rosario, including seven children who lost
parts of their fingers or toes, officials said. The city closed the beaches, but
it was so hot that paramedics said people were going back into the water within
half an hour.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


