                             250 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             April 14, 2014 Monday

Google Buys High-Altitude Drone Maker

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 322 words



HIGHLIGHT: Following in Facebook&#8217;s footsteps, Google said Monday that it
had purchased Titan Aerospace, the maker of high-altitude drone satellites,
which will be used to take photos of the earth and to connect people to the
Internet.


Google is reaching for the clouds, and not the virtual ones.

On Monday, the company said that it had purchased Titan Aerospace, the maker of
high-altitude drone satellites, which will be used to take photos of the earth
and to connect people to the Internet.

"Titan Aerospace and Google share a profound optimism about the potential for
technology to improve the world," a Google spokesman said in a statement. "It's
still early days, but atmospheric satellites could help bring internet access to
millions of people, and help solve other problems, including disaster relief and
environmental damage like deforestation."

The news was first reported by The Wall Street Journal. Terms of the deal were
not disclosed.

While it may sound like a lofty goal, it's one that Google shares with a
competitor. Facebook, recently acquired Ascenta, based in Britain, that makes a
similar type of drone. Earlier reports had said that Facebook was in talks to by
Titan Aerospace.

The Titan Aerospace drones are unique because they are solar-powered and can fly
for several years, according to the company's website.

Drones that can fly for long periods of time without having to land could be
used to offer constant updates of images of the earth, allowing a company like
Google to update the photos in its maps platform.

Both Google and Facebook are also competing to try and connect more people to
the Internet that live in places that are too difficult to reach with
traditional wires and traditional Internet solutions. While satellites can
deliver the Internet to sparsely populated areas, the cost can be very high to
use data connections. Drones, in comparison, will be able to do it at a much
lower cost.


     ·    Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan
     ·    The Tech Bubble's Silver Lining: Cheap Services for Everyone
     ·    Tech Companies Offer Update on Government Data Requests
     ·    Google Buys A.I. Company for Search, Not Robots
     ·    Daily Report: U.S. Eases Some Rules on Data Disclosure


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


