                             2525 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 29, 2014 Wednesday 7:45 PM EST

The "second source" for Snowden reporters, explained;
Everything you need to know about the alleged second source feeding documents to
The Intercept.

BYLINE: Andrea Peterson

LENGTH: 862 words


Since revelations about the extent of government surveillance began to flow from

 former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden last year, the public
has engaged in an ongoing debate about the role of leaks and whistleblowers in
safeguarding democracy.

And according to some journalists closely associated with Snowden, that debate
has spurred another leaker to come forward with what could be more evidence of
government overreach.

But now federal investigators have identified a suspect in their investigation
into an alleged second source who supplied sensitive documents to an outlet led
by journalists connected to Snowden reporting, according to Michael Isikoff at
Yahoo News. So is this suspect "another Snowden"? Do these leakers have valuable
information to offer to the public? Here on the Switch we sort through the
noise.

Wait, there's a second Snowden?

Not exactly -- but there is a leaker who appears to have funneled sensitive
government documents to journalists at The Intercept, the Pierre Omidyar backed
site that counts Snowden journalists Laura Poitras and Glenn Greenwald among its
founders.

This "second source" is mentioned during the final minutes of Poitras' recent
documentary on Snowden, CitizenFour. Intercept co-founding editor Jeremy Scahill
is briefly shown discussing the person, and the final scene of the film shows
Greenwald in Moscow discussing the information apparently coming from him or her
with Snowden.

"The person is incredibly bold," Snowden tells him while reviewing notes
presumably detailing the fresh leaks, and Greenwald replies, "It was motivated
by what you did."

The second source is widely believed to be the person who supplied documents for
an August story by Scahill and Ryan Devereaux that showed nearly half of the
people on the U.S. government's terror-tracking database lacked connections with
any known terrorist group. The classified documents in the report referenced
dates that were after Snowden was already on the run, strongly suggesting that
they came from another individual.

And has this person been caught?

According to a Yahoo News story this week, which quoted anonymous sources, the
FBI has identified a federal contracting employee as a suspect in the leak
investigation and raided the suspect's Northern Virginia home. Contacted by the
Washington Post, the FBI declined to comment.

Editors and reporters at the Intercept told Yahoo News that they hadn't been
notified by federal officials about an investigation -- but didn't seem
surprised to hear about the supposed raid. "The Obama administration in my view
is conducting a war against whistleblowers and ultimately against independent
journalism," Scahill told Isikoff.

In a statement to the Huffington Post, Intercept Editor-in-Chief John Cook
declined to comment on the sourcing of the story at the center of the second
source speculation, but praised its content, saying "Jeremy Scahill and Ryan
Devereaux's reporting for The Intercept on the federal watchlisting program
brought crucial information about this preposterously overbroad and inefficient
system to light, and has been repeatedly cited by civil liberties groups and
civil rights attorneys who are seeking the intervention of federal courts to
reign in its excesses."

So is this second source going to face charges?

That's a great question. Scahill's perspective on the Obama administration's
treatment of whistleblowers and leakers is widely held. According to Propublica,
the Obama administration has brought seven criminal prosecutions over national
security leaks under a World War I era law called the Espionage Act, which
doesn't consider if leaks were in the public interest. That number may not sound
huge, but it's twice as many as all previous president's combined.

And in pursuing those cases, the administration has also targeted journalists.
Investigators looking into a potential CIA leak secretly seized Associated Press
reporters' phone records -- and tracked Fox News reporter James Rosen's physical
movements, phone records, and e-mails while investigating leaks related to North
Korea's nuclear program. While no journalists have faced criminal prosecution to
date, Rosen was identified as a potential criminal "co-conspirator" in Justice
Department affidavit relating to the case.

But according to Isikoff's sources, the Justice Department may have lost its
"appetite" for pursuing this type of case -- presumably due to the backlash over
previous prosecutions, and perhaps due to the public's reaction to Snowden's
revelations. But, of course, Snowden is still facing Espionage Charges despite
calls for his clemency.

So are there more stories still coming from this second leaker?

The only people who really know that are the journalists who are in contact with
the leaker -- he or she may have turned over more documents that they have not
yet been able to cover. But Greenwald passed an awful lot of notes to Snowden
during the final scene of CitizenFour. But at one point in the documentary the
word "drones" can briefly be seen among the scribbled notes.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


