                             2560 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 9, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

Outgoing Seraphin looks to get going

BYLINE: Michael Lee

SECTION: Sports; Pg. D05

LENGTH: 859 words


The Kevin Seraphin Life has been a continuous stream of photographs on Instagram
and Twitter, videos on Vine, and even cartoon images featuring the Washington
Wizards' gregarious backup big man.

Seraphin loves to chronicle his adventures on social media, constantly
connecting with fans by posting selfies or pictures with teammates and other NBA
stars in the locker room, airports and hotel lobbies. He films himself traveling
through the city on a Segway or flying an air drone controlled by his iPod. Each
link is followed by the hashtag, #kevinserpahinlife, or #kslife for short.

"That's my way to have fun," said Seraphin, whose playful personality was
recently featured on a segment of "NBA Inside Stuff" in which he joked around
with a plastic skeleton that he owns.

But Seraphin's fun has been limited to his off-court antics during an otherwise
forgettable campaign with the Wizards (9-10). Following a summer spent getting
in better shape and working extensively with the coaching staff in Washington,
Seraphin has made a stunning regression in his fourth season while posting
career-low production in almost every statistical category except scoring.

Coach Randy Wittman recently dropped Seraphin from his regular rotation and the
6-foot-9 native of French Guiana was on the inactive list for Friday's overtime
loss to Milwaukee after developing some swelling his right knee. "It's nothing
really big," Seraphin said of his knee injury. "I had a little swelling. They
want to make sure everything is okay before they let me play again. I will play
as soon as possible."

The timing of the injury was not ideal with Nene continuing to struggle with
nagging pain in his right Achilles' tendon. Nene will be questionable when the
Wizards host the Denver Nuggets on Monday at Verizon Center, but the team
wouldn't be able to count on much from Seraphin even if he was available.

Seraphin averaged a career-high 9.1 points last season but has only scored at
least nine points twice this season. He also scored in double figures 36 times
last season but is averaging just 3.6 points on just 44 percent shooting. "He's
just got to stay with it, mentally, more than physically," Wittman said of
Seraphin. "He's got to stay confident."

A skilled offensive player with the soft hands and good touch, Seraphin has had
difficulty adjusting to how teams have defended him with immediate traps and
double teams. He is averaging 3.5 turnovers per 36 minutes, which is slightly
more than point guard John Wall, who has the ball in his hands most of the time.

"I won't lie to you, I don't really know," Seraphin said, when asked about the
reason for his struggles. "I don't try to ask myself too many question. Why?
Why? I just like, okay, next game. I try to practice and go out there and do my
thing."

Seraphin was the first big man off the bench through the first seven games
before being  replaced by Jan Vesely, and Trevor Booker has also surpassed him
in the rotation. In the past 12 games, Seraphin didn't play in three and only
played more than eight minutes once.

"I wasn't expecting that at the beginning of the season, that's why I was a
little bit confused. But that's a coach's decision. He's the boss on the court.
He's the one who chooses," Seraphin said. "If he thinks I'm not going hard
enough, and I'm not prepared enough to play, I can't be like, you know, 'I give
up now.' That's not me. I have to show the coach that he can have confidence in
me, he can trust me on the court."

Seraphin bypassed playing for the French national team for the first time last
summer and watched San Antonio Spurs all-star guard Tony Parker lead the country
to its first-ever European championship. He stated that he had "no regrets"
about the decision because he needed to focus on advancing his career, which is
now moving in the opposite direction.

"When you work out, and you give everything you've got, and it doesn't go the
way you want to, any human, for sure, you're frustrated," Seraphin said. "It's a
long season. Everybody won't play 82 games. We just have to be ready."

When the Wizards dealt JaVale McGee to Denver for Nene in March 2012, Seraphin's
career started to take off as he scored in double figures in 22 of the final 25
games. He picked Nene's brain and shadowed him, but Nene has grown flustered
with Seraphin's lack of development.

"What I can do, I give advice, but I can't play for him," Nene said. "Like a
friend, like a brother, I can give advice to him. I can teach, I can try to use
my experience, show the shortcut to him. But in pro life, there is no shortcut.
It's hard work. And he needs to work hard."

Seraphin has heard criticism that his desire to share and have a good time has
affected his play on the court, but he disputes such assertions.

"That's a little inappropriate when you say, 'He should spend more time on the
court and not do videos.' It's not like I make a movie every time. It's not like
I spend all my day filming. It take 15 seconds," Seraphin said with a laugh. "We
don't spend 24 hours on the court. I try to show, every day I come here, I smile
every day. I don't want to be negative."

michael.lee@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


