                             2544 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 24, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

Karzai plans to press showdown with U.S. over pact, aide says

BYLINE: Tim Craig;Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1113 words


Karzai plans to intensify showdown with U.S., aide says

The Afghan leader signals he thinks the U.S. is bluffing on a security pact
timetable; the U.S. has not budged.

KABUL - Afghan President Hamid Karzai will continue to defy U.S. threats to walk
away from a security agreement between the two countries and plans to reiterate
in a speech to a grand council Sunday that he will not sign it before spring,
his spokesman said Saturday.

"They have waited this long, they can certainly wait five more months,"
spokesman Aimal Faizi said Saturday of the Americans. The Obama administration
has characterized the deal, whose terms Karzai had agreed to last week, as a
"final offer" that must be completed by the end of this year.

Karzai appears certain that the administration is bluffing, saying through the
spokesman that he does not believe the United States will resort to the "zero
option" of canceling plans to leave a residual troop force here to train the
Afghan military and continue counterterrorism operations after it withdraws its
combat forces in December 2014.

But the administration, for its part, has also thought that Karzai would change
his tune after opening the assembly of more than 2,500 tribal elders and other
leaders, called a loya jirga, on Thursday with a speech vowing to delay
finalizing the deal until after Afghanistan's presidential election in April.

The tension has escalated into a remarkable stare-down between two leaders who
say they want the same thing - U.S. troops providing long-term training and
support for the Afghan military - but find themselves on the brink of walking
away from that partnership.

"The core of the issue," Faizi said, is a "lack of trust" between the two
governments.

As the elaborate game of diplomatic chicken neared a climax, the Obama
administration was publicly silent Saturday, while continuing talks in private.

U.S. officials in Washington said they were heartened by statements coming out
of the loya jirga, where some members seemed to "understand the importance of
signing sooner rather than later," a senior administration official who was not
authorized to discuss the tense situation said, speaking on the condition of
anonymity.

The officials pointed in particular to a statement Saturday by Sebghattulah
Mojaddidi, the chairman of the loya jirga, who told Afghanistan's Tolonews that
he hopes Karzai will avoid a showdown with the Americans over the timetable,
saying it would harm Afghanistan. "If the U.S. has accepted our terms, then we
should not delay," Mojaddidi said.

But some jirga members have spoken out in opposition to particular portions of
the deal, including a grant of immunity from Afghan legal prosecution for U.S.
troops.

In recent days, Secretary of State John F. Kerry and Defense Secretary Chuck
Hagel have signaled that the administration has little patience for a continued
delay or for any substantive changes in the document. Faizi described a phone
conversation Friday between Karzai and Kerry as "friendly but tense" and said
that Kerry had threatened a complete withdrawal.

Administration officials consider the signing date to be nonnegotiable, citing
the need for at least a year to plan future deployments and to allow coalition
partners, including Germany and Italy, to plan for a residual troop presence
that they have offered.

Having drawn a line in the sand after a year of negotiations, the administration
is also highly reluctant to suffer a repeat of the diplomatic embarrassment that
ensued when a similar deal with Iraq went to the wire before ending with a total
U.S. military withdrawal at the end of 2011.

While U.S. officials have publicly portrayed the current draft agreement as
written in stone, officials said the administration is willing to consider small
changes based on loya jirga concerns, if that will move the assembly to press
Karzai to sign.

Faizi said Saturday that Karzai is also seeking additional "guarantees" that the
administration won't interfere in the coming elections, that it will help
stabilize security in Afghanistan and that remaining U.S. forces won't abuse
their power to enter the homes of Afghans.

"There should be flexibility on two sides," he said.

Meanwhile, outside the confines of the jirga, fresh tension arose between the
two governments for a second consecutive day over the deaths of two Afghans last
week.

On Friday, Karzai accused U.S. troops of killing the two men, whom he described
as civilians, in an operation in the eastern province of Nangahar. Coalition
military commanders responded with outrage, saying the men were "armed
insurgents."

"It's really unfortunate some people are using allegations of civilian
casualties for political purposes," said a senior coalition official who spoke
on the condition of anonymity to discuss the matter freely. The official, who
noted that the mission in question was led by 100 Afghan soldiers but included
17 coalition advisers, said Karzai's remarks were "complicating" efforts to
maintain U.S. military support for the security agreement.

But Faizi said Saturday that Karzai stands by his initial statement about the
incident, adding that the governor and residents of Nangahar are furious. "Bad
behavior happened," Faizi said.

The incident is giving Karzai cover to express other long-standing grievances
with the United States, most notably a lingering suspicion that the
administration supported his opponent during his 2009 reelection campaign.

Faizi said repeatedly that Karzai wants to postpone a final decision on the
security agreement as leverage for ensuring that the United States both stays
out of and helps secure the upcoming Afghan elections.

"The United States can make sure there is no interference in the Afghan
elections as there was in the past presidential" race, Faizi said.

Meanwhile, the U.S.-led coalition is also facing a headache in neighboring
Pakistan over continuing drone strikes on its territory.

Imran Khan, the political leader of Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, led
a day-long protest near the city of Peshawar against NATO convoys that travel
through the region to and from landlocked Afghanistan.

On Sunday, workers affiliated with Khan's Movement for Justice party plan to
escalate the demonstration by placing shipping containers and other barriers on
NATO convoy routes. The blockade will last indefinitely, party officials said,
despite calls for restraint from Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.

tim.craig@washpost.com

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

DeYoung reported from Washington. Haq Nawaz Khan in Peshawar, Pakistan, and
Mohammad Sharif in Kabul contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


