                             2538 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 14, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

DHS pick says he'd move fast to [#xfb01]ll jobs

BYLINE: Ellen Nakashima

SECTION: A section; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 701 words


Jeh C. Johnson said Wednesday that his first priority if confirmed as secretary
of homeland security will be to quickly fill the large number of senior
management vacancies at the agency.

Johnson also promised to boost morale at the sprawling 240,000-employee
department, improve financial management, and be transparent with Congress and
the public about programs and policies.

"If confirmed, I pledge to be a champion for every man and woman of the
Department of Homeland Security and their families," Johnson said at a largely
friendly confirmation hearing before the Senate Homeland Security Committee. "I
hope to be a visible leader [and] remind people of the importance of the
overriding, unifying mission of homeland security."

Johnson, 56, the Pentagon's former general counsel, was nominated by President
Obama last month to succeed Janet Napolitano.

Johnson, who has passed Senate muster twice before - for the Pentagon job and as
Air Force general counsel - is expected to be confirmed easily. The committee
received letters of support for Johnson from all three former DHS secretaries.

But he will take on the daunting challenge of building cohesion at a department
cobbled together from 22 agencies with missions as diverse as enforcing
immigration laws, securing the borders, countering terrorism and preventing
cyberattacks.

About 40 percent of its senior leadership positions are vacant or have an
"acting" place-holder. Its employees on average have the lowest morale of any
federal agency, according to Congress's auditing arm. The Government
Accountability Office has also routinely placed DHS on its "high-risk" list of
agencies vulnerable to waste and mismanagement.

Johnson stressed his background in helping shape the Obama administration's
counterterrorism policies as one reason he was well positioned to lead the
department.

Increasingly, he said, as the core of al-Qaeda has been diminished, "the
terrorist threat is becoming even more diffuse, and we're seeing more lone-wolf
activity, more self-radicalization." Those types of threats, he said, are harder
to detect.

As a result, he added, "we're going to have to be vigilant on the civilian side
in law enforcement, border security and so forth."

In an exchange with Sen. Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.), Johnson said he believes that
U.S. officials have the legal authority to question terrorism suspects before
they enter the criminal justice system. He said he also thinks that Congress and
the executive branch ought to look at writing this authority into law, "because
I think it's going to become an increasingly important practice and there will
be increasing need for this type of interrogation."

With the advent of drones for surveillance, including along the nation's
borders, Johnson said he recognized the need to respect Americans' privacy
rights. "As we move to more advanced technology, I think we also need to be
sensitive to privacy, civil liberties concerns that people who live along these
borders may have," he said.

In perhaps the testiest exchange of the hearing, Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.)
repeatedly pressed Johnson to promise to tell the committee what is needed so
that Customs and Border Protection could have "90 percent" effective control of
the southern border. Johnson said he wanted to better understand the issue
before committing to an assessment. McCain said he could not support Johnson's
confirmation until he got such a commitment.

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) asked Johnson whether he thought the United States should
target for killing American citizens overseas who are not involved in combat. He
said he was thinking of "propagandists" or people who may have committed treason
but have not been charged.

"Do you think that a bunch of lawyers in a room from one administration, from
one political party, can decide the guilt or innocence of American citizens?"
Paul asked.

"As you pose it, I think my answer would be no," Johnson said.

Johnson said he prided himself in challenging assumptions made by others in
planning counterterrorism operations. "Every once in a while, I felt like it was
11 to one, and I was the one. And I said to myself, 'This is why the president
put you here.' "

ellen.nakashima@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


