                             2578 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 30, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

Turf battle shapes up as Army seeks greater Paci[#xfb01]c role

BYLINE: Rajiv Chandrasekaran

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2767 words


ABOARD THE USS LAKE ERIE - Approaching from the Hawaii coast, the
mosquito-shaped helicopter buzzed around this guided-missile cruiser twice
before swooping toward the landing pad. The Navy crew on the deck crouched, the
helmeted faces betraying more than routine concern as the aircraft, flown by a
pilot who had never before alighted upon a ship, hovered a foot off the tarmac
and then set down with a thud.

The sailors' trepidation was prompted by three words painted in black block
letters on the drab olive fuselage: United States Army.

The Army, which fights on terra firma, does not usually land its helicopters on
ships - the domain of the Navy and the Marine Corps - but these are not usual
times in the U.S. military. As the Obama administration winds down the
Army-centric war in Afghanistan, Pentagon leaders are seeking to place the Air
Force, Navy and Marines in dominant roles to counter threats in the Asia-Pacific
region, which they have deemed to be the nation's next big national security
challenge.

Fearful that the new strategy will cut its share of the defense budget, the Army
is launching an ambitious campaign to transform itself and assert its relevance
in the Pacific. And that, in turn, is drawing the Army into a fight.

With the Marines.

Calculating that there are only slim chances of the Army fighting a big land war
anywhere in the Far East other than the Korean Peninsula, the new top Army
commander in the Pacific, Gen. Vincent K. Brooks, wants his forces to more
quickly and effectively respond to small conflicts, isolated acts of aggression
and natural disasters. Doing so, however, has traditionally been a challenge for
the Army, which bases most of its soldiers assigned to the Orient - in Hawaii,
Alaska and Washington state. To overcome what he calls "the tyranny of
distance," Brooks is trying to make his forces more maritime and expeditionary.

To cut travel time and increase regional familiarity, he is seeking
authorization to send key elements of a U.S.-based infantry brigade to Asia and
keep them there for months at a time, moving every few weeks to different
nations to conduct training exercises. The rotating deployment, which amounts to
the first proposed increase in U.S. forces in Asia in years, could enable the
Army to move more speedily to address humanitarian crises and security threats.

Brooks said he wants "a capable force that can respond to a variety of
contingencies" - rapidly. "Forces that are already in motion have an advantage
in responding," he said.

The initiative, which Brooks is calling "Pacific Pathways," is also an
opportunity to recast the Army's image in Washington, yielding television images
of soldiers - not just Marines and sailors - responding to typhoons and
cyclones. "We can no longer afford to build [combat] units and put them on a
shelf to be used only in the event of war," Brooks's command wrote in an
internal planning document.

To the Marine Corps, however, Brooks is committing the military equivalent of
copyright infringement. Marines regard themselves as the nation's first - and
only - maritime infantry force. They have troops in Asia that are not tied down
in Korea - three infantry battalions, an aviation wing and a full logistics
group based on the Japanese island of Okinawa - and, they note, they have an
expeditionary unit that sails around Asia to conduct bilateral exercises and
respond to crises. Those Marines were among the first to respond to Typhoon
Haiyan in the Philippines last month.

"They're trying to create a second Marine Corps in the Pacific," said a Marine
general, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the Army's internal
plans. "To save their budget, they want to build a force the nation doesn't
need."

Okinawa's governor on Friday acceded to U.S. plans to maintain a large Marine
contingent on the island, despite local opposition, by approving site
preparation for a new air base on the less-populated northern half of the
island. To win permission, the Marines have pledged to relocate almost 5,000
personnel to the U.S. territory of Guam, about 1,400 miles away, which could
bolster the Army's case for a small rotating force closer to mainland Asia.

The Army-Marine fight has profound implications for both services. If Brooks
succeeds, Army leaders would lay claim to a new strategic narrative and gain a
powerful argument to stave off additional rounds of personnel cuts, while the
Marines could face an existential crisis without their exclusive expeditionary
status. If he doesn't, the Army, which is planning to shrink from 540,000 to
490,000 soldiers by 2017, could become even smaller.

"The Army is in genuine crisis at the moment," said Kori Schake, a research
fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution who has served as director of
defense strategy on the National Security Council. "They're grasping for a
mission to justify their end-strength."

Both sides see the battle in winner-take-all terms: The administration's
national security strategy and the Pentagon's strategic guidance to commanders
have all but rejected the sorts of troop-intensive counterinsurgency campaigns
waged by the Army in Iraq and Afghanistan. Instead, they call for a focus on
Asia to counter China's growing influence in the region. The documents envision
not a head-on war with China but the need to be able to confront Chinese efforts
to control shipping lanes and seize disputed territory with a combination of air
and naval power - and an agile, fast-moving ground combat force.

"There is no doubt about the need for expeditionary, amphibious troops," a
senior Defense Department official said. "The question is whether we need the
Army to provide that capability."

Reclaiming ground

For decades, Asia was the Army's domain. It was the first service to establish a
base in Hawaii. During World War II, the Army deployed five times as many troops
to the Pacific theater as the Marines, and it was the Army that took the lead in
the Korean and Vietnam wars.

"The Army's history in the Pacific has been long - and unbroken," Brooks said.

But in the 1970s, the Army scaled back its presence across the Far East, save
for South Korea, to focus on defending Western Europe from a Soviet invasion. It
left the continent to the Navy, Air Force and Marines. The Marines have about
24,000 uniformed personnel west of the International Date Line - most of them
based on Okinawa - while the Army has fewer than 2,500 outside Korea.

For years, that disparity did not bother Army leaders, who regarded Asia as far
less important than the Middle East. China was not a global power. There were
wars to fight in Iraq and Afghanistan. For much of the past decade, the Army's
troop-intensive counterinsurgency strategy was the flavor of choice in the
Pentagon.

No longer. As the administration began to pivot toward Asia, the other services,
burned by the Army's claim on post-Sept. 11 defense spending, saw an opening.
They formulated an Asia-centric strategy called "air-sea battle," which calls
for the Navy, Air Force and Marines to play the leading role in responding to
China's rise. The strategy assumes that the United States is unlikely to need to
wage a protracted ground war in East Asia; instead, it envisions the use of Air
Force stealth fighter-bombers, Navy littoral ships and Marine amphibious forces
to respond to crises.

"Air-sea battle is an essential part of sustaining America's military freedom of
action and ability to project power," Adm. Jonathan Greenert, the chief of naval
operations, wrote last year with his then-Air Force counterpart, Gen. Norton
Schwartz, in the magazine American Interest.

The Army, distracted by Iraq and Afghanistan, initially scoffed at air-sea
battle. Its strategists - convinced that the most likely venue for America's
next war will be in the Middle East, not in Asia - offered up an alternative
called "strategic land power" that would serve its interests in justifying large
infantry and armor units. But top officials in the White House and Pentagon have
been unswayed, prompting worry within the Army that it would be the principal
loser in the next big war - the battle over the defense budget.

As a consequence, Army Chief of Staff Ray Odierno has opted to turn westward.
One of his first moves was to elevate the job of leading Army forces in the
Pacific to a four-star position, a higher rank than for any other Army
geographic command. Odierno selected Brooks, a distinguished infantry officer
who had been commanding Army forces in the Middle East, to assume the challenge.

The distance factor

Tall and lean, Brooks became a television star in the opening weeks of the Iraq
war in 2003, when he conducted many of the military's daily news briefings
detailing the march to Baghdad. His ability to convey U.S. strategy in an
engaging, charismatic way is a tailored fit for the Pacific job, which involves
more military diplomacy than traditional lead-the-troops generalship.

An initial focus has been to build army-to-army rapport. Although six of the
world's 10 largest armies are in the Pacific, and most of the militaries in the
region are led by army generals, the top U.S. military officer in the region -
the chief of the U.S. Pacific Command - has always been a Navy admiral. U.S.
Army officials believe an Army four-star general may be able to forge closer
bonds with Asian army leaders.

"There's a shared understanding as army commanders," Brooks said.

One of his first priorities was to ensure that Army units assigned to the
Pacific actually focused on it. For the past decade, the Army's 1st Corps, based
in Washington state, and its subordinate divisions, including the 7th Infantry
and the 25th Infantry, were sent on multiple tours to Iraq and Afghanistan.
Officers paid little attention to events in Asia, and their soldiers came to
expect a year's notice before deployment, as well as a full component of
equipment at their destination. "We completely lost the part of the Army's
culture that was expeditionary," said Maj. Gen. Kurt Fuller, commander of the
Hawaii-based 25th Infantry Division.

Over the past year, the Pentagon has exempted Army units in the Pacific from
further Afghanistan rotations. That has prompted major changes in training and
planning. The 25th Infantry, which no longer subjects its soldiers to desert
drills, plans to reopen a jungle warfare school on the Hawaiian island of Oahu
that has been closed since the Vietnam War. The division has also devised plans
to send small teams - including engineers, medical personnel and communications
technicians - on planes to Asia within 24 hours to respond to natural disasters.
"We're going to be adaptable and scalable," Fuller said. "And fast."

No matter how ready they are, though, troops from the 25th face a long flight
from their bases in Hawaii and Alaska. Soldiers from the 7th must travel all the
way from the coast of Washington state.

The distance was driven home to Army officers at an annual exercise with the
Japanese military this month on the snowy island of Hokkaido. In responding to a
scenario in which the northern half of the island was invaded, the allies mapped
out their respective responses. On the U.S. side, the elements of the 25th would
land on the fourth day of the counterattack. The Marines were slated to arrive a
day earlier.

To overcome distance-related delays, Brooks is pushing his Pacific Pathways
initiative, which would keep a rotating unit of about 700 soldiers, plus a
contingent of helicopters, on a circuit in East Asia and Southeast Asia.

He envisions piggybacking off existing military exercises - instead of flying
troops back and forth from the United States for each visit, the soldiers would
move from one country to another, spending four to six more weeks in each nation
at the beginning and end of the training sessions.

If a natural disaster strikes, or there is another need for U.S. ground troops,
Army leaders would seek to quickly divert those soldiers. "If your brigade is on
the way to Malaysia and a typhoon hits the Philippines," said Lt. Gen. Robert B.
Brown, the commander of 1st Corps, "you can take a left turn and there you are."

Plenty of obstacles

As his two-seat OH-58D Kiowa Warrior helicopter approached the USS Lake Erie,
Lt. Col. George Ferido looked down at the deck. He was flying one the Army's
smallest helicopters, and, from afar, it seemed too big for the ship. "We're
landing on that thing?" he muttered to himself as he eased down the collective
lever to descend.

A minute later, he did. Flawlessly. On a deck that was big enough.

The landing, however, turned out to be the easy part. Unlike Navy and Marine
helicopters, Army birds do not have brakes to quickly stop the rotors, forcing
Ferido to sit in his aircraft for several minutes. Plans to gas up his Kiowa
were foiled because of a problem connecting to the ship's fuel hose. And when
the deck crew decided to pull the helicopter into the hangar, the sailors
discovered that the front blade, which cannot quickly fold like those on Navy
helicopters, was going to strike a metal support beam.

So the crew members improvised. They found a pillow-size piece of padding and
affixed it to the blade with duct tape.

"Careful," a sailor called out to his shipmates. "We're trying to put a square
peg in a round hole."

Army aviators are confident that they can work out the kinks and commence
frequent shipboard operations. "It will give us a huge new capability across the
Pacific," said Col. Kenneth A. Hawley, commander of the 25th Infantry's combat
aviation brigade.

Marine officers are less optimistic. They point to the waters off Haiti in the
mid-1990s - the last time that the Army flew its helicopters on and off ships.
Several Army aircraft were so badly corroded by saltwater that they had to be
junked.

The implementation of Brooks's Pathways plan is shaping up to be an even larger
challenge. Although he and other Army officials emphasized the potential savings
from the program because of fewer transcontinental flights to move troops, Army
planning documents project that the overall initiative will cost about $45
million more than the Army currently spends on military exercises in the
Pacific.

Keeping hundreds of soldiers on bases in other nations, even if only for a month
or two, could spark anti-American sentiment and unnerve host governments. This
month, the Army shared its plans with U.S. ambassadors in the region, with the
hope that they will help sell it in the countries they are stationed in.

"We're sensitive to the politics," Brooks said. He noted that Marine
expeditionary units, which conduct similar training exercises, are based aboard
amphibious assault ships that can "quickly move away if you cause concern or
excitement that you didn't want."

Those obstacles are worth overcoming, in the view of Army leaders, if soldiers
can get closer to the action - an imperative laid bare by last month's typhoon
in the Philippines. A 70-person advance team from the Okinawa-based 3rd Marine
Expeditionary Brigade arrived less than 24 hours after the Philippine government
requested U.S. military assistance. Within three days, the Marine response
increased to more than 2,000 troops - 1,200 of whom were on Philippine soil.

Using their own helicopters and cargo aircraft, the Marine brigade moved about
2,000 tons of relief supplies to storm-racked areas before handing off the
assistance effort to a larger U.S. task force comprising troops from all four
services.

Marine officers say their response was aided by experience: In April, the
brigade conducted exercises with the Philippine military and met many of the
same Philippine troops who later were involved in the typhoon relief. "We had a
personal relationship," said Lt. Gen. John E. Wissler, the top Marine commander
in Asia. "That's the value of being forward-deployed."

Brooks scoffs at Marine complaints that he is trying to make his soldiers more
like Marines. During the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he noted, Marines were
stationed in the desert, far from water, and operated in ways similar to
soldiers.

"Did it look a little bit like the Army?" he said. "I'm ready for someone to say
that the Marines and the Army have lots in common."

But, he said, "we also have lots of things that aren't in common," including
more sophisticated attack helicopters, more small surveillance drones and more
advanced medical evacuation crews.

"We're looking for complementarity," he said. "There's plenty of work to be done
in the Pacific."

rajiv@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


