                             2589 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 8, 2014 Wednesday 8:14 PM EST

Ex-Guantanamo detainee implicated in Benghazi attack

BYLINE: Adam Goldman

SECTION: A section; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 784 words


U.S. officials suspect that a former Guantanamo Bay detainee played a role in
the attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, and are
planning to designate the group he leads as a foreign terrorist organization,
according to officials familiar with the plans.

Militiamen under the command of Abu Sufian bin Qumu, the leader of Ansar
al-Sharia in the Libyan city of Darnah, participated in the attack that killed
U.S. Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans, U.S. officials
said.

Witnesses have told American officials that Qumu's men were in Benghazi before
the attack on Sept. 11, 2012, according to the officials. It's unclear whether
they were there as part of a planned attack or out of happenstance. The drive
from Darnah to Benghazi takes several hours.

The State Department is expected to tie Qumu's group to the Benghazi attack when
it designates three branches of Ansar al-Sharia, in Darnah, Benghazi and
Tunisia, as foreign terrorist organizations in the coming days.

In 2007, Qumu was released from the U.S. prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and
sent to Libya, where he was detained. The Libyan government released him in
2008.

He and two other men, militia leaders Ahmed Abu Khattala and Seif Allah bin
Hassine, will be identified as "specially designated global terrorists," a
determination that allows U.S. officials to freeze their financial assets and
bar American citizens and companies from doing business with them.

The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not
authorized to publicly discuss the developments.

About a dozen criminal complaints have been filed in the Benghazi case, with
more expected. U.S. intelligence officials have said that several militias had a
hand in the attack. Some of the individuals charged are from Darnah, although
it's not clear if they are tied to Qumu's group. Khattala has already been named
in a criminal complaint.

The FBI declined to comment Tuesday.

U.S. officials are also investigating whether any of the people involved in the
Benghazi raid had a role in the killing of Ronnie Smith, an American
schoolteacher who was gunned down while jogging in the city last month.

Lawless conditions in eastern Libya have frustrated U.S. efforts to investigate
the attack in Benghazi and capture those responsible. U.S. officials scrapped a
plan to snatch Khattala in Benghazi for fear that American action could trigger
unrest and destabilize the Libyan government.

Khattala, meanwhile, has flaunted his freedom, giving interviews to U.S.
reporters as the FBI watches from afar. He has denied any involvement in the
attack.

Qumu, 54, a Libyan from Darnah, is well known to U.S. intelligence officials. A
former tank driver in the Libyan army, he served 10 years in prison in the
country before fleeing to Egypt and then to Afghanistan.

According to U.S. military files disclosed by the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks,
Qumu trained in 1993 at one of Osama bin Laden's terrorist camps in Afghanistan
and later worked for a bin Laden company in Sudan, where the al-Qaeda leader
lived for three years.

Qumu fought alongside the Taliban against the United States in Afghanistan; he
then fled to Pakistan and was later arrested in Peshawar. He was turned over to
the United States and held at Guantanamo Bay.

He has a "long-term association with Islamic extremist jihad and members of
al-Qaida and other extremist groups," according to the military files.
"Detainee's alias is found on a list of probable al-Qaida personnel receiving
monthly stipends."

Qumu also had links to Zayn al-Abidin Muhammed Hussein, known by his alias Abu
Zubaida, a key al-Qaeda facilitator who is being held indefinitely at
Guantanamo.

The United States is offering $10 million for information about the Benghazi
attack.

The day before the raid, anti-American violence erupted in the Middle East,
North Africa and elsewhere when al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri called on
followers to avenge the death of Abu Yahya al-Libi, the terrorist group's No. 2,
who was killed in a CIA drone strike. Officials, however, said there is no
evidence that al-Qaeda's core leadership was directly tied to the assault on the
compound in Benghazi.

"The situation on Sept. 11th in Benghazi was a complicated one," a senior
administration official said. "We will never be able to know what motivated
everyone involved in this attack, and one of the things the investigation is
looking at right now is the level of planning that may have gone into it."

In addition to Qumu and Khattala, American officials are eager to question Faraj
al Chalabi, a Libyan extremist who might have fled the country.

adam.goldman@washpost.com

Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


