                             2586 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       January 6, 2014 Monday 8:14 PM EST

U.S. will not send forces to aid Iraq

BYLINE: Loveday Morris;Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1217 words


BEIRUT - Secretary of State John F. Kerry said Sunday that the United States is
ready to help Iraq in any way possible as that country began a major offensive
to wrest control of two cities from al-Qaeda-linked militants. But he made it
clear that no American troops would be sent in.

Kerry described the militants from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS,
as "the most dangerous players" in the region. But as Iraqi forces launched
airstrikes and clashed with the militants in western Anbar province on Sunday,
Kerry said it was Iraq's battle to fight.

ISIS, formerly known as al-Qaeda in Iraq but renamed to reflect the group's
growing ambitions, has been extending its influence across Syria, Iraq and
Lebanon. It is suffering a backlash in Syria, where it lost ground to rival
rebel fighters on Sunday. But the Sunni militants' gains in Iraq present a
critical test for the Shiite-led government of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.

They also leave the Obama administration worried about the renewed force of a
militant movement once declared all but vanquished in Iraq.

A string of bombings in the Iraqi capital killed at least 20 people Sunday;
although no one asserted responsibility, the attacks appeared linked to the
fighting in Anbar. In that strategic province, meanwhile, the militants linked
to al-Qaeda fought to retain their grip on the cities of Ramadi and Fallujah,
which they seized last week.

The Iraqi army had encircled Fallujah on Sunday, poised for an assault.
Thousands of residents fled, fearing an onslaught similar to the U.S. military's
2004 battle for the city, then held by Sunni insurgents. It was the most deadly
confrontation of the Iraq war for U.S. forces and some of their bloodiest
fighting since the Vietnam War.

Meanwhile, in Ramadi, airstrikes killed 60 ISIS militants late Saturday, Iraq's
army chief, Lt. Gen. Ali Ghaidan Majid, told the National Iraqi News Agency.

According to officials who spoke to the Reuters news agency, fighting on Sunday
killed at least 22 soldiers and 12 civilians in Ramadi and left an unknown
number of militants dead. Video footage released by the Iraqi Defense Ministry
showed late-night strikes on what it said were ISIS vehicles and hideouts.

"This is a fight that belongs to the Iraqis," Kerry said toward the end of a
visit to Jerusalem. "We are not, obviously, contemplating returning. We are not
contemplating putting boots on the ground. This is their fight, but we're going
to help them in their fight."

Kerry didn't give details of what assistance the United States might provide but
said it would do "everything that is possible." After Maliki appealed in
November for more U.S. support in fighting extremists, Washington sent 75
Hellfire missiles and promised to dispatch drones.

Fear and criticism

A local journalist in Fallujah said Sunday that the Iraqi army was shelling
militant positions but that civilian areas in the city also had been hit.

"It is back to the same as it was in 2004," said the journalist, referring to
the major U.S. assaults. "Before 2004, there was only one cemetery in Fallujah.
Afterwards, there were four cemeteries," said the journalist, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity for security reasons. "Now the people fear there will be
eight cemeteries."

Although Fallujah remained under the militants' control Sunday, their grip on
Ramadi appeared to be weakening.

An Iraqi military commander said it would take two to three days to expel
militants from the two cities. Lt. Gen. Rasheed Fleih, who leads the Anbar
Military Command, told state television that pro-government Sunni tribes are
leading the operations while the army is offering aerial cover and logistics on
the ground, the Associated Press reported.

The fall of Fallujah to the al-Qaeda-linked group prompted renewed criticism
from U.S. lawmakers of the Obama administration, which had planned to leave
several thousand American troops in Iraq after the 2011 pullout for training and
counterterrorism operations. But the deal fell apart when Iraq's parliament
refused to guarantee the remaining U.S. military personnel immunity from
prosecution in Iraqi courts.

"The thousands of brave Americans who fought, shed their blood and lost their
friends to bring peace to Fallujah and Iraq are now left to wonder whether these
sacrifices were in vain," Republican Sens. John McCain (Ariz.) and Lindsey O.
Graham (S.C.) said in a statement Saturday.

The Syria connection

ISIS's tightened grip on Anbar gives it a swath of land straddling the Syrian
border. "This is a fight that is bigger than just Iraq," Kerry said Sunday. "The
rise of these terrorists in the region, and particularly in Syria and through
the fighting in Syria, is part of what is unleashing this instability in the
rest of the region."

But in Syria, the group is under pressure. In recent days, other rebel groups
have joined forces to confront ISIS fighters, who include numerous non-Syrians
and have antagonized residents with their brutality.

On Sunday, Syrian rebels were locked in a third day of clashes with ISIS
militants, during which the al-Qaeda-linked fighters have been expelled from a
slew of towns and villages in the opposition-held north. ISIS pulled out of
positions in the Syrian town of Adana, one of its strongholds, activists said.
Meanwhile, near the Turkish border, fighting spread to the north-central
province of Raqqah, an ISIS stronghold.

"ISIS appears to have sustained serious territorial losses," said Charles
Lister, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar. "But much of
this, for now, is likely a result of pragmatic withdrawals rather than outright
military defeat."

However, Lister warned, whatever takes place in the coming weeks, ISIS will
probably remain in Syria in some form.

"Should it be entirely isolated by all other key fighting groups in Syria, its
actions will likely become even more harsh than before," he said.

The latest fighting occurred just weeks before scheduled Syrian peace
negotiations. On Sunday, Kerry for the first time opened the door to Iranian
participation in the talks.

Softening the U.S. hard line against any role for Iran if it refuses to endorse
the ground rules for the Jan. 22 conference, Kerry suggested that Iran might be
able to participate from the sidelines. Iran backs Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad and has provided him with weapons and other military help.

"Could they contribute from the sidelines? Are there ways for them conceivably
to weigh in?" Kerry asked rhetorically about the Iranians, who oppose the
conference's goal of establishing a transitional government in Syria.

Kerry suggested that Iran's diplomatic office in Geneva might be able to serve
as an unofficial participant.

The U.N. envoy organizing the conference, Lakhdar Brahimi, wants Iran included
in the talks, and U.N. officials have suggested that Iran could play an
unofficial role.

Although U.S. relations with Iran have improved since the successful early
negotiations over the country's nuclear program last year, the United States
remains suspicious of Iran's foreign policy goals in Syria and elsewhere.

loveday.morris@washpost.com

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Gearan reported from Jerusalem. Suzan Haidamous in Beirut contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


