                             2581 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     December 31, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 394 words


Drone test sites pickedTeams from states, including Virginia, will examine
aspects of integrating the aircraft into U.S. airspace. A3

Fears in South SudanAnti-government forces prepared to attack a key town,
officials said. (Also, a briefing on the crisis.) A6

THE REGION

Maryland legislators will consider a bill that would reduce the time - from
years to days - that debt collectors have to take homeowners to court for
leftover debt on foreclosed homes. B1

Three of four casinos in Maryland can sell alcohol around the clock, unlike bars
elsewhere in the state. Some taverns say that's an unfair advantage. B1

Prince George's police tracked down and arrested a 22-year-old District Heights
man in connection with a weekend slaying, using a description the victim
provided before he died at a hospital. B2

A Montgomery police officer gave CPR to a9-day-old baby who had stopped
breathing. B2

Arlington architects, reluctant to demolish a 1926 Sears kit house, are giving
it away - but only if the taker moves it. B1

Maryland's new quotas on rockfish, set to take effect Wednesday, have prompted
controversy. B4

THE WORLD

Egypt's governmentdetained four journalists working for the Qatar-based Al
Jazeera English news channel, accusing them of links to the banned Muslim
Brotherhood. A7

Israelfreed more Palestinian prisoners as part of an effort to restart peace
talks, but the move upset victims' families and other Israelis. A7

Iranian conservatives spoke out against engagement with the West. A7

THE NATION

Jan. 1outstrips every other heavy-drinking holiday for the percentage of
fatalities - 54 percent - blamed on drunken driving. B1

The teenwho fatally shot a fellow student at a Colorado high school this month
entered through a door that was supposed to be locked but had been propped open,
a sheriff said. A3

THE ECONOMY

Facebook's strongest growth in the past year came from seniors, a survey found.
A2

Daimler's electric cars are coming with a synthetic vroom to thwart the risks of
silence. A10

Wells Fargowill pay a net $541 million to Fannie Mae to settle claims over
defective home loans issued before the financial crisis. A10

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


