                             2520 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      October 28, 2014 Tuesday 3:56 PM EST

If the GOP wins the Senate, then what?

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 887 words


The Post reports that Republicans have opened up a 6-point lead in the generic
congressional poll. It is hard to escape the conclusion that a GOP victory would
amount to a vote of no confidence in the White House:

Driving attitudes is a pervasive sense of a country in trouble. Overwhelming
majorities say the country is badly off-track and give the economy negative
ratings. Economic expectations are little better today than they were at this
time four years ago.

It is worse in the battleground states with competitive Senate races: "In nine
states with competitive Senate races, voters express a preference for voting for
the Republican in the House election by a margin of 57 percent to 39 percent. .
. . In many of the states with competitive Senate races, other public polls have
found that Obama's approval is below his national numbers, creating a drag on
Democratic candidates."

The results may be similar but voter sentiment is quite different this year than
in 2010, when the overriding theme was conservative antagonism toward government
overreach, most especially toward Obamacare. Now, one senses near desperation
among all voters: Can't these guys do anything? What is the matter with the
president? In that regard, it is a more dangerous environment for Democrats, who
now must battle against GOP enthusiasm and liberals' exasperation and even
embarrassment.

It is also more treacherous terrain for Republicans, who misread public opinion
at their own peril. Voters are looking for executive competence, something the
Congress can affect only indirectly through oversight and the budget. Voters are
dismayed and anxiety ridden by the foreign policy disasters and rise of the
Islamic State. Here Congress can use the power of the purse to restore defense
funding, pass sanctions against Iran and use oversight, the bully pulpit and
confirmation hearings to press the administration for a more coherent policy and
more competent staff. But once again the president remains the commander in
chief.

What Republicans can do is restore some confidence that at least where there is
agreement, government can attend to important issues. Republicans would be well
advised to divide initiatives into two piles.

One stack should contain legislation which enjoys bipartisan support. A
comprehensive energy bill, reform of job training programs and possibly
corporate tax reform with an emphasis on job creation (e.g. making our corporate
tax rate more competitive, allowing companies to  repatriate money from overseas
without a huge tax hit) should at the top of the list.  Deals on Medicaid reform
(expansion for block granting, or at least legislatively directing waivers for
innovative state alternatives like Indiana's), as well as higher education
reform (e.g. greater transparency for college tuition, use of federal aid for
schools other than 4-year colleges) are possible as well. On foreign policy,
enhanced sanctions against Iran and increasing defense spending should gain
bipartisan support.

The second pile should be things that the GOP cannot accomplish without the
White House. Here it is important to share Republican solutions with voters,
forcing Democrats to try to block them or the president to veto them. This can't
be a bizarre assortment of fantasy legislation (e.g. abolish major areas of
government, repeal Obamacare with no replacement.) The GOP should focus on the
sort of common-sense center-right proposal which prompt voters to say: "Hey
these guys aren't nuts; they have some good ideas," not "These guys are nuts; we
can't give them the White House too." Sure the far right will think that the
latter sorts of schemes are just fine and that Republicans need only advocate
them more frequently and more loudly. But really, didn't these same people prove
to be paper tigers in the primaries and entirely irresponsible in last year's
shutdown?

Here is where innovators like Sens. Mike Lee (R-Utah) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.)
and particularly Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) can shine. Bills should follow some
basic criteria: 1. The principle purpose is reform, not penny pinching; 2. The
lower or middle class benefits; and 3. If the welfare state bureaucracy is doing
something poorly (e.g. Obamacare, food stamps) replace it with something better.
That leaves the field wide-open for welfare reform, full-blown tax reform,
regulatory reform, and an Obamacare alternative. Legislation may include a more
decentralized solution in which the feds take a more supportive role (e.g.
funding)  but states construct programs. Oh yes, if some of these are so
compelling they might gain Democratic support and move over to the first stack.

What Republicans can't do is spend their time trying to chop chunks of
government, obsess on the spending side, cut holes in the safety net, perpetuate
cronyism or let paranoia gut anti-terror measures (e.g. drones, NSA). Senate
gadflies are about to learn that being in the majority is far different than
throwing spitballs from the minority. They will need to show they can
problem-solve (or they will confirm concerns that they cannot).

If the GOP follows this sort of approach the country will be better off, the
party's reputation will be enhanced and the table will be set for a
reform-minded Republican president. If not, Hillary Clinton can start measuring
the drapes.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


