                             2543 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 22, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 308 words


A Karzai surpriseThe Afghan leader voiced support for a post-2014 deal with the
U.S. but said he won't sign it until the spring. A8

the nation

Insurance brokers said technological problems with HealthCare.gov prevent them
from helping consumers sign up for plans. A3

The annual one-night head count of homeless people found a 4 percent decline,
with big drops among families and veterans. A2

Americanslag behind the international average in life expectancy, a report
found. A18

the economy

The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 16,000 for the first time on
encouraging jobs news. A17

Classic toys top wish lists this season as analysts wonder how the lack of a
must-have gift will affect shopping. A17

A Thanksgiving dinner's average cost has dropped a bit for the first time in
three years, a survey by a trade group said. A19

the world

A State Department advisory against travel to North Korea came after a visiting
U.S. veteran of the Korean War was jailed there. A10

U.S. officials strongly denied Pakistani allegations that an Islamic school was
hit in a U.S. drone strike. A10

the region

The corruption probe at two Maryland detention facilities led to 14 more arrests
of current or former corrections officers. B1

D.C. police said two recent attacks in Columbia Heights may be part of a
disturbing trend called the "knockout game." B1

What a 5-year-old girl told a neighbor led to the discovery of her parents and
baby brother dead of apparent gunshot wounds, in Frederick County.
Murder-suicide is suspected. B1

The teen driver involved in a skateboarding stunt in Arlington that killed his
friend apologized before he was sentenced. B3

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


