                             2549 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 28, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

China in a fix as bluff is called over new air defense zone

BYLINE: Simon Denyer

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 1283 words


New air defense zone unites neighbors, U.S. against China       China in a fix
as U.S. calls its bluff over air defense zone

U.S. is given perfect opportunity to reassure allies about commitment to
Asia-Pacific security.

BEIJING - It was designed as a forceful response to Japanese assertiveness. But
Beijing's creation of an air defense zone may have backfired, experts said,
eliciting a strong joint response from the United States and Japan.

Instead of strengthening China's position, the "air defense identification zone"
has unsettled and united its neighbors. It provided Washington with a perfect
opportunity to reassure its Asian allies that it remains committed to
maintaining stability in the Asia-Pacific region.

On Saturday, the Communist Party government said any noncommercial aircraft
entering a broad zone over the East China Sea should first identify itself and
warned that failure to do so could provoke "defensive emergency measures" by
China's armed forces. The statement heightened an already tense standoff with
Japan over several disputed islets in the area.

But the United States called China's bluff by sending two warplanes into the
zone Tuesday, and Beijing's response was muted. The Defense Ministry merely said
it had identified and monitored the planes, while the Foreign Ministry stressed
that the zone was purely defensive and offered to strengthen communications with
other regional players to maintain peace and security.

"We hope relevant countries do not make too much of a fuss about it, panic and
read too much into it," spokesman Qin Gang said.

Paul Haenle, director of the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy in
Beijing, said the mild reaction was surprising. "It is almost as though they
hadn't anticipated the U.S. response and didn't know what to do," he said.

In Chinese eyes, the standoff began in September 2012, when the Japanese
government purchased three of the islands - known as the Senkaku islands in
Japan and the Diaoyu islands in China - from a private Japanese landowner. In
response, Beijing stepped up its own claims to the rocky landmasses, increasing
sea patrols and pressing Japan to accept that the territory is disputed.

Japan, like numerous other countries, has its own air defense identification
zone. The country increasingly has cited the zone as a reason to warn or
intercept Chinese planes in the area, according to military experts in Beijing.
In September, Japan threatened to shoot down Chinese drones flying over the
disputed islands; China warned that such a move would constitute an act of war.

The Chinese military had been considering establishing its own air defense zone
for some time, and this increased tension may have tipped the balance, experts
said.

"Japan has been acting more and more confrontational with regards to the Diaoyu
islands, so China had to roll out its own measures to balance it out," said Zhou
Yongsheng of the Center for Japanese Studies at China Foreign Affairs University
in Beijing. "Whenever Chinese aircraft entered Japan's zone, they would dispatch
fighter jets to intercept us, which put us in a very passive position."

'A hawkish voice'

Popular sentiment in Japan and China also has become increasingly hostile toward
the other country. Rising nationalism in China is now coupled with genuine
concern about the intentions of a more nationalist Japanese government under
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. His government has raised military spending since
coming to power in December.

Zhu Feng, a professor of international studies at Peking University, said China
had established the air zone to "curb the arrogance of the Abe administration."
Zhao Chu, a military affairs columnist, said China was responding to Japan's
more aggressive enforcement of its own zone.

"But the primary cause is that China needs a stronger foreign policy at present
because an appeal for that has been gathering momentum in Chinese society for
over a decade," Zhao said. "It's a hawkish voice that now dominates Chinese
society."

Beijing's actions appear to fit a recent pattern, experts said. Reluctant to be
seen as the provocateur, China tends to respond forcefully to what it sees as
provocations from others and then advance its own claims even more strongly.

But China may have overplayed its hand with Saturday's Defense Ministry
announcement, experts said.

Both Secretary of State John F. Kerry and Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel strongly
criticized the move. Vice President Biden will convey the administration's
concerns when he meets separately with the leaders of Japan, China and South
Korea on a week-long trip to Asia starting Sunday, officials said.

Under President Obama, the United States has announced a "strategic rebalancing"
- or pivot - toward Asia, a move that many in China see as an attempt to contain
its rise. But when Obama, consumed by the federal government shutdown, failed to
attend two important summits in Asia last month, doubts surfaced about the depth
of the U.S. commitment. Biden will try to reassure the leaders of Japan and
South Korea during his trip, but this week's events may already have done the
job for him.

Hagel called his Japanese counterpart, Itsunori Onodera, on Wednesday, described
China's move as "a potentially destabilizing unilateral action" and commended
the Japanese government "for exercising appropriate restraint," spokesman Carl
Woog said in a statement.

Acting on instructions from their government, Japan's two biggest commercial
airlines announced that they would not relay plans to China before flying
through its newly declared zone. Onodera told reporters Wednesday that
Self-Defense Forces jets would continue to operate in the East China Sea without
reporting their flight plans to Beijing.

"This announcement and quick U.S. response have clarified the U.S.'s siding with
Japan much more than the past," said Mathieu Duchtel, a representative of the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute in Beijing. "So there is some
degree of miscalculation" by China.

Echoing of concerns

Japan has voiced concern for years about what it sees as China's increasing
maritime aggression, but in recent days those concerns have been echoed by
Taiwan and South Korea. The anger from South Korea is particularly notable,
because Seoul, under President Park Geun-hye, has drawn closer with Beijing
while sparring with Japan over historical issues.

On Wednesday, South Korea's foreign minister, Yun Byung-se, said in a speech
that China's announcement had "made already tricky regional situations even more
difficult to deal with."

In the past few months, China had been working hard to reassure many of its
Asian neighbors that its rise not only did not threaten them but also would be
to their benefit. China's leaders have made successful visits to Malaysia,
Indonesia and Vietnam and offered billions of dollars in trade and
investment.Now, those reassurances may look less convincing.

"This will inject a large dose of anxiety and uncertainty into countries in the
region about China's rise," said Haenle of the Carnegie-Tsinghua institute.

The episode also appears to underline China's sometimes confusing foreign and
strategic policy stance, with the armed forces often adopting more hawkish
positions than the Foreign Ministry. That, said Haenle, was precisely why
President Xi Jinping announced this month that he would establish a high-level
committee to better coordinate national security policy.

simon.denyer@washpost.com

David Nakamura in Washington, Chico Harlan in Seoul and Liu Liu, Li Qi and Guo
Chen in Beijing contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


