                             2501 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                      October 20, 2014 Monday 8:12 PM EST

UEFA official says Serbia and Albania will be 'fined severely,' but likely not
expelled from Euro 2016;
The fine amounts will not be known until mid-November.

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 312 words


Both the Albanian and Serbian national soccer teams will be "fined severely" for
their actions that led to the abandonment of their Euro 2016 qualifying match, a
UEFA disciplinary committee member said (via Goal.com). Rudolf Repka, who also
serves as the general secretary of the Czech Republic's national team, said UEFA
will probably not, however, disqualify either team from the Euro 2016
tournament.

"I believe neither Serbia nor Albania will be punished in the most extreme way,
but both FA's will be fined severely and the suspended match will most likely be
played again, at a neutral venue behind closed doors," Repka told the Czech
paper Kurir (via Goal.com).

Repka noted that while the decision on the abandoned match will come down
Thursday, the fine amounts will not be known until mid-November.

"[I]t is very complicated matter," Repka said. "[T]o make a decision on fines we
need more time."

The Albanian and Serbian teams clashed last week in Belgrade and forced the
referee to end the match prematurely when fights broke out on the field after
both Serbian and Albanian fans engaged in nationalistic activity. Most notably,
one or a group of Albanian fans, who under UEFA guidelines were not being let
into the stadium, flew a drone over the pitch holding a pro-Albania banner that
alluded to the conflict with Kosovo.

Prior to that, the all-Serbian audience in the stadium was reportedly chanting
taunts toward Albanian players, as well as burning flags.

Each side has blamed the other for the escalation that caused the match to be
suspended, while many onlookers wondered why such a match, given the underlying
political tensions, was allowed to occur in the first place. UEFA has since
defended its original decision, noting the two countries, whose diplomatic
relations have soured since the match fell apart last Tuesday, were fine at the
time of scheduling.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


