                             2532 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

Turns out, the 2012 campaign is still not over

BYLINE: Peter Hamby

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1910 words


By now, everyone knows that Mitt Romney's inner circle was righteously peeved at
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie for spending the final days of the 2012
presidential race arm-in-arm with President Obama as they toured the Jersey
coastline after its thrashing by Hurricane Sandy. The buddy-buddy act boxed
Romney out of national media coverage for days while lending the president some
bipartisan street cred.

But it wasn't just the storm. Christie had rankled Romney's team throughout the
campaign: He held back his endorsement as long as possible, flirted with
big-shot GOP donors who begged him to jump into the race and used his prime-time
address at the Republican National Convention to puff up his Garden State record
- without mentioning Romney once.

For Romney's aides, dealing with Christie's overbearing team was about as
pleasurable as a traffic jam on the New Jersey Turnpike. For Christie's staff in
Trenton, the feeling toward the Romney machine was pretty much mutual.

Many months after Romney's loss, that toxic relationship is revealed in
page-turning detail in "Double Down," a chronicle of last year's grind-it-out
election by journalists Mark Halperin and John Heilemann. The authors deploy the
conversation-driving formula that propelled their previous book, "Game Change:
Obama and the Clintons, McCain and Palin, and the Race of a Lifetime," to
bestseller status and a movie deal with HBO. (The same network has already
optioned the rights to "Double Down.") The duo's M.O. - translating insider
politics for mass-market readers with behind-the-scenes reporting and Gonzo
flair - is custom-built for today's news cycle, in which scoops explode on
Twitter and oblige the rest of the political media to chase, confirm, refute,
scrutinize, analyze to death. The digital blast radius for "Double Down" is
infinite.

And it will hit Christie first. Halperin and Heilemann make abundant use of a
vice-presidential vetting file dropped into their hands by someone in Romney's
orbit to illuminate secrets about the governor. Delivering the documents to the
authors was a stunning breach of political decorum that can only be read as a
giant middle finger at Christie and his aides.

According to the authors, Romney and his team were shaken by what they
discovered about Christie during "Project Goldfish," as the hush-hush veep
search process was known. His "disturbing" research file is littered with
"garish controversies," the authors write: a Justice Department investigation
into his free-spending ways as U.S. attorney, his habit of steering government
contracts to friends and political allies, a defamation lawsuit that emerged
during a 1994 run for local office, a politically problematic lobbying career
that included work on behalf of a financial firm that employed Bernie Madoff.
And that's not to mention the Romney team's anxiety about the governor's girth.

For Christie, who is coasting to reelection on Tuesday and already laying
behind-the-scenes groundwork for a 2016 presidential bid, the book's revelations
are a Drudge-ready public relations nightmare that will send his advisers
scrambling to explain awkward aspects of his record and his personal life just
as he is stepping onto the national stage.

For Halperin and Heilemann (and their publisher), this means one thing: mission
accomplished.

Coming off the history-making spectacle of the 2008 race, the
borderlinenihilistic presidential campaign of 2012 presents a challenge to
authors seeking to spin a compelling tale. That may explain why the pair devotes
considerable attention to the Republican primary contest, a more topsy-turvy
drama than the trench warfare between Obama and Romney.

The book lacks the made-for-Hollywood scenes of "Game Change": Elizabeth Edwards
ripping off her shirt to reveal her mastectomy scars in an emotional tarmac
confrontation with her cheating husband, or anything Palin-related. But there's
still click-bait aplenty: Obama meditating on drone strikes and telling his
aides that he's "really good at killing people"; Christie's raging temper;
Romney adviser Stuart Stevens vomiting backstage after Clint Eastwood's
performance art in Tampa; Romney's fascination with fat people, including his
habit of ribbing male campaign staffers about dating overweight women; George W.
Bush calling Rick Perry, his gubernatorial successor in Texas, "a
chicken-[expletive] guy"; Obama's team secretly polling and focus-grouping the
notion of replacing Joe Biden with Hillary Rodham Clinton on the Democratic
ticket; and so on. It's a book that will launch a thousand listicles.

Such goodies were mined over three years from deep-background interviews with
the candidates, their aides and the small galaxy of Washington fixers who
surrounded the campaigns. The authors explain their hazy sourcing in a note at
the book's conclusion; media snobs will have a field day. The Halperin-Heilemann
method, a number of those who sat for interviews told me, is to invite a subject
to a private room at a restaurant or a plush hotel suite, ply them with booze
and let the stories flow. But the alcohol was unnecessary; the wild success of
the first volume guaranteed that insiders would talk this time. Indeed, in a
summer's worth of casual conversations with veterans of all the campaigns, it
was difficult for me to find anyone who didn't consent to an interview with the
pair.

The book's loose argument is that both Obama and Romney placed their bets about
the race early on and "doubled down" throughout the contest. It's an apt take on
Obama World. The "Obamans," as the authors call them, set out to annihilate
Romney almost two years before the election and executed their plan with brutal
efficiency. There were hiccups along the way, specifically Obama's dreary
debate-prep sessions and his cringe-worthy performance in Denver, but his
deputies in Chicago rarely deviated from their search-and-destroy mission.
Romney's campaign, though, with its bad habit of reacting to news cycles with
snap decisions, always felt more ad hoc, with tactics trumping strategy.

Though the gossip merchants of This Town might be disappointed, readers are for
the most part spared staff-level infighting and post-campaign score settling.
There are exceptions: Former White House chief of staff Bill Daley comes in for
rough treatment, depicted as a feckless outsider lost in the youthful, clannish
and data-reliant Obama-verse. Although Romney's chief strategist, Stevens - a
popular punching bag for know-it-all Republican consultants after the loss -
emerges mostly unscathed, we witness some flashes of impetuousness. He was
frustrated, it seems, to be the lone voice on Team Romney lobbying for Christie
to be on the ticket instead of Paul Ryan, who is as much a cipher in the book as
he was during the campaign: rarely mentioned and barely consequential.

The authors' main project is to get into the minds of the candidates, even if
the book does little to alter our understanding of the campaign's main players.
Obama is brilliant but peevish, allergic to the nitty-gritty of politics. Romney
is a decent man but hopelessly ham-fisted on the stump and oblivious to why
voters can't seem to appreciate his private-equity rsum.

As for the vice president, Biden is as Uncle Joe as ever: loyal to Obama and
desperate to be in the arena, but prone to gaffes and rhetorical indulgences
that give the president and his aides heartburn. Richard Ben Cramer's "What It
Takes" remains the great ur-text of Bidenology. But the "Game Change" guys do
dredge up what might be the Bidenest quote of all time: "I don't understand why
everyone's so mad at me," he tells a confidante, after endorsing same-sex
marriage before the president did. God bless him.

Obama's evolving relationship with Bill Clinton is one of the more intriguing
tales of "Double Down." Aware that Clinton would be a crucial asset to the
campaign, Obama World lured the former president to its side, even agreeing to
pay off Hillary Clinton's 2008 campaign debt in exchange for Bill's help. The
two presidents slowly warmed to each other throughout the race. "He's luckier
than a dog with two d----," Clinton told his friends of Obama.

The real drama of the 2012 campaign unfolded on the Republican side: the
Newt-killing, Perry-on-painkillers, 9-9-9, couple-of-Cadillacs theatrics of the
Republican primary. After opening with some 80 pages of Obama portraiture, the
authors gorge themselves on the hot mess of the GOP race for the next 200 pages.
The most enjoyable action plays out among the "Romneyites" (yes, the authors
have an annoying habit of sprinkling their text with gnomic nicknames; let this
be the last time Rick Santorum is called "Santo"). The Romney campaign's
methodical destruction of Gingrich, first in Iowa and again in Florida, is
detailed, as is Romney's problematic lurch to the right as he fought off a
conservative insurgency fronted by Santorum and his sweater vest.

If Halperin and Heilemann have a bias, it's toward the candidates who stood a
chance of winning - except for their recurring obsession with Donald Trump. Tim
Pawlenty's campaign merits four pages. Ron Paul is an afterthought. Iowa straw
poll winner Michelle Bachmann gets five pages, and the most memorable thing we
learn is that she gets her hair done at a place called Fantastic Sam's.

Jon Huntsman is the exception, and the authors' rendering of him is not pretty.
Perhaps most damning for a candidate who professed to be above
politics-as-usual, the authors report that the Huntsman campaign was behind two
of the cycle's roughest news hits: peddling dirt to reporters on Mitch Daniels's
wife, Cheri, a warning shot intended to keep the former Indiana governor out of
the GOP field; and facilitating Politico's splashy story about Cain's apparent
extramarital dalliances, a revelation that drove the pizza magnate from the
race.

Halperin and Heilemann fixate just as much on the Republicans who never set foot
on a debate stage and who handed Romney enough breathing room and financial
support to capture the nomination. Christie gets an entire chapter (titled "Big
Boy"). Daniels, Haley Barbour and Mike Huckabee all receive more attention than
Cain, who once topped the national polls.

The Nate Silver wing of the Internet will almost surely gripe that the book is
an example of political journalism's worst instincts - it's too dependent on the
hunches and agendas of sources rather than hard measures of why Obama won. The
authors ascribe colossal import to the tactical decisions and shouting matches
inside campaign war rooms, but their dishy portraits often skimp on the larger
forces that drove the race, from an improving economy and demographic shifts to
Romney's charisma deficit and the Obama campaign's superior voter-contact
machinery.

Campaigns, though, aren't just about number-crunching and statistical analysis.
Candidates matter. Voters tell pollsters that they make their choices based on
issues such as education, health care, taxes and the economy - and they do. But
they also care about temperament, empathy, strength, reason, trust and the human
side of these strange and wily people who think they're up to the task of
running the country. And as Halperin and Heilemann understand, so do readers.

bookworld@washpost.com

Read more from Outlook, friend us on Facebook, and follow us on Twitter.

DOUBLE DOWNGame Change 2012

By Mark Halperin and John Heilemann

Penguin Press. 499 pp. $29.95

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


