                             2597 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 13, 2014 Monday 8:14 PM EST

A hard-edged defender of spy agencies

BYLINE: Greg Miller;Adam Goldman

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1901 words


Amid the initial wave of leaks by former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden,
U.S. officials arranged closed-door briefings with lawmakers in a bid to contain
the damage. As tensions rose in a session with members of the House of
Representatives, Robert S. Litt, the intellignce community's top lawyer, showed
his pique:

"Well, you're the ones who passed it," he said, referring to the law being used
to collect the phone records of virtually every U.S. citizen. "And if you don't
like it," he added, according to participants, "you can always repeal it."

Meant to quiet the crowd, the remark instead triggered hostile applause among
members inclined to take Litt's dare - a reaction that underscored how rapidly
the political terrain was shifting for spy agencies and the level of antagonism
their attorney could provoke.

As general counsel to the director of national intelligence, Litt has assumed an
unusually high-profile role in the aftermath of the Snowden leaks, serving as
the point person in defending the massive surveillance programs to Congress and
the public.

He has defended spy agencies aggressively in dozens of congressional hearings
and other settings. He has battled news organizations to keep some Snowden
material out of news reports and fired off a steady stream of e-mails accusing
reporters of sloppy or sensationalized work. He has also alienated some key
lawmakers, including Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.), the chairman of the House
Intelligence Committee, who for the past six months has effectively banned Litt
from appearing before the panel, even behind closed doors.

Litt is praised by some for his willingness to defend agencies confronting
perhaps the most damaging series of leaks in their history. Amid that deluge,
"the agencies need someone nimble on his feet, who can think quickly and come
across as thoughtful and substantive," said Rep. Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.), a
member of the intelligence panel. "He meets all those criteria."

But others said Litt's abrasive tendencies - and the damaged credibility of his
boss, James R. Clapper Jr. - have compounded the challenge of containing the
Snowden fallout.

This month, Litt sent letters to news organizations insisting that Clapper
hadn't lied when he testified before Congress in March that U.S. spy agencies
were not collecting data on large numbers of Americans. He said that Clapper was
referring to a separate surveillance program and that in that context, "his
answer was and is accurate."

Litt's account is the fourth attempt by the DNI or his subordinates to explain
the episode, and it is at odds with Clapper's own previous admission that he had
given the "least untruthful" answer he could in response to a question about a
classified program.

The ongoing controversy has become a source of frustration to senior National
Security Agency officials and others struggling to restore public confidence in
spy agencies and defend the integrity of their leaders.

"You have Clapper, who is on the hook for lying to Congress, and then you have
the lawyer who failed to tell his principal he was going to get sandbagged and
failed to correct that after it happened," said a senior U.S. official who spoke
on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak on the
record. "It's not helping."

In an interview, Litt voiced frustration with the continued focus on Clapper and
said he has sought only to be straightforward in his dealings with Congress.
"People perceive me the way they perceive me," Litt said. Telling members they
could repeal surveillance authorities "certainly wasn't intended as being
abrasive or hostile . . . I pride myself on being candid."

Clapper said he has total confidence in Litt. "Bob is not the kind of guy who'll
just tell you what you want to hear," Clapper said in a statement to The
Washington Post. "He's intelligent, candid and brutally honest and those
qualities have made him invaluable to me in my role as DNI."

Unusually public role

Litt's level of public exposure runs counter to the tendency of most
intelligence community lawyers to remain in the background and has caught former
colleagues off-guard.

"You don't really want the general counsel spinning," said former director of
national intelligence Dennis C. Blair, who hired Litt during President Obama's
first term. Litt has been an effective advocate in a moment of crisis, Blair
said, but "it is a little bit odd, and it probably puts Bob a little bit out of
his original skill."

In some ways, however, Litt's assignment marks the culmination of a career spent
fiercely protecting the interests of law enforcement and intelligence agencies,
as well as some of their most controversial operatives.

Disclosure forms he submitted to the Senate Intelligence Committee before
returning to government in 2009 indicate that he had represented "several
present and former employees of the CIA in Dept. of Justice, congressional and
[inspector general] investigations" over the past decade.

Litt, 64, did not disclose the names of those clients. But current and former
U.S. officials said they included a CIA analyst, Alfreda Frances Bikowsky, who
was tied to a critical intelligence-sharing failure before the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks and the botched 2003 "rendition" of an innocent German citizen thought
to be an al-Qaeda operative. Khaled el-Masri spent five months in a CIA prison,
where he has said he was brutalized, before the agency admitted its mistake and
quietly set him loose in Albania.

Litt's eight years out of government during the administration of George W. Bush
were a financially rewarding stretch. He listed annual income of $975,000 in
2008, and he worked for clients such as Philip Morris and the government of
Israel as a partner with the Washington office of the law firm Arnold & Porter.

But Litt made clear in a 2006 interview that he got little pleasure from such
work. "Private practice has turned from a learned profession into a business,"
he told the Yale Law Review, urging new graduates to avoid jobs at big firms:
"Don't follow the money."

Litt has donated tens of thousands of dollars to Democratic candidates and
causes, and friends describe him in somewhat contradictory terms: an avowed
liberal on social issues but a true believer in the propriety of surveillance
programs such as those exposed by Snowden.

"I don't know if he's a card-carrying member of the ACLU, but it wouldn't
surprise me that he makes contributions there," said Irvin B. Nathan, a former
Litt colleague who serves as attorney general for the District of Columbia. But
when defending spy agencies, Nathan said, Litt is a "zealous advocate."

Litt's ascent through the U.S. government's legal ranks was swift but included
setbacks. He was a clerk to Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart before taking a
job as assistant U.S. attorney in the Southern District of New York.

"My initial impression was that he was very smart, kind of precocious," said
Mark F. Pomerantz, a longtime friend. He told what he called a "classic Bob Litt
story" that unfolded as then-U.S. Attorney John S. Martin Jr. was outlining
strategy with his legal team. Litt endorsed one of his boss's ideas by saying,
"You know, that's not as stupid as it sounds."

"He has a healthy ego," Pomerantz said. "But he is willing to listen and
reconsider, and he doesn't get dug in just for the sake of proving that he's the
smartest guy in the room."

During the Clinton administration, Litt was nominated to be chief of the Justice
Department's criminal division but withdrew after his admitted use of marijuana
in the 1970s complicated his prospects for confirmation. Instead Litt took a
post that didn't require Senate approval and that involved reviewing
applications for the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, the secret panel
now under scrutiny for authorizing the programs exposed by Snowden.

Litt was involved in the major national security debates of Obama's first term -
including the decision to kill an al-Qaeda figure, Anwar al-Awlaki, an American
citizen, in a drone strike in Yemen - but he wasn't seen as a key player.

'He strives to be candid'

The response to the Snowden avalanche, which required coordination across the
intelligence community and a grasp of surveillance law, moved Litt closer to the
center of events. Part prosecutor and part defense attorney, Litt has attacked
Snowden's motives and actions while making no acknowledgment that spy agencies
overstepped.

"He doesn't strive to be popular, he strives to be candid," John C. Inglis,
deputy director of the NSA, said in an interview. "He's courageous about that.
He's pure-hearted."

Some lawmakers have found Litt's manner off-putting at best. Rogers, the
chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, made clear to the DNI's office
last summer that Litt was no longer welcome before his panel.

"The committee has not found Bob to be the most effective witness to explain
complex legal and policy issues," said a U.S. government official familiar with
the falling-out. Rogers was also bothered that Litt faulted the committee for
not doing more to share information about the surveillance programs with other
members, unaware that doing so would have violated committee rules.

Rogers declined to comment for this report. Litt would say only that he has
"tremendous respect for Rogers. I think he's done a fabulous job, and I've told
him this to his face."

Litt's testimony before other committees has been conciliatory in tone but often
tailored in legalistic fashion to obscure broader truths. Asked in July about
location data emitted by cellphones, Litt said, "We're not collecting that under
Section 215." In a speech days later, he said, "We don't randomly target e-mail
addresses or collect all foreign individuals' e-mails under 702."

Snowden's revelations later showed that the NSA was gathering both kinds of
information in massive quantities, although the caveats of Litt's statements -
and references to surveillance law - made them technically accurate.

Litt's latest foray, his letters to the New York Times and the New Yorker
magazine, made even some supporters wince at the renewed attempt to defend
Clapper's testimony last year that the NSA was not gathering data on millions of
Americans.

Clapper's office had been warned that he would be questioned on the subject by
Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.). Litt said that the office prepared talking points for
the director based on that warning, but he could not explain why Clapper hadn't
seen them.

As part of his 2009 confirmation, Litt was asked what he would do if the DNI
ever made a significant public statement that was erroneous or misleading. "If I
was not satisfied with the director's explanations and could not convince the
director to correct the statement, I would consider resigning," Litt said at the
time.

In his interview, Litt said he never considered doing so after Clapper's
testimony last spring. "I was satisfied with the director's explanation," Litt
said, citing only one regret. "If I had this to do all over again . . . I would
recommend the DNI send a classified letter to the committee correcting the
matter."

Clapper did send such a letter months later, but only after his false testimony
had been exposed by Snowden. Asked why Clapper hadn't done so sooner, Litt said:
"Because his general counsel, among others, didn't recommend it to him."

greg.miller@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


