                             2588 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 8, 2014 Wednesday 8:14 PM EST

Another day, another terrorist

BYLINE: Al Kamen

SECTION: A section; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 870 words


Scrambling to find a belated Christmas gift for someone you overlooked? Someone
who remembered to send you an excellent present? Shop no more!

We've got a possible gift for that special someone: Yes, it's the 2014
Counterterrorism Calendar, the 12th edition of the daily planner, which has been
issued for the past 10 years by the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) -
and before that by another government agency.

The cover is a bit grim. It's a photo from the Boston Marathon bombing. Agency
officials struggled with the photo selection because they wanted something more
positive in light of the agency's 10th anniversary, one official told us.
"However, we cannot escape the harsh reality that, as proud as we are of our
part in many foiled plots, Boston still happened," he said.

It's in daily calendar format with, on the left, pictures, maps and data on
"most wanted" terrorists and organizations, starting with al-Qaeda co-founder
Ayman al-Zawahiri- for whom there's a $25 million bounty - down to Abdul Rahman
Yasin, who was involved in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. (He's worth only
$5 million.) You can pick up $10 million for info about Yasin al-Suri, who
raises money and recruits for al-Qaeda. Problem is, he's hanging out in Iran
these days and it might be tough to get him.

Longtime calendar favorite Anas al-Libi, worth $5 million for his involvement in
the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, is not listed because
he's resting in the slammer in New York. He was picked up in Tripoli on Oct. 5
by a Delta Force team. Unfortunately, another favorite, Faker Ben Abdelazziz
Boussora, is still at large, despite "his protruding ears" and "a serious
pituitary gland illness."

The right page of the planner has great factoids. For example, did you know that
Wednesday, or 6 Rabi' al-Awwal in the Islamic calendar, is the 16th anniversary
of the sentencing of Yasin's co-conspirator Ramzi Yousef? He got life plus 240
years in the bombing.

And did you know the day in 2000 on which Shining Path leader Carlos Fernandez
was captured in Peru? That's right, Oct. 4 (or 9 Dhu al-Hijjah).

Lots of people in the calendar's "captured or killed" section, including Anwar
al-Awlaki, are listed as "killed in an explosion." Hmm. Well, explosions are
sometimes known to occur after drone strikes.

The calendars are given as resource guides for anti-terrorism folks, especially
those working in the field. You can get an online version on the NCTC Web site.
Budget cuts have reduced the number printed. But we're told the Government
Printing Office, for the first time, will be selling the 5-by-9-inch spiral
version online starting in a few weeks.

If you want one real quick, though, you've got to know someone in the biz.

A man of conviction

Senate candidates need a broad range of qualifications. A domestic-violence
assault conviction may not be one of them.

Still, Erick Bennett, a political consultant in Portland, Maine, who's running
in the GOP primary against Sen. Susan Collins, says his 2003 conviction for
attacking his wife - the couple have since divorced - attests to his "guts and
integrity," the Bangor Daily News reported. He called her claims "fraudulent."

Bennett, in a news conference last week, said he was "railroaded" by the court
after he turned down a plea agreement.

"The fact that I have been jailed repeatedly for not agreeing to admit to
something I didn't do should speak to the fact as to how much guts and integrity
I have," he said, vowing to bring "that same" integrity to Washington if
elected.

Even so, the odds that he, or any challenger, can beat Collins in November are
slim at best. Let's recall that in 2008, Obama demolished Sen. John McCainin
Maine by 17 points. At the same time, incumbent Sen. Collins routed her
challenger, six-term Rep. Tom Allen, a popular Democrat and one of the state's
two House members, by 23 points. She even got 23,000 votes more than Obama.

ISO a Quality nominee

No white smoke yet from the White House on a pick to succeed Nancy Sutleyat the
helm of the Council on Environmental Quality, our colleague Juliet Eilperintells
us.

The leading candidates to succeed Sutley, who is leaving next month as top
environmental policy adviser, include Mindy Lubber, president of Ceres, a
nonprofit enviro group; former Energy Department official Dan Reicher, who's now
executive director of the Steyer-Taylor Center for Energy Policy and Finance at
Stanford University; and former deputy interior secretary David Hayes, who's now
a visiting lecturer at Stanford Law and a senior fellow at the William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation.

Others are in the mix, we're told.

There remains a possibility that former White House senior energy and climate
adviser Heather Zichalcould return. President Obamawas said to have asked her to
stay on - and the possibility of her taking the CEQ job was said to have been
discussed in order to get her to stay.

Obama is a big fan, though it is unclear whether Zichal would want to reenter
the administration. And you can expect new White House counselor John Podesta,
whose portfolio includes climate change, to weigh in on the decision.

al.kamen@washpost.com

The blog: www.washingtonpost.com/intheloop. Twitter: @InTheLoopWP.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


