                             2547 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                    November 27, 2013 Wednesday 8:13 PM EST

Whether Justice memos should be public at issue

BYLINE: Ann E. Marimow

SECTION: A section; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 750 words


A federal appeals court on Tuesday considered whether the Justice Department
must make public a legal opinion on the scope of the FBI's surveillance
authority.

The case marks the first time that the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C.
Circuit has addressed whether opinions from the government's legal advisers must
be disclosed under the Freedom of Information Act.

At issue is a January 2010 memo from the Justice Department's Office of Legal
Counsel that allowed the FBI to informally gather customer phone call records
from telecommunications companies. The office, according to court filings, found
that under certain circumstances, the bureau could collect the data "without
legal process," such as a court order or subpoena, or a "qualifying emergency."

The FBI has said that the bureau stopped the controversial practice in 2006, but
the issue of secret government surveillance has taken on renewed significance
after it was revealed this past summer that the National Security Agency had
obtained billions of domestic phone call records. The broad collection of
Americans' data was authorized by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court,
which operates in secret.

Mark Rumold, a lawyer for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the civil
liberties organization that brought the lawsuit, called the FBI memo a
"blossoming example of secret surveillance law" and said that the legal
rationale in the memo could still be used by other intelligence agencies.

"When the government is allowed to continue to interpret the law in secret, that
creates problems for the privacy rights of Americans," he said.

Attorneys for the government argued - and at least one judge on Tuesday's
three-member panel agreed - that the role of the Office of Legal Counsel is to
help the attorney general provide legal advice to the president, not to set
policy.

Requiring the Justice Department to release the memo, the lawyers said in court
filings, would "chill" free-flowing discussions inside the government and hinder
the office's ability to provide "confidential legal advice to federal agencies
as they develop their policies."

The Justice Department characterized the 11-page memo in court filings as
"simply advice" to the FBI with no "legal effect on the rights or obligations of
telephone companies or their customers."

Judge David B. Sentelle agreed that the memo was part of the "deliberative
process" and protected by a legal privilege designed to promote candid,
confidential discussions regarding policy decisions.

"The office is there to give advice," he said, skeptically quizzing Rumold.
"You're saying they can't give advice unless it's publicly disclosed. That
doesn't make sense."

Under questioning by newly appointed Judge Sri Srinivasan, Justice Department
lawyer Daniel Tenny conceded that federal agencies do not typically ignore
advice from the Office of Legal Counsel. But he noted that the memo at issue in
this case was not adopted by the FBI, but was used as a justification for its
past practice when the bureau was being questioned by the department's inspector
general.

Judge Harry T. Edwards followed up, asking, "Couldn't they try to do it again?"

The FBI turned to the Office of Legal Counsel in late 2009 in response to
criticism from the inspector general about its practice of informally obtaining
telephone toll information by sending so-called exigent letters to
telecommunications providers. The bureau stopped using emergency letters to
track phone call information in 2006.

The Office of Legal Counsel has in the past voluntarily released some of its
opinions. The Obama administration, for instance, disclosed memos about the
CIA's interrogation program during the George W. Bush administration. But the
office also has been criticized for not making public memos that provide the
legal rationale for controversial government programs such as the use of drones
for targeted killings.

In court filings, the civil liberties organization wrote that the office's
opinions are "conclusive and binding interpretations of law" and essentially
represent the legal positions of the executive branch.

A lower court judge, however, found that the government properly withheld the
memo under an exception to the Freedom of Information Act. The Electronic
Frontier Foundation appealed and was joined in an amicus brief by several other
organizations, including the American Civil Liberties Union, Citizens for
Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, and The Washington Post.

ann.marimow@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


