                              25 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       March 25, 2014 Tuesday 2:27 AM EST

Unmanned future: Drones to clean your gutter, tend to crops and take aerial
selfies?

BYLINE: Dan Zak

SECTION: Style; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1229 words


The drone settles back on the cracked asphalt after a brief ascent into the
lower reaches of the suburban troposphere. ¶ "Yeah, it flies," says Christopher
Vo, director of education for the D.C. Area Drone User Group. His thumbs release
the remote-control levers that animate the three-pound vehicle, which is the
size of a large pizza. ¶ "I want to give it a try," says the quadcopter's
creator, Herndon resident Karl Arnold, a telecom sales engineer who got into
drone building as a hobby. "Just get it up a few feet." ¶ "Right now?" Vo says,
a bit incredulous. "Have you flown in the simulator?" ¶ "For two minutes." ¶ Vo
hesitates, then hands over the controls. "All right, everyone, step back," he
says. ¶ "My car is right there," says Frank Bi, a digital news developer for
"PBS NewsHour," as he backs up toward a large trash bin.¶ "Mine, too," Vo says,
looking at Arnold and then at the contraption. "It's yourdrone."

¶ It is indeed his drone, which Arnold built in about nine hours over a couple
of weeks, with help from fellow drone enthusiasts. They're a niche group, for
now, living in the world they think we will all be inhabiting before too long:
using drones for fun and convenience, like any other toy or gadget, and for the
betterment of society.

We're living in drone-y times. Reports surfaced this month that Facebook is
considering purchasing a drone production company. In December, Jeffrey P.
Bezos, who founded Amazon and owns The Washington Post, made headlines by
suggesting that Amazon could deliver orders by drone within five years. Three
weeks later, the Federal Aviation Administration announced a multiyear process
to study and test the application of unmanned aerial vehicles in the various
climates and geographies of the United States.

At the drone user group gathering, Arnold activates the four propellers, which
make a sound like an electric weed cutter or a mutant wasp. He nudges a lever on
the remote control, and the drone hiccups upward an inch, tilts back and skids
on the ground. "Okay, maybe I'll wait," Arnold says, humbled by the sensitivity
and latent power of his creation.

"Have fun," Vo says, heading back inside Nova Labs, a nonprofit "makerspace"
hidden in a Reston office-park labyrinth. "Don't break it. Don't break other
things with it."

Outside the labs, at least one car bears a bumper sticker that says, "My Other
Vehicle Is Unmanned." Inside the labs Sunday, the drone group's all-day building
workshop is underway. Thirty people crowd two small rooms with folding tables
and every tool imaginable. They talk with great energy about the unmanned aerial
vehicles in front of them, which are in various stages of assembly. There is
buzzing and beeping and the odor of soldered wiring. Men walk in with plastic
tubs of parts as if they're meeting up in a friend's garage to break things and
make their mothers nervous.

Speaking of which, Leslie Shampaine arrives shortly after the 10 a.m. start to
drop off her 15-year-old son, Brahm Soltes, who is building a drone for a class
project at Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School. She found the group online and
connected Brahm in order to make sure the drone parts - which average about $500
for a basic model - were actually put to use.

"I didn't want them to be sitting around the house," she says before leaving.
(She'll be one of just two women - both mothers passing through - who will enter
the space Sunday.)

Hovering nearby the high school sophomore is Ken White, here for higher-altitude
reasons than a class project. White is an enterprise architect for the
Department of Homeland Security.

"I'm on a mission, but it's low," he says, referring to the priority of his
attendance, which is his way of absorbing the mechanics of civilian drone work
so that he can integrate it into his own. "My belief is you have to walk the
walk and build a skill set."

The D.C. Area Drone User Group is the largest of its kind, with about 1,000
members, and the monthly workshop is an open forum for experts and rookies to
learn, build and share best practices. Other group events include regular
"fly-ins," where users congregate on open terrain to launch their drones, and
occasional competitions such as a search-and-rescue challenge scheduled for May,
when organizers will stage a missing-person scenario and drone users will hunt
for photographic aerial evidence.

The people gathered at Nova Labs are hobbyists who get a kick out of extending
their reach to the sky as well as businessmen who see a golden opportunity to
robotically monitor agriculture or deliver products. Think of the drone
possibilities for wedding photography and videography, they say, although the
average news consumer might picture drones delivering Hellfire missiles into
foreign wedding convoys, as was the case in December in Yemen, where a U.S.
strike by an unmanned aerial vehicle killed more than a dozen revelers.

"You hear the word 'drone,' and everybody has that military connotation," says
Ken Druce, an avionics systems engineer from Leonardtown, Md., who makes the
drive to Nova Labs several times a week. "There's no delineation between the
light quadcopters here and the 100-pound drones" made by private contractors for
military surveillance and offense. "The applications are different."

Suffice it to say that none of the devices (or people) here at Nova Labs look
threatening, although users are aware of the public's concern about privacy and
safety as well as the FAA's attempts to regulate the use of personal drones.
Drone technology still has some maturing to do, and its relationship to
telecommunications and aviation needs to be streamlined and solidified, says
telecom executive Peter Lewis, who dropped into the Sunday workshop as a
self-described drone novice interested in commercializing the technology.

"Is a drone going to drop on people's heads on K Street during rush hour?" Lewis
says, a notepad in hand as he meanders between work spaces. "Is it going to
disrupt a symphony at Wolf Trap or buzz a funeral at Arlington Cemetery? That's
what's going to give this thing a black eye, unless we all figure out these
rules of flying."

The D.C. Area Drone User Group hopes to help figure out the rules, and it will
continue to bring the curious into its fold and fantasize about using civilian
drone fleets for everything from crop dusting to crisis mapping.

"I think probably one in five people will have their own drone" eventually, says
the group's president, Timothy Reuter, who is leaving his government job next
month to focus on his drone start-up company. "It's going to be a great
accessory for people who want to have a system to automatically check their
gutters or to document their lives. I can see people doing aerial selfies. It's
an extension of that same philosophy: Let's see the world and document your
adventures from a new perspective."

The collaborative energy in Nova Labs among teenagers, PhD students, federal
technicians and robotics junkies feels like a preview of communal tinkering on a
much larger scale. Imagine, for a moment, a world in which we have ceased
staring down at our smartphones and started looking up all the time at that
buzzing airborne extension of ourselves.

"Did you get up flying?" Druce asks Arnold as he leaves with his quadcopter.
"You've stabilized?"

"Yeah," Arnold says.

"Good. I'll see you after your next crash."

dan.zak@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


