                             2573 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 27, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

The pictures tell his story

BYLINE: Ann Hornaday

SECTION: ; Pg. T26

LENGTH: 641 words


This has been such an exceptional year in movies that calling a movie "perfectly
likable" or even "good" starts to sound like faint praise. Which means that "The
Secret Life of Walter Mitty," Ben Stiller's contemporary adaptation of the James
Thurber story, may well get lost in the shuffle of its betters. But that
shouldn't detract from the strengths of a film that, while imperfect, has much
to recommend it.

As the title character, Stiller brings his jut-jawed, laser-blue glare to a
character who starts off as something of a passive cipher. As a longtime manager
for "negative assets" at Life magazine, Walter processes the magazine's
photographers' celluloid  - in other words, he's an obsolete guy working in an
obsolete media platform within a soon-to-be all-digital art form. The film's
opening scene - wherein Walter hesitantly "winks" at a woman on an online dating
forum - makes it clear: This is a man working at Life, rather than living it.

As a bland, ineffectual drone harboring fantasies of romance and adventure,
Stiller's Walter is without a doubt a direct descendent from Thurber's 1939
creation. But, working with Steve Conrad's screenplay, Stiller eventually takes
enormous liberties with the story's plot, which in his hands takes increasingly
digressive and literal flights of fancy. Thurber purists will be appalled, but,
as yet another tale of a man coping with the 21st-century onslaught of
technology, downsizing and alienation, "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty" feels
very much of its time, cinematically and otherwise.

Because the film is so rooted in present-day anxieties, the filmmakers don't
need to underline, italicize and repeat its message - crystallized in the
oft-repeated Life motto, about seeing things "thousands of miles away," "hidden
behind walls" and "dangerous to come to." The digressions that Stiller takes as
a director don't always bear fruit, and the movie - in which the main plot
driver is Walter's nascent love for a co-worker played by Kristen Wiig - ends
with an odd whimper, especially considering the spectacular set pieces that have
gone before.

But there are moments of real value in "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty." Conrad
sneaks in lots of clever puns on Life, both humorous and dark, and the movie
benefits from a bright, attractive visual design that lingers as lovingly on its
most colorful interludes as on the magazine's most iconic black-and-white
portraits. When a company arrives to oversee the end of the print edition (an
effort headed by a tiresomely one-note jerk played by Adam Scott), scenes of the
wall-size pictures being de-accessioned suggest an entire history and cultural
patrimony being carelessly discarded.

And there are passages of astonishing beauty in the film, which not only stages
impressively produced scenes of daredeviltry within Walter's imagination, but
also situates him against backdrops of magnificent natural scenery. One scene in
particular - involving the David Bowie song "Space Oddity," an errant helicopter
and a mad dash for redemption - looks for all the world as if he's flying
directly into a Rockwell Kent painting. (The MacGuffin coincides with a charming
cameo appearance from a flawlessly cast actor in top self-effacing form.)

The unevenness of "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty," and Stiller's recessive
characterization of the title character, keep it from being an all-out
crowd-pleaser. As a similar exploration of being in the moment and staying
there, Spike Jonze's "Her," also opening this week, is far more subtle and fully
realized. Still, there's a winsome, attaboy appeal to "The Secret Life of Walter
Mitty" that deserves to be honored. It's a perfectly likable movie, and
sometimes that's good enough.

ann.hornaday@washpost.com

PG. At area theaters. Contains some crude comments, profanity and action
violence. 114 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


