                             2562 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 13, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 381 words


Vigil for gun victimsAbout 800 people gathered at Washington National Cathedral
to remember those killed in massacres. A3

Navy corruption scandalAn NCIS agent accused of taking bribes has agreed to
plead guilty and cooperate with investigators. A9

science

The Hubble Space Telescopeobserved signs of geysers erupting from Jupiter's moon
Europa, representing the best evidence yet that it has a deep subsurface ocean.
A8

Education

Schoolchildrenare learning computer coding this week in a nationwide campaign
embraced by President Obama. A2

the nation

The top highway safety official resigned as the Transportation Department
continued a leadership shake-up. A7

A federal panel recommended lifting protections for grizzly bears in and around
Yellowstone National Park. A5

The Redskins' name should be changed, the top U.S. civil rights coalition said.
A6

Child pornographywas found on the computer hard drive of a senator's fired chief
of staff, court documents said. A7

the world

The Obama administration cracked down on firms accused of violating Iran
sanctions even as it tried to keep lawmakers from imposing new curbs. A15

Yemeni security officialssaid 13 people were killed when U.S. drone missiles
struck a convoy traveling to a wedding party. A12

Secretary of State John F. Kerry tried to reassure Israelis and Palestinians on
a border security proposal for the Jordan Valley. A12

the economy

November retail salesrose the most in five months, boosted by increasing
consumer confidence. A18

JPMorgan Chaseis nearing a settlement with the federal government to pay $2
billion related to the Bernard L. Madoff fraud. A19

Hilton Worldwide's sharesrose 7.5 percent in its market debut. A20

Bank of Americaagreed to pay $131.8 million over mortgage securities before the
financial crisis. A20

the region

Ex-Beauvoir teacher Eric Tothpleaded guilty to producing child pornography of
students and other youngsters. B1

Virginia Gov. Robert F. McDonnell(R) proposed $11 million for a slavery heritage
site in Richmond. B5

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


