                             2546 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 24, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

China declares new air defense zone, raising tension with Japan

BYLINE: Chico Harlan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 923 words


Beijing declares new air defense zone in East China Sea

The move adds another dimension to the feud with Japan over the control of
maritime territory.

SEOUL - China said Saturday that noncommercial aircraft entering a broad zone
over the East China Sea must first identify themselves to Beijing, at the risk
of facing "defensive emergency measures" by Chinese armed forces.

China's establishment of an "air defense identification zone," announced by the
country's Ministry of National Defense, adds a new dimension to the simmering
territorial dispute with Japan and raises the chance of armed conflict.

The eight uninhabited islands at the center of the dispute fall within China's
new aerial zone. Based on guidelines that China's Defense Ministry released
Saturday, any Japanese aircraft flying around those islands would need to submit
their flight plans to China's Foreign Ministry or civil aviation administration.
They would also need to maintain radio communication with Chinese authorities.

China did not detail what measures it would take against aircraft that disobey,
but defense experts say its military could scramble jets or even shoot down
planes it views as a threat.

The country's air force conducted its first air patrol later Saturday, after the
establishment of the new zone, with two large scouts leading the mission and
early-warning aircraft and fighters providing support and cover, according to
the official Xinhua News Agency.

"The patrol is in line with international common practices, and normal
international flights will not be affected," said Shen Jinke, spokesman for the
air force. He said the Chinese armed forces would take measures to deal with any
air threats to protect the security of the country's airspace.

Numerous countries, including the United States and Japan, have air defense
identification zones of their own. The zones are established to help countries
track or monitor aircraft nearing their territories, but in this case, the zones
of Japan and China overlap. Security experts worry that China's new zone could
increase the likelihood of a mishap that sparks a wider armed conflict, drawing
in the United States, which is treaty-bound to protect Japan.

China's move makes "the already dangerous area surrounding the [disputed]
islands even more ripe for an inadvertent collision," said Paul Haenle, director
of the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy at Tsinghua University in
Beijing.

In a statement, the Japanese Foreign Ministry said, "The airspace the Chinese
side established today is totally unacceptable and extremely regrettable as it
includes the Japanese territorial airspace over the Senkaku Islands, an inherent
territory of Japan.

"Unilaterally establishing such airspace and restricting flights in the area is
extremely dangerous as it may lead to miscalculation in the area," the statement
said.

U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel expressed strong concern over the Chinese
decision. "We view this development as a destabilizing attempt to alter the
status quo in the region. This unilateral action increases the risk of
misunderstanding and miscalculations," Hagel said in a statement Saturday. "This
announcement by the People's Republic of China will not in any way change how
the United States conducts military operations in the region."

A Chinese Defense Ministry spokesman, Yang Yujun, said China had created its
zone "with the aim of safeguarding state sovereignty, territorial land and air
security," according to a transcript on the ministry's Web site.

The aerial zone does not cover the South China Sea, where China is engaged in
several other territorial disputes, notably with the Philippines and Vietnam.
But Yang said China will establish additional zones "at the right moment after
necessary preparations are completed."

The struggle between China and Japan over control of several tiny land masses in
the East China Sea escalated last summer, when Tokyo purchased three of the
islets from a private landowner. Since then, the neighbors have been locked in a
cat-and-mouse game around the islands, with each side sending ships to ward off
the other.

But increasingly, the confrontation is happening above the waters, not just in
them. Both sides have recently scrambled fighter jets, and two months ago
Japan's government said an unidentified drone flew near the islands, the first
such incident of its kind.

Although leaders on both sides have talked about wanting to repair badly frayed
ties, little progress has been made. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe says
that the islands are an "inherent" part of Japanese territory and that the
validity of its claims isn't up for debate. Japan has increased its military
spending, with plans to beef up forces around its perimeter islands. Chinese
defense experts, meantime, say the country finally has the military power to
make a play for contested territory that China controlled centuries ago.

"If China is to implement fully the policy of its air defense identification
zone, there will be an increasing likelihood of conflict and confrontation in
the air" between Japan and China, said Zhou Yongsheng, a specialist in
Sino-Japanese issues at the University of International Relations in Beijing.
"But I think China shouldn't be afraid of conflicts, because we've been
suppressed by Japan for so many years. We should safeguard our sovereign
interest."

chico.harlan@washpost.com

Simon Denyer, Liu Liu and Guo Chen in Beijing contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


