                             2535 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 8, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 396 words


Adding up the impasseThe government shutdown cost $2 billion in lost
productivity from furloughed employees, the OMB said. A4

GDP's deceptive bounceSigns of economic weakness lie beneath a new report of
faster-than-expected growth over the summer. A16

the nation

The Senate voted to establish federal protections for the nation's gay and
lesbian workers. A2

Edward Snowdenwas said to have conned passwords out of NSA co-workers to access
some of the classified material he leaked. A4

Reports of sexual assaults in the military increased by 46 percent in the past
fiscal year, the Pentagon said. A3

The FAA presented what it called a "road map" to put drones in U.S. skies after
years of testing at six yet-to-be-chosen sites. A4

the world

The Pakistani Taliban selected as its new leader a hard-line militant who had
ordered the shooting of the teen education advocate Malala Yousafzai. A10

Japan'sdamaged nuclear plant is set to take a  groundbreaking step in a cleanup
expected to last decades. A14

the economy

J.C. Penney reported the first annual increase in store sales since 2011 and
said online salesalso rose. A17

Competitionis forcing Whole Foods Market to adjust its longtime strategy of not
competing on price. A17

Taxpayersare close to breaking even on the government's bailouts of Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac. A17

The Energy Department failed to disclose its concerns about a green-tech company
that won federal funding but later filed for bankruptcy. A20

the region

Workwas performed at Virginia Gov. Robert F. McDonnell's home by the brother of
a businessman whose relationship with McDonnell is the subject of a federal
probe. B1

A ban on food and beverage containers made of plastic foam is among
environmental initiatives that Mayor Vincent C. Gray submitted to the D.C.
Council. B1

Three armed menburst into a Montgomery County home and confronted three
residents, leaving one dead, authorities said. B3

Authoritiesin Baltimore launched a massive strike against the Black Guerrilla
Family gang, indicting 48 suspects. B4

sports

The Capitalsbeat the Wild, 3-2, in a shootout, stretching their winning streak
to four. D1

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


