                             2539 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 14, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 324 words


Security fearsEven as relief efforts in the Philippines picked up pace, typhoon
survivors were worried for their lives as the law-and-order situation
deteriorated. A9

the nation

A TSA program to screen air passengers for suspicious behavior hasn't proved
effective, auditors said. A3

Guns made with 3-D printers are an increasing cause of concern among federal law
enforcement officials. A3

the economy

The United States produced more crude oil in October than it imported for the
first time since early 1995, the Energy Information Administration said. A10

Financial incentives for doctors may be driving some of the rapid rise in spinal
fusion surgery, a government study showed. A6

Gasoline priceshave fallen to their lowest level in 33 months, dropping 55 cents
a gallon since February. A11

Appleconfirmed that Italy is reviewing the firm's tax returns amid claims it has
not paid everything it owes. A14

the world

Drone combat missions may eventually be scaled back by more than 25 percent, the
Air Force's top commander said. A8

The United States formally designated the Nigerian Islamist militant
organizations Boko Haram and Ansaru as terrorist groups. A9

the region

An Air Force colonel who led a sex-assault branch was cleared of accosting a
woman in Arlington. B1

Federal investigators are questioning the District's settlement with a
businessman at the center of a probe into Mayor Vincent C. Gray's 2010 campaign.
B1

Prince William police rounded up 31 alleged dealers of prescription pills or
heroin and charged 10 others. B1

With temperatures falling, local governments and charities are stepping up
efforts to help the homeless. B1

A dangling cable extended Red Line commutes Wednesday morning, some by hours. B3

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


