                             2676 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 26, 2014 Saturday 3:58 AM EST

virtual astronauts

BYLINE: T. Rees Shapiro

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 843 words


Students from around the world explored the surface of Mars on Friday, examining
the craggy outcrops of the Martian horizon and rocks smoothed by waters that
once flowed on the Red Planet's surface.

No, they weren't actually onthe surface of Mars, but it was the next-best thing.
Students from the District, Houston, New Jersey, Buenos Aires and Managua,
Nicaragua, joined in on a virtual field trip with NASA experts, looking at
images beamed back from the rover Curiosity as part of an event that helped open
this weekend's USA Science and Engineering Festival at the Walter E. Washington
Convention Center.

The festival - which is free and open to the public - features an array of
hands-on science experiments, enormous futuristic machines, atomic-particle
games, drones, light shows and countless educational exhibits.

Friday's preview attracted hundreds of students, including Tyshoun Barber, an
eighth-grader at the District's Kramer Middle School. Barber was among a group
of youngsters learning about the rover from NASA scientists who helped design
and build Curiosity, the nuclear-powered robot equipped with lasers than can zap
rocks more than 20 feet away.

Barber and students from around the world were able to join together online
through a Google video chat, and they examined astronaut's gloves, played with
models of robots and rovers, and pored over photographs of Mars and images of
Earth from space.

Barber said he wants to visit Mars some day and said he'd take along one thing:
a dove.

"I'd bring a dove with me to keep in mind that Earth is still my home," said
Barber, 14. "It's a symbol of peace."

NASA engineer Lisa May said the agency's latest efforts seek to broaden
scientific understanding of Mars, the fourth planet in line with the sun and
Earth's closest planetary neighbor.

May, a leader of NASA's Mars program, said that early in her career, Mars was
known as little more than "a formless ball of red stuff." During the past
decade, scientists have uncovered significant evidence suggesting that Mars
might have been habitable to life as we know it. May said that analysis of data
from Curiosity show that lakes on Mars once had water so pure that humans could
drink it through a straw.

Jim Green, NASA's planetary science division director, said that such findings
make scientists confident that they one day will prove life beyond Earth could
exist or has existed in our solar system.

"We're on the precipice of discovery," Green said. "I think our best bet is at
Mars."

On the trail are two rovers operating on the Martian surface, including
Opportunity, which landed in 2004, and Curiosity, which touched down in 2012.
Standing seven feet tall and weighing 2,000 pounds, Curiosity is equipped with
state-of-the-art sensors and cameras that capture the landscape in fine detail.
The robot, which cost $2.5 billion to develop, already has covered more than
five kilometers of Mars in its exploration of the dry and arid planet, which is
about half the size of Earth.

The students on Friday learned that Curiosity's recent measurements indicated a
maximum temperature of 6 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, relatively mild
considering that the coldest days on Mars reach 225 degrees below zero.

Green said that what surprised many NASA scientists about Mars is its
similarities to Earth. Mars once had clouds and weather. There were once vast
bodies of water.

"If we had microbes from Earth planted there they would grow, multiply and
survive," Green said, noting that mounting evidence suggests that life once
existed on Mars. But then something happened, Green said: Martian climate
change.

John Feeley, a deputy assistant secretary of state for Western Hemisphere
affairs, said the virtual field trip showed how international relations are
crucial for future space endeavors.

"We live in a globalized world," Feeley said. "Not one country or society will
have the answers to global warming or the mysteries of space."

Many of the students taking part in the discussion Friday asked Green about the
Martian environment and whether humans will one day bounce across its surface.
[Because of  the low effect of gravity on Mars, a 100-pound person on Earth
would weigh only 38 pounds there.]

Green said that NASA is drafting plans to send another rover to Mars by 2020.
This time, the robot will drill into the surface, retrieve core samples and
scoop up rocks that one day will be rocketed back to Earth for a hands-on
examination.

By 2030, NASA hopes to send humans to Mars. But it's a long trip. Depending on
its orbital position, Mars is, on average, about 140 million miles from Earth.
It likely will take two years to make the round trip. Once there, Green said
that the astronauts will investigate the planet's geology, seeking clues that
could solve some of the mysteries of the early cosmos.

Feeley said those first Earth visitors to Mars could be students who are now the
same age as Barber.

If  trends hold, Feeley said, those historic interplanetary explorers probably
will "take a selfie and send it back to Earth."

t.shapiro@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


