                             2635 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        March 2, 2014 Sunday 4:46 AM EST

Pakistani Taliban announces cease-[#xfb01]re, says it wants talks

BYLINE: Riaz Khan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 464 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan - The Pakistani Taliban announced Saturday that the group
will observe a one-month cease-fire as part of efforts to negotiate a peace deal
with the government, injecting new life into a foundering peace process.

Spokesman Shahidullah Shahid said in a statement e-mailed to reporters that the
top leadership of the militant group has instructed all of its units to comply
with the cease-fire.

"Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan has initiated talks with the government with
sincerity and for good purpose," Shahid said, referring to the group by its
formal name.

The leader of the government's negotiating team, Irfan Sadiqui, praised the
cease-fire announcement on Pakistan's Geo Television, saying the government will
review any written document from the Taliban about it.

"Today, we are seeing a big breakthrough," Sadiqui said.

In recent weeks, Pakistani jets and helicopters have been striking militant
hideouts in the northwest. Previous efforts at negotiations broke down when a
militant faction announced it had killed 23 Pakistani troops.

The Pakistani Taliban has been trying for years to overthrow the government and
establish its own hard-line form of Islam across Pakistan. Tens of thousands of
people have died in militant attacks.

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has long promoted negotiations over military
operations as a way to end the ongoing crisis. His efforts gained traction this
year when both sides announced that negotiating teams had held initial meetings.
But negotiations fell apart after the deaths of the 23 Pakistani troops, and
Sharif has been under pressure to retaliate for any Taliban violence.

Critics of the peace process say militants have used previous negotiations to
simply regroup. They also question whether there is room to negotiate with
militants who do not recognize the Pakistani constitution. In the past the
militants have called for the removal of all military forces in the tribal areas
as well as an end to U.S. drone strikes.

A temporary cease-fire could be difficult to ensure. The Pakistani Taliban is
not a unified organization, and some of the factions are not believed to support
peace talks. Violence earlier Saturday showed how difficult it could be to
enforce a cease-fire, let alone forge a peace agreement.

Two bombs exploded minutes apart in northwestern Pakistan, striking tribal
police assigned to guard polio workers and killing 11, police said. No one
claimed responsibility for the two separate bombings, but anti-polio teams and
their guards have been frequently targeted in Pakistan by Islamist militants.

Also Saturday, a bomb targeting security forces in the southwestern province of
Baluchistan killed three soldiers and wounded six, the paramilitary Frontier
Corps said.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


