                             2657 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       March 30, 2014 Sunday 11:00 PM EST

McLean students and parents make a caring community

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 322 words


I was apprehensive after reading the March 24 Style article "Pushing for a
course correction," on McLean Parent-Teacher-Student Association President Wilma
Bowers, for whom I have great respect. I understand Ms. Bowers's perspective
that McLean is too focused on student achievement, but I worried the article
might invite hyperbolic and vitriolic commentary.

Sure enough, Eleanor Dyment's March 27 letter ["For a better school-life
balance"] portrayed McLean as "a soulless, highly competitive suburb filled with
goggle-eyed soccer moms in Lexus SUVs" that is "all about who has the biggest
McMansions, the most expensive cars and kids at Harvard and Yale." Such a
characterization is reprehensible and irresponsible.

Most mornings for the better part of a decade, I have endured a traffic-choked
odyssey on the Beltway from Burke to McLean, where I teach advanced English at
McLean High School and coach for McLean Youth Soccer. Although the 18-mile
journey takes the better part of an hour, I consider the trip well worth it. I
could easily teach and coach in communities closer to my home. But in McLean I
teach bright, energetic and motivated students who are nothing like the
anxiety-riddled drones that it seems to be in vogue to portray them as being.
Furthermore, I have found their parents nearly unanimously to be supportive,
appreciative and generous.

Do these students have a work ethic? Yes. Do they like to succeed? Yes. Will
their parents do whatever they can to help them achieve their goals? Yes.
Somewhere along the line, I guess, these admirable qualities must have become
equated with hyper-vigilance.

I have worked, in some capacity, with thousands of children in McLean over the
years and, consequently, I have dealt with thousands of their parents. This
experience has been profoundly positive and, dreary commute aside, I have come
to view McLean as a second home and its people as a second family.

Marc Cascio, Burke

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


