                             261 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                        July 18, 2014 Friday 1:44 AM EST

How the government's hazy drone rules landed a congressman's wedding in the
news;
Rep. Sean Maloney's videographer is suddenly facing action by the FAA.

BYLINE: Philip Bump

LENGTH: 1142 words


It's perhaps a sign of the times that the same-sex wedding of a member of
Congress should be newsworthy because of legal issues surrounding a drone.

But so it is. Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney (D-N.Y.) got married to his partner on
June 21, and, as one does, hired a photographer to document the scene. That
photographer then hired Parker Gyokeres, an active duty member of the Air Force
who runs an aerial photography company called Propellerheads, to do some aerial
shots of the ceremony. And he did.

Why the headlines? Because the FAA prohibits the use of unmanned drones
("unmanned aircraft systems" in the agency's vernacular) for commercial
purposes. Gyokeres' video was something of a giveaway to the agency, which on
Wednesday announced (indirectly) that it was looking into the situation to
"determine if there was any violation of federal regulations or airspace
restrictions."

One of the interesting twists in this case is that Maloney helps oversee the FAA
as a junior member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee's
Aviation subcommittee. And in case Maloney wasn't aware previously, the FAA's
much-debated and hazy rules around unmanned aircraft could probably use a little
more oversight.

Attorney Brendan Schulman leads the Unmanned Aircraft Systems practice at the
New York law firm Kramer Levin. Speaking with the Post by phone, Schulman was
blunt. "The issue is that there hasn't been any rulemaking with regards to
unmanned air systems," he said, despite it having been on the agency's agenda
for about a decade. "We're now at a point in which there's tremendous interest
in commercial applications" for UAS flights -- "as well as humanitarian
applications." In April of this year, a company called Texas Equusearch retained
Schulman to sue the government to overturn an FAA prohibition on using UAS's to
search for missing people. His obvious goal: Clarify the boundaries of what is
and isn't allowed.

We should explain two things before we continue. First, how the FAA outlines its
existing prohibitions, and, second, what exactly we're talking about when we
refer to a drone or UAS.

We'll start with the second. The word "drone" has become ubiquitous, prompting
two general associations. The first, of course, is silent, plane-like vehicles
that coast above countries in the Mideast, killing people. The second is those
little helicopter-like things that guys in glasses and Dr. Who T-shirts take to
the park on the weekends. But those are two ends of the spectrum. What is at
stake here lies in between.

"It's a hexacopter," Gyokeres, the videographer, told us about the craft he used
for Maloney's wedding when reached by phone. "It's about five times the size of
a DJI Phantom." Gyokeres' UAS is custom-built, 30-inches wide, 14 pounds, and
with six small helicopter blades that propel it. It flies for nine minutes, with
two people operating it: One controls the craft, the other monitors the live
video stream to provide guidance on where it should be flown.

"I am obsessive about safety, which is what the FAA cares about," he said. And
so he follows several rules when flying, including that he maintains
"line-of-sight" with the craft (meaning he can see it) "at all times" and that
the device is restricted in how high it can go. "I have a GPS limiter on my
vehicle that does not allow me to fly higher than 130 meters. It cannot go
higher than 400 feet." (The steeple on the church in the video, he estimated,
was about 100 feet high.)

Which brings us to the FAA's current guidelines. There are at least three
classes of groups that use a UAS in the FAA's eyes. There are hobbyists, who
fall under a 1981 "circular" outlining operating standards. For example: "Do not
operate model aircraft higher than 400 feet above the surface." In June, thanks
in part to confusion over the rules, the agency released "dos and don'ts" for
hobbyists, which includes a "don't" about letting your drone leave your sight.

The second group is public agencies (police forces, for example), that want to
use larger UASs. They can request a Certificate of Waiver or Authorization from
the FAA, and the FAA grants or rejects it. As of last December, there were 545
active certificates in the United States.

Recently, the FAA extended that opportunity to the third group: commercial
operators like Gyokeres. They can now petition the FAA for the right to use a
UAS. But that's a recent development. For those without that approval, the FAA
has cracked down. A recent comment on Gyokeres' video is revelatory. "Great
video, seriously spectacular," a user named Glenn Martin writes. But: "Don't we
know by now not to put these on the Internets for the FAA to try and hit you
with the ban hammer?"

"The typical response is a cease-and-desist letter," Schulman told us. "In a
couple of other cases there have been subpoenas asking for documents or
testimony." He would know: Schulman also represents the respondent, a commercial
videographer like Gyokeres who filmed scenes at the University of Virginia, in a
dispute with the FAA.

"The FAA may take enforcement action against anyone who operates a UAS in a way
that endangers the safety of the national airspace system," a statement from the
FAA provided to the Post reads. While Schulman argues that the agency doesn't
have a regulatory right to crack down on drone operators, given that it hasn't
developed regulations yet, the FAA leverages its authority over the safety of
the airspace. In the case of Schulman's U.Va. client, the threat to safety was
due to the drone's proximity to things that it might hit. It was flown "within
approximately 15 feet of a UVA statue," "within approximately 50 feet of railway
tracks," and "directly towards a two-story UVA building below rooftop level and
made an abrupt climb in order to avoid hitting the building."

Gyokeres is very aware that this is the agency's goal. He explained his various
precautions: having a clear path to a safe landing zone, never flying above
people (he explained where he flew over the reception in the video to meet this
standard), and never letting children near the copter. ("It's straight sorcery
for a child.") "I carry half a million dollars in insurance," he told us. "The
only difference is that the FAA says that since I'm taking a dollar for it I'm
unsafe. I'm unauthorized. I'm unallowed."

In 2012, Congress passed the FAA Modernization and Reform Act which, among other
things, mandated that the FAA "accelerate the integration" of UASs into the
airspace system. Sean Patrick Maloney hadn't yet been elected to Congress; his
predecessor in New York's 18th voted against the bill.

The FAA hasn't contacted Parker Gyokeres yet, but he is ready for them to do so.
"They want to crush me like a bug," he told us. "I say, I'm going to throw
spikes and stink before they step on me."

"I will not go quietly into the night."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


