                             2600 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 16, 2014 Thursday 8:14 PM EST

Karzai says U.S. troops killed 8 Afghan civilians

BYLINE: Sayed Salahuddin;Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 775 words


Karzai says U.S. troops killed eight civilians in Afghanistan

The incident in Parwan province further complicates efforts to conclude a
security agreement.

KABUL - Relations between the U.S. military and Afghan President Hamid Karzai
are being tested once again after he accused American troops of killing eight
civilians, including seven children, during a military operation in eastern
Afghanistan on Wednesday.

According to Karzai and the governor of Parwan province, the incident occurred
about 1 a.m. when U.S. Special Forces attempted to enter a home. A gun battle
ensued, resulting in a coalition airstrike that killed the children and a female
relative in the house, they said.

In a statement, the U.S.-led coalition confirmed that an incident had occurred
during a joint operation by Afghan and coalition forces in an area known for
Taliban activity, some of it linked to the Haqqani network. Officials said the
troops were fired upon "from two compounds" as they hunted militants wanted for
recent attacks on Bagram air base, located north of Kabul.

The firefight that followed became so intense that the international troops
requested airstrikes, coalition officials said. They said at least 10 insurgents
were killed, but they also acknowledged receiving reports of two civilian
deaths.

A coalition soldier also was killed, officials said.

The coalition "regrets that civilians were killed" during the operation, the
statement said.

Although U.S. officials stressed that Afghan soldiers were in the lead during
the operation, the incident further hinders efforts to resolve the impasse over
the signing of a long-term security agreement between the two countries.

The bulk of U.S. and NATO troops are slated to withdraw from Afghanistan by the
end of the year, but the Obama administration hopes to keep a residual force in
the country for counterterrorism missions and to help train the fledgling Afghan
military.

In November, after months of negotiations, both sides finalized  a draft of the
security agreement that would allow up to 15,000 coalition troops to remain in
Afghanistan for 10 years. That force could include 8,000 to 10,000 U.S. troops.

But Karzai has refused to sign the agreement, setting up a high-stakes showdown
with Obama administration and Pentagon officials.

In a series of escalating demands in recent weeks, Karzai has said he will not
sign the deal until coalition forces stop raids and airstrikes that result in
civilian casualties. He also wants the U.S. government to help launch peace
talks with the Taliban and to free all 17 Afghan prisoners from the Guantanamo
Bay military prison in Cuba.

In his statement Wednesday, Karzai lashed out at President Obama, accusing him
of not following through on pledges to limit U.S. military operations in
civilian areas in Afghanistan. In late November, just hours before 2,000 Afghan
tribal and provincial officials endorsed the security agreement, Obama sent
Karzai a letter saying that U.S. forces would enter the homes of Afghans only
under "extraordinary circumstances."

"But the American troops, contrary to all mutual agreements and given assurances
in President Obama's letter, once again resorted to bombing a residential area
and killing  civilians," Karzai said in his statement.

The incident is at least the third in recent weeks in which allegations of
civilian deaths have complicated efforts to win Karzai's backing for the
security deal.

In late November, a suspected drone strike targeting militants in Helmand
province killed a 2-year-old child, provincial officials said. Gen. Joseph F.
Dunford Jr., commander of U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan, quickly
called Karzai to apologize.

Last week, Reuters news service reported that U.S. Marines had accidentally shot
and killed a 4-year-old boy in Helmand, which prompted Karzai's spokesman, Aimal
Faizi, to reiterate that military operations in civilian areas must end for the
security agreement to be signed.

Still, many analysts contend that Karzai is trying to push the matter off onto
his successor.

The Washington Post reported last week that U.S. Ambassador James B. Cunningham,
the lead U.S. negotiator in Afghanistan, recently sent a classified cable saying
he doubts that Karzai will sign the agreement before national elections in
April.

Such a delay could prompt Obama to order the full withdrawal of U.S. forces this
year, even though Western intelligence officials fear the Afghan government
would rapidly collapse without continued coalition assistance.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Craig reported from Islamabad, Pakistan.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


