                             2613 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 2, 2014 Sunday 8:14 PM EST

Risks outside the 'ring of steel'

BYLINE: Aki Peritz;Mieke Eoyang

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 965 words


Olympian Roberto Carceln wouldn't be competing in Sochi if it weren't for his
wife, Kate. She was the one who introduced him to skiing after he gave up elite
surfing in Peru to move to Seattle and marry her. She convinced him that it was
like surfing on frozen water.

When Carceln skis for his native Peru on the cross-country track this month,
however, Kate and their daughter will be at home. Amid reports about the
possibility of terrorist attacks at the Winter Games, they decided it would be
safer that way - and less stressful.

"I'm going to be up training in the mountains, while the family would be down in
the city outside the Olympic rink," Carceln told CNN. "So that puts a lot of
pressure on me as an athlete."

The security threat during the Olympics isn't hypothetical. As has been widely
reported, the Winter Games are being held in a country with an active insurgency
capable of coordinating devastating attacks, including two suicide bombings in
December. In the past seven months, Chechen terrorists have twice issued
statements targeting the Olympics.

But if there's a terrorist attack during the Games, it's far more likely to
happen outside Sochi.

That's because President Vladimir Putin has gone all out to secure the Olympic
villages and venues. His "ring of steel" includes 100,000 police officers,
soldiers and secret service personnel; drones and attack helicopters; and
advanced ground-to-air missile systems. Russia's surveillance state will be in
full force, operating tens of thousands of security cameras and monitoring phone
calls and e-mails. Visitors to the Olympic Villages will have to show
pre-approved "Olympic passports."

While the Olympic sites will be brimming with security, much more vulnerable are
the routes in and out of Sochi. Attacks on transportation are the signature of
Russia's current terrorist nemesis, the Caucasus Emirate. It claimed
responsibility for derailing a high-speed train in 2009, sending a pair of
female suicide bombers to strike Moscow's metro during rush hour in 2010 and
targeting Russia's largest airport in 2011. It has also targeted security
checkpoints, and there will be many on the road to Sochi.

The group may figure that an attack at such a checkpoint, on a bus or on the
railroad tracks would have the same symbolic effect as striking within Sochi
itself.

Air is the most defensible route to the Winter Games, and it's how the majority
of the 15,000 Americans attending the event will get there. One can fly into the
newly expanded Sochi-Adler International Airport from Frankfurt, Istanbul,
Munich, Moscow, St. Petersburg and several smaller Russian cities. Russia's
airports, with their guns, gates and guards, should be relatively safe. But the
planes themselves are vulnerable to shoulder-fired missiles, also known as
man-portable air-defense systems (MANPADS), a weapon terrorist groups have used
to target civilian aircraft. Ominously, Russia in 2012 discovered large weapons
caches near Sochi that included several MANPADS.

On the ground, bus and rail are the primary travel options. Sochi hugs the Black
Sea for 92 miles, and there are only two main arteries into the city: one
highway and one rail line. By road, the nearest intersection is 100 miles
northwest of Sochi along the winding M27 highway, through villages and mountain
switchbacks. And as of Jan. 7, drivers with out-of-town license plates have had
to leave their cars 60 miles away and take shuttle buses in.

The rail line winds up the coast some 75 miles to the town of Tuapse, then
splits off through mountains and into one of Europe's largest primeval forests.
Beyond that point, a spider web of transport hubs, connecting railways, and
sleepy stops in towns and tiny villages links Fortress Sochi to the city of
Krasnodar and the rest of the world. Of course, Winter Games are often held in
hard-to-reach mountain towns, but the journey to Lake Placid, Nagano or
Lillehammer did not wind through terrorist stomping grounds.

Both of these fragile ground-transport ribbons are vulnerable to attack. A
well-placed obstruction on a hairpin turn would delay traffic for hours.
Combined with a terror strike, it would decimate any sense of safety at the
Games, cast a pall over Sochi and shake Putin's image as a man with an iron
grip. Blast roadways and train tracks simultaneously, and one of the largest
sporting events in Russia's history becomes a disaster.

Russian and U.S. security officials are certainly aware of these
vulnerabilities. Russia has informally requested use of the Pentagon's
sophisticated anti-bomb equipment to suppress threats along the roads and rails.
Meanwhile, Matthew Olsen, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, told
the Senate on Wednesday that the greatest threat to the Games is terrorists
hitting "softer targets " around Sochi. The State Department has warned athletes
to avoid wearing Team USA gear outside of Olympic venues. The U.S. military has
positioned two naval ships in the Black Sea and has aircraft on standby in
Germany in case it needs to evacuate Americans quickly.

The Olympics' Closing Ceremonies on Feb. 23 coincide with the 70th anniversary
of Stalin's brutal deportation of the Chechen and Ingush populations from the
Caucasus. Almost 500,000 men, women and children were rounded up in freight
trains and sent to Central Asia. Up to half of them perished along the way.
Terrorists might try to exploit the symbolism of the day and of the Olympics for
nefarious ends, and transportation in and out of the Games may be the place
they'll choose to make their presence known.

Let's hope we remember the Sochi Games for the triumph of the athletes, not of
the terrorists.

Twitter: @AkiPeritz, @MiekeEoyang

Read more from Outlook, friend us on Facebook, and follow us on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


