                             2675 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 26, 2014 Saturday 2:47 AM EST

Man sentenced for urging violence

BYLINE: Matt Zapotosky

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 654 words


A New Jersey man who used his Islamic organization's Web site to advocate
violence against those whose ideals he found offensive to his religion was
sentenced Friday to 21 / 2 years in prison - a term that a federal judge said he
imposed so people would "understand the line" between free speech and criminal
calls for violence.

Yousef al-Khattab, 45, renounced his postings during the hearing in federal
court in Alexandria, asking U.S. District Judge Liam O'Grady to hold him
responsible only "for what I say, not how other people understood it."

Derisively calling himself a "clown" and "the Gilbert Gottfried of the Muslims,"
Khattab said he did not intend to incite violence but would not make the
postings today that he did years ago.

"I look back now, and I'm very wrong," Khattab said.

For his part, O'Grady said that he believed Khattab would not make the postings
again but was skeptical that his intention had been only to spark discussion.
O'Grady asked Khattab particularly about a post he made seeming to direct
followers to attack the Chabad Jewish organization's headquarters in Brooklyn.

Court records show that in 2009, Khattab posted a photo of the headquarters with
a link to a map and noted that the main temple was always full at prayer times.
In another post that year, he told readers to seek out leaders of Jewish
organizations in the United States and "deal with them directly at their homes,"
court records show.

Khattab pleaded guilty in October to using the Internet to put another in fear
of death or injury.

"To a reasonable person, you were espousing violence, encouraging violence,
praising violence in very plain language," O'Grady said. "What you did is
criminal."

Prosecutors also argued that authorities had connected more than 12 followers of
Khattab and the organization he helped found - Revolution Muslim - to various
terrorist plots or organizations.

Among them were Colleen LaRose, the American woman who used the nickname
JihadJane as she allegedly recruited people to "wage violent jihad," and Samir
Khan, who is said to have founded the notorious al-Qaeda magazine Inspire. He
was killed in a controversial drone strike alongside American Anwar al-Awlaki,
an al-Qaeda operative.

"Mr. Khattab's aim was to inspire Muslims to engage in terrorism," Assistant
U.S. Attorney Gordon D. Kromberg said in court. "He succeeded."

Defense attorney Alan H. Yamamoto argued that his client's postings were no
different than those of several anti-Muslim groups and Khattab thought that what
he was doing was legally protected as free speech. He acknowledged that Khattab
"stepped over the line" but disputed the notion that he was "the reason all
these nuts are out there doing things."

Khattab renounced some terrorist attacks, including the Boston Marathon bombing,
and referred to some of his former affiliates as "scum."

"To hold him responsible for all the hate and anger that's out there is just not
correct," Yamamoto said. "He was a block in that wall, but he's not the wall."

Prosecutors had asked that Khattab spend three years in prison; Yamamoto sought
a year and a day for his client.

O'Grady said he agreed that Khattab's actions warranted a lesser punishment than
those in similar cases. Revolution Muslim co-founder Jesse C. Morton, for
example, was sentenced in 2012 to 111  / 2 years in prison after admitting that
he encouraged extremists to attack the writers of the "South Park" animated TV
show because an episode featured the prophet Muhammad in a bear suit.

But O'Grady also said that "freedom of speech carries with it responsibility"
and that the postings of Khattab were "horrific."

Khattab, who was allowed to report on his own to jail at a later date, told
O'Grady after the sentence was imposed: "I have no hard feelings, and I thank
you." He declined to comment after the hearing.

matt.zapotosky@washpost.com

Get updates on your area delivered via e-mail

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


