                             2682 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 30, 2014 Wednesday 2:31 AM EST

Free WiFi is a selling point in NoMa, but why isn't the Internet free wherever
we'd want it?

BYLINE: Dan Zak

SECTION: Style; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1131 words


Utopia announces itself in magenta and margarita green.

"Free Outdoor WiFi," say the placards shellacked to the sidewalks of First
Street NE. Their cheery color scheme and matter-of-fact wording make WiFi seem
like both an amenity anda necessity, at least when pondered to the sound of
water cascading over the stone facade of a nearby palace of swank apartments
(sorry, residences). NoMa claimed this month that it's the first D.C.
neighborhood to connect the air we breathe to free Internet, and maybe it is, if
you're particular about the definitions of "first" and "neighborhood" and
"Internet."

But the livelier, whinier point of contention is this: Why, more than a decade
into the proliferation of WiFi networks, is free wireless Internet not available
everywhere all the time, especially in the capital of the free world? Why must
we purchase and set up our own individual hotspots, or linger in coffee shops,
or siphon connectivity from unsecured networks, or make do with our phones?

Why in 2014 is a neighborhood stoked to offer a service that for some has become
as elemental as clean air, as sacrosanct as a universal human right?

"The technology really wasn't ready until now," says Harold Feld, senior vice
president of Public Knowledge, a D.C.-based consumer advocacy group dedicated to
an open and accessible Internet. "It took a while for the technology to get up
to speed and work and for people to understand the value. And now people are
ready for it, you've got an infrastructure that can support it, you've got
institutions like libraries that are embedded in the community - now we need to
put all the pieces together."

One problem: The market relies on consumers to purchase connectivity
individually. In other words, blame AT&T or Verizon, if you're willing to also
blame capitalism as a whole.

You could also blame government inertia and - brace yourself for jargon - the
limited availability of unlicensed radio spectrum frequencies, the bands of
airwaves that are open for use by anybody. At its May 15 meeting, the Federal
Communications Commission will prepare the rules for the 2015 auction of the
broadcast-TV range of the radio spectrum. Some of these bands will be set aside
for unlicensed use - which could be a boost to WiFi, local broadband
connectivity and technological innovation in general - and some will be
auctioned to the highest licensed bidder, i.e. corporations that are already in
the game.

"Whenever I think about putting in a new WiFi hotspot, I want to look at the
level of service and whether industry can do it," says D.C.'s chief technology
officer, Rob Mancini, whose office has rolled out more than 600 public WiFi
hotspots in the city over the years. "When government and industry can combine
forces in a way that's productive, this is where the American example shines."

This reliance on industry sometimes can result in "a learned helplessness" in
city governments, says Greta Byrum, an urban planner and senior field analyst
for the Open Technology Institute.

"With the consolidation that you see - the Time Warner and Comcast merger -
there's definitely interests that don't want to see any kind of diversification
of the market or new models at play," Byrum says. "Local communities have the
power to create their own infrastructure, but a lot of people think they don't
know how or that it might be illegal. It's difficult to do an infrastructure DIY
project. You have to have a lot of passion."

Consider the effort to wire NoMa, a project that took more than a year of
planning and designing. The neighborhood's Internet couldn't happen without
access points - 17 gray, foot-wide boxes that are perched on streetlights or on
top of buildings - and the gathering of permits, the routing of electricity, and
so on.

"If you get on anybody's roof, that's a process, and some required license
agreements," says Robin-Eve Jasper, president of the NoMa Business Improvement
District. "And to be able to put devices on lampposts took a good bit of
conversation about attaching them and how they look and whether they affected
the performance of the lamppost."

Thus, a human right may hinge on whether it eclipses the radiance of a
streetlight.

Granted, the patchwork of free and public WiFi in wealthy parts of the District
is worlds away from the 20 percent of Americans who don't have household
broadband or a smartphone, from the two-thirds of the global population that
doesn't have anyreliable access to the Web, and from nations that restrict or
disconnect their population from the Internet (see Russia, Syria). Three years
ago, the United Nations declared that depriving a citizen of access to the
Internet is a violation of the human right "to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers," as it's phrased in
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Speaking of frontiers: space!

If you're not in range of those rooftop transmitters in NoMa, do not despair.
Internet connectivity will soon come from orbit, beyond the reach of municipal
governments, industry incumbents and authoritarian countries.

Last month, Mark Zuckerberg announced Facebook's plan to beam the Internet
through lasers, satellites and drones to swaths of the planet that are not
already covered by 2G or 3G networks. Google's Project Loon will do the same
thing but with high-altitude balloons, perhaps by 2020.

Then there's Outernet, which would use satellites to broadcast a library of
content to the entire planet for free via the unlicensed spectrum of radio
waves, starting as early as June 2015.

It wouldn't replicate the limitless browsing experience of the Internet, but it
could be the next big step toward unified planetary connectivity.

As with most plans involving global domination, the ambitions are grand and as
yet unrealized.

A dozen transponders (already in orbit) could link humanity to 500 gigabytes of
new data per day, says Outernet founder Syed Karim, director of innovation at
the nonprofit Media Investment Development Fund, which is backing the project
and has already invested $128 million in media businesses across 31 countries.
Open-source material, Creative Commons content, the literature and courseware in
the public domain - it would all be broadcast to Earth via satellites and
intermediary hotspots that store content locally and allow any WiFi device to
connect.

"We're building a library for everyone, and removing the physical nature of what
a library has to do, for about $15 million a year," Karim says, adding via
e-mail, "If information is the currency of the modern global economy, Outernet
is a free ATM."

The step after Outernet?

A "space-based, jurisdiction-free, regulation-proof laser Internet system," he
says.

Shellac that in magenta on the moon.

dan.zak@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


