                             263 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 5:41 PM EST

Argument: Militants are winning the public relations war about U.S. drones

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 470 words


The United States has been launching drone strikes for at least a dozen years,
killing more than 2,400 people across the globe during President Obama's time in
office alone. Many of them have been militants planning attacks on U.S. troops
or partner nations, but the program also has killed enough civilians that it
remains highly controversial.

But a new piece in the Air Force professional publication "Air and Space Power
Journal" argues that it isn't just civilian deaths that have made it difficult
for the U.S. military to shape opinion about drone operations. While militant
groups have developed a sophisticated public relations network that casts drone
strikes in the worst light possible, the United States has kept them shrouded in
secrecy, creating a one-sided view that needs to be rectified, writes Air Force
Capt. Joseph O'Chapa.

"To the extent that national security can be safeguarded, this article has
argued that the federal government should not simply disclose but publicize much
of its RPA program that remains in the dark," O'Chapa writes, using a military
acronym that stands for remotely piloted aircraft. " The battle for hearts and
minds with respect to RPAs is being waged in the PR domain. Today, the enemy is
winning."

The piece does not address whether the United States was within its rights to
launch specific controversial missions like the September 2011 drone strike in
Yemen that killed Anwar Al-Awlaki, a U.S. citizen and accused al-Qaeda
operative. Awlaki's relationship with al-Qaeda "brings him within the scope" of
the 2001 congressional authorization to use military force against the militant
group, according to a July 2010 memo Justice Department memo released in June
under order of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit in New York.

Still, O'Chapa's piece is remarkably candid commentary for an active-duty
officer. The military fosters discussion through professional journals like "Air
and Space Power Journal," but expressions of opinion are typically tempered with
the reality that a service member can be court-martialed for "contemptuous
words" against the president or other senior officials.

O'Chapa doesn't go that far, but he advocates not only disclosing more
information about drone operations, but actively pushing back against
"misconceptions," such as the concept that operating a drone is like playing a
video game. In particular, O'Chapa argues, the United States should more clearly
explain the rules of engagement used in drone strikes and the safeguards it has
in place before an airstrike is launched.

"The world has heard only one side of a two-sided discussion and,
unsurprisingly, has succumbed to it," O'Chapa writes. "Intelligent,
well-intentioned people should have the opportunity to hear both sides so that
they can develop an informed opinion."

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


