                             2667 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 10, 2014 Thursday 2:53 AM EST

At Fort Hood, Obama tackles war's toll at home

BYLINE: Scott Wilson

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1124 words


FORT HOOD, Tex. - President Obama arrived here again Wednesday to console a
mourning military community that has carried the burden of the nation's
post-Sept. 11 conflicts, marking a turn from the wars abroad to the one now
looming at home.

As a dry wind blew across this vast Army post, Obama eulogized three soldiers,
all veterans of the Iraq war, who were killed last week by Spec. Ivan Lopez, a
fellow Iraq veteran who was being treated for mental illness.

The president's words were hopeful, drawing on Scripture. But they also included
a call to better receive the millions of troops returning from the post-9/11
battles, many of them suffering in unseen ways from their tours.

"We must honor these men by doing more to care for our fellow Americans living
with mental illness, civilian and military," he said. "As commander in chief,
I'm determined that we will continue to step up our efforts to reach our troops
and veterans who are hurting, to deliver to them the care that they need and to
make sure we never stigmatize those who have the courage to seek help."

The visit was a grim return for Obama. Less than a year into his administration,
he flew here with his first message of public condolence as a wartime commander
in chief. It had suddenly become, over the course of that November afternoon, a
domestic extension of the battlefields abroad.

Maj. Nidal M. Hasan, an Army psychiatrist embittered by the United States' wars
in Muslim countries, had opened fire at a medical center on the post where
troops are checked out before deployment. He killed 13 people - soldiers and
caregivers, retired and active-duty, some home from combat tours and some simply
making their way through another taxing day supporting those conflicts at home.

"This," Obama said in memorializing the dead then, "is a time of war."

On Wednesday, accompanied by the first lady, Obama arrived at a much different
time in his presidency and in America's post-9/11 history. The post is a
battlefield in its own right, an enclave capturing the grave challenge of the
next war the United States will fight.

Obama was able to frame Hasan's attack as part of America's hot wars, given that
its motivation was rooted in the U.S. conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, where
576 soldiers from this post have died. But the killings carried out last week by
Lopez represent the next conflict.

Lopez was under treatment for depression. In committing suicide at the end of
his shooting rampage, which wounded 16 others, he became one of 22 veterans who
kill themselves on average every day.

It is an epidemic, veterans' advocates warn, that is falling hard on the
generation that Obama described in 2009 as those who "signed up to serve in the
shadow of 9/11." The suicide rate is rising as more and more troops return.

Obama attempted to define the outlines of this next war - the one being fought
at home in the scattered aftermath of a dozen years of combat abroad, conducted
by a relatively small segment of the U.S. population.

"In an era when fewer Americans know someone in uniform, every American must see
these men and these women, our 9/11 generation, as the extraordinary citizens
that they are," he said. "And when we truly welcome our veterans home, when we
show them that we need them not just to fight in other countries but to build up
our own, then our schools and our businesses, our communities and our nation
will be more successful, and America will be stronger and more united for
decades to come."

The service was held on what most days is an open grass field - a training
course on one edge and an American flag, on this day fluttering at half-staff,
nearby.

Security preparations turned the area where Obama spoke into a bunker. Shipping
containers stacked two and three high broke the breeze available for several
hundred family members, friends, military officers and elected officials who
attended the service.

In spirit, Obama's remarks echoed the solemn speech he delivered during his
November 2009 visit, when he mentioned each victim by name, described briefly
the defining features of their lives and called their deaths "incomprehensible."

He did so again Wednesday, while telling the families present that "no words are
equal to your loss."

Then he remembered Sgt. 1st Class Danny Ferguson, 39, a veteran of Iraq and
Afghanistan; Staff Sgt. Carlos A. Lazaney Rodriguez, 38, an Iraq veteran just
months from retirement; and Sgt. Timothy Owens, 37, an Iraq veteran who enlisted
after the 2001 attacks and recently married.

"In moments such as this, we summon once more what we've learned in these hard
years of war," he said. "We reach within our wounded hearts. We lean on each
other. We hold each other up, we carry on, and with God's amazing grace, we
somehow bear what seems unbearable."

At the time of Hasan's attack, the politics were in some ways more complicated
for Obama than they are now, as he unwinds the last of the post-9/11 wars and
focuses public attention on the plight of those struggling with the mental
anguish that often lingers after combat ends.

Hasan, inspired by the radical teachings of Yemeni American cleric Anwar
al-Awlaki, opened fire here just five months after Obama had asked the Muslim
world for a "new beginning" in a speech at Cairo University. The address was
designed to close the gulf between the United States and Islamic communities
after Sept. 11 and the wars that followed - an approach many conservatives
viewed skeptically given the enduring threat from al-Qaeda and affiliated
groups.

Hasan's call of "Allahu Akbar" before he began shooting shattered some of the
administration's early optimism that followed the Cairo speech, which had been
generally well received abroad. Obama had to speak carefully here about Islam
and the gunman's motivations; in his remarks, he never mentioned Hasan by name.

He also did not name Lopez on Wednesday, although he included him tacitly among
the victims in declaring that "four soldiers are dead."

In the intervening years, Hasan has been sentenced to death for his crime.
Awlaki, whose teachings helped turn the soldier against his country, was killed
in a U.S. drone strike in 2011, becoming the first American citizen to be
targeted that way.

The wars have also ebbed. U.S. troops have left Iraq, even if that country's
conflict has yet to resolve itself. The American military involvement in
Afghanistan - the longest in U.S. history - is scheduled to conclude in its
current form at the end of the year.

"We must honor their lives not in word or talk, but in deed and in truth," Obama
said. "We must honor these men with a renewed commitment to keep our troops
safe, not just in battle, but on the home front as well."

scott.wilson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


