                             2620 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     February 11, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

Al-Qaeda expulsion stirs debate over U.S. law

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1249 words


The Obama administration is engaged in a debate about the extent of the
president's powers to use lethal force against terrorist organizations, and the
deliberations have been accelerated by al-Qaeda's recent decision to sever ties
with a violent Islamist group in Syria.

The focus of internal discussions is whether a law giving the president
authority to attack al-Qaeda affiliates still applies to the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the group that was disavowed last week.

Current and former U.S. intelligence officials said last week's expulsion marked
the first time al-Qaeda had ejected a group that had formally joined its fold, a
potentially risky move at a time when the terrorist network's affiliates have
largely eclipsed the core group in strength and relevance.

According to some administration lawyers and intelligence officials, the
expulsion of ISIS removes the group from the short list of al-Qaeda "associates"
that the president has virtually unlimited powers to strike under a law passed
days after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The group has emerged over the
past year as a ruthless player in the Syrian civil war and one whose ability to
project its power - and recruits - beyond the immediate battlefield is worrying
Western intelligence agencies. On Monday, more than 20 ISIS recruits were killed
when a bomb exploded during a class on suicide bombings, Iraqi officials said.

The unofficial list of al-Qaeda affiliates is now down to four:  the powerful
offshoots in Yemen and North Africa, Somalia-based al-Shabab, and Jabhat
al-Nusra, an ISIS rival within the Syrian opposition to President Bashar
alAssad.

Others think ISIS can still be targeted because of its long-standing al-Qaeda
ties and parallel ambitions. Officials who spoke about intelligence matters on
the condition of anonymity stressed that the administration has not made any
ruling on the subject.

What appears at first glance to be a legal debate over an arcane dispute among
terrorists is largely theoretical, since the administration has no current
intention of attacking in Syria or Iraq. But the answer has major implications
for a far more important issue - what to do about the post-Sept. 11 law
authorizing the use of force as the Afghanistan war winds down and an
increasingly decentralized al-Qaeda becomes more of a shared ideology than an
organized hierarchy.

In recent years, as new groups have posed threats to the United States and to
its overseas personnel, the administration has adopted an increasingly elastic
definition of the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force, or AUMF, to
include groups it says are associated with the al-Qaeda and Taliban
organizations explicitly covered by the law.

In a major national security speech in May, however, President Obama said the
time had come to "recognize that the threat has shifted and evolved from the one
that came to our shores on 9/11." He said he wanted to "refine and ultimately
repeal" the AUMF and would work with Congress to come up with an alternative
better suited to the current reality.

Since then, however, most of the administration's national security attention
has been taken up by the leaks of former National Security Agency contractor
Edward Snowden, and the subject has languished.

"The default position is to do nothing," said Rep. Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.), a
member of the House Intelligence Committee who last year introduced legislation
to sunset the law with the upcoming end of the Afghan war.

Continuing to rely on the AUMF as the legal justification for counterterrorism
operations "becomes increasingly strained when you're not using it in the
theater of war, you're not using it against organizations that existed on 9/11,"
and one of the most violent groups "is not even affiliated with al-Qaeda
anymore," Schiff said in an interview.

The ISIS issue "rekindles the whole question" of revising the AUMF, one U.S.
official said.

"You can't predict the future," said Seth Jones, an analyst with the Rand Corp.
who has advised the military at home and in Afghanistan. "What if the situation
were to get notably worse not just in Syria but in Iraq, and we were to see
[ISIS] get involved in plotting against the U.S. homeland?"

The administration has other alternatives for using force outside war zones,
including the president's constitutional authority and international
self-defense doctrines. But Obama remains leery of justifying drone strikes and
other types of military action with constitutional powers he accused his
predecessor, George W. Bush, of overusing.

And the more time that passes since Sept. 11, 2001, the more critics of U.S.
lethal policies, including some leading allies, are likely to challenge the
justification for unilateral strikes and Special Operations actions.

The Pentagon has said it sees no need to change the law, and its press
secretary, Rear Adm. John Kirby, said the military "currently has the necessary
authority, under domestic and international law, to meet the threat posed by
al-Qaeda and other terrorist organizations."

In last year's speech, Obama noted that the United States cannot be on a
perpetual war footing and "made clear . . . that he will not sign any law
designed to expand" the AUMF mandate, said National Security Council spokeswoman
Caitlin Hayden.

But it is hard to see how the law can be adapted without expanding its scope.

In a House hearing last week, Jones and other experts offered suggestions on a
variety of possible fixes, most of them focused on terrorist goals, operations
and capabilities rather than on group affiliations or rhetoric.

"The goal here is not to narrow the scope of the AUMF or to expand the scope of
the AUMF, but to align our ways, means and laws in such a way that we can
achieve the ends that we're after," Christopher Swift, a Georgetown University
professor and former Treasury Department official, told the House Armed Services
Committee.

Beyond its implications for broader U.S. counterterrorism operations, the
expulsion of ISIS is being examined by analysts at the CIA and the National
Counterterrorism Center for clues to al-Qaeda's evolving strategy amid the
turmoil of the Middle East.

A U.S. intelligence official asked: "Does it make al-Qaeda leadership look
stronger or weaker" to eject an insubordinate but violently effective franchise?
"Will it help their recruitment efforts" to side with Jabhat al-Nusra, a faction
in Syria that has stronger ties to that nation's populace and is seen as
marginally less extreme?

U.S. officials said the split is unlikely to harm the operational capabilities
of ISIS, which has never depended on its al-Qaeda sponsor for funding or other
material support. The officials, noting long-standing frictions between al-Qaeda
leader Ayman al-Zawahiri and ISIS's upper ranks, said there is no doubt the ban
was real and not a ruse.

Current and former officials noted that Zawahiri did not cite ISIS's brutality
in the decision to sever ties with the group but instead focused on its battles
with Jabhat al-Nusra and insubordination. Officials also said the move
underscores the importance that Zawahiri attaches to Syria - over maintaining
ties with a wayward but viable franchise in Iraq.

"Syria is an opportunity for them" above all others, said a former senior U.S.
intelligence official. "They truly believe that if they don't get in there and
do the best they can, they're nothing anymore."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

greg.miller@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


