                             2632 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 28, 2014 Friday 3:45 AM EST

In U.S. report, a bigger focus on LGBT rights

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 878 words


Gay and transgender people are singled out for state-sanctioned discrimination
or mistreatment in about 80 countries, the United States charged Thursday in the
broadest statement yet that Washington considers the treatment of gays a key
measure of human rights around the world.

The annual State Department review of global human rights practices released
Thursday considers lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights alongside more
traditional rubrics, such as free speech, political freedoms and religious
liberty.

"From Nigeria to Russia to Iran, indeed in some 80 countries the world over,
LGBT communities face discriminatory laws and practices that attack their basic
human dignity and undermine their safety," Secretary of State John F. Kerry said
in introducing the country-by-country review.

The report covers 2012, before Uganda's U.S.-backed president signed a
wide-ranging law criminalizing homosexuality, but Kerry criticized that
legislation and similar official discrimination as part of a "global trend of
rising violence and discrimination against LGBT persons and their supporters."

"They are an affront to every reasonable conscience," Kerry said of such
legislative measures, "and the United States will continue to stand with our
LGBT brothers and sisters as we stand up for freedom, for justice, for equal
rights for all people around the world."

A day earlier, Kerry blasted the anti-gay law in Uganda as akin to
state-sponsored discrimination by Hitler's Nazi Germany or apartheid-era South
Africa.

"You could change the focus of this legislation to black or Jewish, and you
could be in 1930s Germany, or you could be in 1950s or '60s apartheid South
Africa," Kerry said during a roundtable interview with reporters Wednesday. "It
was wrong there, egregiously, in both places, and it is wrong here."

Kerry said he would direct U.S. ambassadors to look at "how we deal with this
human rights challenge on a global basis."

Uganda's new law, which has been debated for years, punishes gay sex with up to
life in prison.

The United States has long lobbied President Yoweri Museveni to reject  the law.
Then-Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton raised it with Museveni when she
visited Uganda in 2012. She also celebrated the African nation's cooperation
with U.S. counterterrorism work and visited a military installation where
surveillance drones are based.

The White House called the new measure "abhorrent" and signaled that it could
cut aid to Uganda. At least three European countries have moved to withdraw
millions of dollars in direct support to Museveni's government.

The annual human rights report describes the Syrian civil war as a "human rights
calamity," and calls out U.S. diplomatic partners such as Russia, Turkey, Saudi
Arabia and Egypt for discrimination, repression, mistreatment of prisoners and
other alleged abuses catalogued by the State Department.

Much of the criticism is familiar from past reports, which are mandated by
Congress and serve as one guideline for U.S. aid. The focus on gay rights,
however, is more prominent and pointed than in years past.

The first nation listed in the report, U.S.-backed Afghanistan, is criticized
for "societal discrimination based on race, religion, gender, sexual
orientation, and HIV/AIDS status."

For the last nation on the list, heavily sanctioned Zimbabwe, the State
Department found "discrimination against persons with disabilities, racial and
ethnic minorities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community,
and persons with HIV/AIDS."

The report highlights several themes for 2012, including "the continued
marginalization of and violence against members of vulnerable groups," including
religious and ethnic minorities, gays and women.

The report notes "shrinking space for civil society activism," in nations such
as Russia, Egypt, Bangladesh and China, and the ongoing political struggles born
of the 2011 Arab Spring revolts.

The report criticized the government of now-ousted Ukrainian president Viktor
Yanukovych for politically motivated and arbitrary prosecutions, detentions and
beatings. It takes Yanukovych's sometime-protector Russia to task for new laws
restricting the activities of charitable and pro-democracy groups, electoral
abuses and alleged mistreatment of prisoners.

The cases of individual Chinese detainees are held up as part of a pattern of
state-directed targeting of activists and political dissidents. By including the
names and circumstances of each person's arrest, disappearance or prosecution,
the State Department seeks to show that it is tracking such cases closely and
will call China to account for the outcome.

Targeting of political activists and journalists in Egypt, Turkey and elsewhere
is detailed, along with new press restrictions in Azerbaijan, the United Arab
Emirates and other nations. The report catalogues government efforts to infringe
on or silence political groups in Belarus and Venezuela, and police or security
abuses in Libya, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, Afghanistan and elsewhere.

Burma's move away from full control by a brutal military-backed government is
held up as a bright spot, although the country comes in for criticism because of
continued curbs on news media and political freedoms.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


