                             2634 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        March 2, 2014 Sunday 3:13 AM EST

Soldiers [#xfb01]ghting Islamists deplore sloppy missions

BYLINE: Loveday Morris

SECTION: A section; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 1203 words


For Iraqi soldiers, battle with Islamists looks like "a mess"

As the United States sends weapons to Iraqi forces, some soldiers call for
better planning and intelligence.

DIWANIYAH, Iraq - The United States is shipping arms to Iraq to help its army
fight a Sunni Islamist insurgency in Anbar province. But some Iraqi soldiers
argue that basic planning and supplies are just as sorely needed.

Lt. Col. Ihab Hashem, a deputy army commander based at the 8th Division
headquarters in this southern city, recounted a series of what he said were
poorly planned and executed missions in Anbar. There, the government is
struggling to oust militants from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS,
an al-Qaeda splinter group that has proved a formidable foe.

Hashem described one mission in early January in the Anbar capital of Ramadi,
where the army is trying to crush pockets of insurgency, as a "mess." The aim
was to reach a bridge at the end of Street 60, a notorious stronghold for
militants and tribesmen who seized the city in January. Troops from four
divisions entered after sunset, he said, although only a few had night-vision
goggles and the pre-mission briefing was weak.

"There were no maps, there were no details," he said in an interview last month
while on leave, recovering from an injury. The convoy lost eight Humvees after
coming under fire and hitting a roadside bomb, he said, and at least one soldier
was killed.

"We reached the bridge, but it was a disaster," he said, describing the purpose
of the mission as "just to be there."

That operation was one of several ill-fated missions that have characterized
Iraq's battle against ISIS in Anbar and underscored the weakness of security
forces that the United States spent more than $20 billion to train and equip,
according to the Congressional Research Service.

In December, more than a dozen soldiers, including a division commander and
several high-ranking officers, were killed in an ambush as they attempted to
clear an ISIS training camp. That incident prompted Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki to take a more assertive stance in Anbar, including a crackdown on
Sunni demonstrators who were protesting against his Shiite-led government.

In another high-profile incident, four special forces soldiers were executed in
late January after being captured by Islamist insurgents, who broadcast a video
of their deaths on the Internet.

Nouraddin Ismail al-Jowari, 22, was one of those killed. His relatives, from the
run-down district of Zafaraniyah in southern Baghdad, have attempted to piece
together the story of his last hours from colleagues.

The relatives said they were told by other soldiers that Jowari's team was left
alone by the rest of their convoy after it was struck by a roadside bomb in a
hostile village.

"Confusion was the master of the situation," said his brother, Mouyad, 32. He
said another Humvee from the convoy was later sent back to find the team, but
the men were already gone.

'What they need is training'

As the fight in Anbar has escalated, Washington has responded to pleas from the
Iraqi government by stepping up deliveries of light arms, Hellfire missiles and
surveillance drones to Baghdad. Iraq has also turned to its ally Iran for
military support. Iran has signed a deal to sell Iraq ammunition and weapons
worth $195 million, Reuters reported Monday, citing leaked documents. The State
Department has said it is seeking clarification on the deal, which would breach
U.N. sanctions on Iran.

But some observers say weapons should not be the top priority.

"I can't believe that after 10 years, the U.S. hasn't given enough in small arms
to arm the Iraqi armed forces twice over," said a former U.S. senior adviser to
the Iraqi armed forces, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the
sensitive topic. "What they need is training and intelligence."

American training of Iraqi forces stopped when the U.S. military withdrew in
2011, but discussions are underway to revive it.

Ali Moussawi, an Iraqi government spokesman, said that the conflict in Anbar has
helped to clarify the "weaknesses and strengths" of the country's armed forces
and that army commanders had highlighted a need for better counterterrorism
training. The United States, Iraq and Jordan have said that they are considering
training for Iraqi forces by about 1,500 U.S. troops based in Jordan.

In interviews, soldiers also said local intelligence remains a problem. The
United States shares phone intercepts and satellite imagery with Iraq, but
Hashem said it often feels as if troops are working in the dark.

For his first 10 days in Anbar, he said, the soldiers he commands used a road
into Ramadi that passed through the village of Bou Faraj, controlled by
anti-government tribesmen. Once, after a light military vehicle carrying weapons
was shot up and had to be retrieved, it took one of Hashem's convoys nine hours
to cross the stretch of a few miles. Four soldiers were injured and one was
killed, he said.

Local police then told him that there was another, secured route that bypassed
the village.

"I crossed that road three times under fire . . . many, many units were crossing
there," he said.

Said Abu Hussein, a soldier in an artillery unit in Anbar who also was
interviewed while on leave in Diwaniyah, "When we fought in Diwaniyah, we knew
how to control it, but Anbar we don't know well, and [ISIS fighters] do." He did
not give his full name for security reasons.

'Sitting there like bait'

Although the Iraqi armed forces have been more active in Ramadi, the Anbar city
of Fallujah remains completely out of the state's control nearly two months
after being seized by the Islamist fighters.

The Iraqi government is attempting to recruit local tribes to negotiate a
withdrawal of the Islamist fighters from Fallujah, fearing that sending ground
forces into the city where U.S. troops faced some of their most deadly fighting
in Iraq would lead to a bloodbath.

So for now, soldiers are stationed at bases outside the city, where they say
they are subject to frequent hit-and-run attacks.

"We just sit there and al-Qaeda progresses toward us," said a 28-year-old
soldier from Diwaniyah, who declined to give his name. "We are sitting there
like bait. The army is a victim of the decision-makers."

The Iraqi government does not release figures on the number of soldiers killed
in the conflict. In an interview last month, Maliki said 80 members of the
security forces had been killed in the first two weeks of January.

Diwaniyah is among the cities paying the price of the conflict.

There is little industry in this city in Iraq's southern Shiite heartland, so
young men have scarce employment options other than the army. But even as
coffins return from the Anbar battlefields, few here question the importance of
fighting the Sunni insurgency.

"Iraq deserves its sacrifices," said Qassim Farhan, 35, whose 26-year-old nephew
was killed with two others in an attack near the village of Saqlawia, a few
miles northwest of Fallujah, in late January. "These people are against us, and
seek nothing but destruction and death."

loveday.morris@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


