                             2609 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 28, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

A war without purpose

BYLINE: Richard Cohen

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 729 words


While watching the utterly gripping movie "Lone Survivor" recently, I comforted
myself by noting that the four Navy SEALs engaged in a desperate firefight with
the Afghan Taliban were all volunteers. They asked for this, I told myself. They
were not draftees yanked out of civilian life and compelled to fight a war they
could neither understand nor win. They had asked for this, I insisted, but I
knew all the time that this was a lie. They had volunteered, but certainly not
to die and certainly for no purpose.

Okay, I know this is only a movie. But it is faithful to the book of the same
name  , which is faithful to the 2005 mission called Operation Red Wing that was
intended to take out a Taliban commander. The title "Lone Survivor" pretty much
says what happened, but you owe it to the SEALs and to their families to see the
movie. The ending is not in doubt, but the reason for their sacrifice
undoubtedly is. Afghanistan is a war searching for a reason.

All through the movie, I kept asking myself, Why? What are these men fighting
for? Once, I knew the answer. After Sept. 11, 2001, I wanted to wipe out
al-Qaeda and kill its Afghan hosts, the Taliban. Even before the terrorist
attack, reports of the Taliban's treatment of women - stonings, public
executions in the soccer stadium, etc. - and beheadings of men convinced me that
it simply had it coming: Send in the Marines.

But U.S. fighting units have been there since 2001. The initial mission - the
destruction of al-Qaeda in Afghanistan - was completed long ago. The Taliban and
its allies remain, but unlike al-Qaeda they are indigenous and, seemingly,
undeterred. They apparently have an unlimited supply of suicide bombers (who are
these people?), and they continue to inflict mayhem on Afghans and foreigners
alike.  This month, the Taliban struck a Kabul restaurant with that draws a
Western clientele and killed at least 21 people. The attack by gunmen was
preceded by a suicide bombing.

Bob Gates, in his memoir "Duty," depicted Barack Obama as a commander in chief
whose policy in Afghanistan was to do as little as possible - simultaneously
ordering a surge and announcing a pull-out date. Gates, then defense secretary ,
was appalled: "The president doesn't  . . . believe in his own strategy and
doesn't consider the war to be his."

Well, the war is not Obama's. It is George W. Bush's - one he interrupted to
mindlessly chase after Saddam Hussein. But Obama embraced the Afghanistan
mission and then, apparently, never knew what to do with it. I don't blame him.
Afghanistan is an arid Vietnam, a quagmire presided over by the petulant and
unpredictable Hamid Karzai. For Obama, Gates wrote, "it's all about getting
out."

The quote is pithy, but the observation is banal. It was clear back in 2009,
when Obama ordered his surge in Afghanistan, that he had no stomach for
continuing the war. The war goes on and on and has now become fused with the
futility of Iraq - 2,307 Americans dead in Afghanistan, 4,489 dead in Iraq, an
incomprehensible waste of lives.

The administration wants U.S. troops to remain in Afghanistan (the Pentagon has
suggested 10,000). It has its reasons. The country was once a terrorist base and
could revert. The necessary pursuit of the remaining Sept. 11 terrorists is best
based in the region - as are U.S. drones - and without an American spine, the
Afghan army could collapse. That would permit the return to power of the Taliban
and the abandonment of women and girls to frenzied misogynists. That, though,
has nothing to do with realpolitik, just real life. Soon, the music will die and
we will have to avert our eyes.

But as Gates insisted, Obama has failed to make these or other arguments. "He
needed to say publicly why the troops' sacrifices were necessary," Gates said
of the president. Gates made that point several times, and he is right. Maybe,
though, Obama is cautioned by the experience of Lyndon Johnson. On July 28,
1965, LBJ began a news conference by addressing the question of "why we are in
Vietnam." He never supplied a satisfactory answer.

In the movie theater, I watched two films at once - "Lone Survivor" on the
screen and Vietnam in my head. On the screen, as in reality, men fought and died
- and, as with Vietnam, I no longer knew why. One man survived the battle. The
rest were lost - as is the reason for the war itself.

cohenr@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


