                             267 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 18, 2014 Thursday 7:21 PM EST

The Navy's massive Triton drone just flew across the U.S. for the first time;
At 7:53 a.m., the drone landed in Maryland following an 11-hour flight from
California that soared over the Mexico border and up the Atlantic Coast.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 360 words


When Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 disappeared on March 8 while traveling from
Malaysia to China, the U.S. military deployed a variety of aircraft and ships as
part of a international effort to find the missing plane and the 239 people on
board. But a Navy aircraft that could eventually play a prominent role in such
searches wasn't ready yet: The massive MQ-4C Triton maritime surveillance drone
is expected to be operational in 2017.

The massive drone reached a new milestone Thursday, however. At 7:53 a.m., one
of the 131-foot wide aircraft landed at Naval Air Station Patuxent River in
Maryland following its first cross-country flight, the Navy said. The drone
soared at heights of more than 50,000 feet at times; it departed from a facility
in Palmdale, Calif., owned by its maker, Northrop Grumman, late Wednesday. It
flew along the U.S.-Mexico border, over the Gulf of Mexico and across Florida
before turning north up the Atlantic Coast.

The Triton had completed 15 test flights prior to the one landing in Maryland on
Thursday. The first occurred in May 2013 from Palmdale. It's shown Thursday in
this video released by Northrop Grumman:

The drone is expected to supplement the Navy's new P-8 Poseidon surveillance
plane, performing what the service calls Broad Area Maritime Surveillance, or
BAMS. Northrop Grumman says the drone, a descendant of the Air Force's Global
Hawk unmanned aircraft, will rely on radar, infrared sensors and advanced
cameras to provide full-motion video and photographs to the military. Northrop
Grumman described it here:

The Navy deployed its new P-8, a replacement for the P-3 surveillance plane, to
search for missing Flight 370 in the Indian Ocean in March. Working from
Australia, it flew numerous surveillance missions, but the Triton that will
eventually work alongside it wasn't ready. The P-8s were eventually called off
April 30, as the search moved almost entirely underwater and the Pentagon
curtailed its involvement.

Northrop Grumman said Thursday that over the next few weeks, two other Triton
drones will fly to Maryland. One is owned by the Navy; the other is a
demonstration aircraft owned by the defense firm.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


