                             2615 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 4, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

Pakistan, country's Taliban set initial talks

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 746 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - In its most ambitious step yet to address Pakistan's most
potent domestic threat, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's government plans to hold
preliminary talks Tuesday with representatives of the Pakistani Taliban.

The meeting is described as an introductory chat with the Islamist militant
group, which is responsible for a decade-long insurgency that has claimed more
than 45,000 lives. If the talks are unsuccessful, Sharif has signaled that he
might order a military offensive to regain control of tribal areas that are
effectively under Taliban control.

Representatives from both camps confirmed Tuesday's meeting. But many analysts
doubt that a peace deal can be reached, citing the insurgent group's violent
history, decentralized command structure and harsh ideology.

Some Pakistani Taliban officials have circulated 10 demands they want to pursue
in the talks, including a ban on women appearing in public in jeans or without
head scarves, the release of all Taliban prisoners, immunity for the group's
commanders, the establishment of Islamic courts, a complete withdrawal of the
Pakistan army from tribal areas and compensation for the victims of U.S. drone
strikes.

The list has shocked Pakistan's political and cultural elite.

"If this is true, it will not be acceptable to very many people in Pakistan,"
Khalid Naeem Lodhi, a former Pakistani army general, said of the demands.

The Taliban is increasingly splintered, and the group's chief spokesman,
Shahidullah Shahid, said any information about demands is premature.

"We have not yet put forward any conditions or demands for the talks," Shahid
said in a phone interview. "If there is a list of demands in the media, that is
not ours but may be someone else's."

Sharif, who returned as prime minister in June after two terms in the 1990s, has
made a negotiated settlement with the Pakistani Taliban a chief priority.

The Pakistani Taliban formed in 2008 in the aftermath of the U.S.-led invasion
of Afghanistan. It claims to be independent of the Afghan Taliban, but the two
groups are thought to coordinate activities. Both organizations seek to replace
their respective countries' governments.

Although Pakistan's major political parties gave Sharif broad support last
summer to engage in talks, the prime minister has struggled to persuade Taliban
representatives to participate.

Over the past four months, the Taliban has asserted responsibility for a series
of attacks that have killed hundreds of people. Last month, 20 Pakistani
soldiers were killed in a suicide bombing in North Waziristan. The military
responded with airstrikes that killed 40 militants and foreign fighters and
caused thousands of residents to flee their homes.

Many analysts saw the bombardment as a sign that Sharif and Pakistan's army
chief, Gen. Raheel Sharif, were preparing to launch a major offensive. Instead,
Sharif announced last week that he was appointing a four-member delegation to
make a final push at peace talks.

This time, Taliban leaders have appeared more receptive. They have appointed
three representatives for the talks, including Maulana Sami ul-Haq, a top
religious leader.

Analysts caution, however, that Sharif's government may not have much leeway to
bargain with the Taliban. Although Pakistan's constitution is rooted in Islamic
principles and law, it also includes provisions guaranteeing the rights of women
and minorities.

Efforts to ban women from wearing jeans in public would probably run afoul of
those principles, said Khalil ur-Rehman Khan, a former Supreme Court justice.

Although women in rural areas rarely wear jeans, it is becoming more common to
see young women wear them in urban  settings.

"Under Islam, you have to dress in a way that is not profane, or abusive, but
that choice is given, and it's based on how society accepts you," Khan said.
"And the culture of society changes with the passage of time, more education."

Zahid Hussain, an Islamabad-based defense analyst, said Sharif would run into
resistance from military leaders if he agreed to any release of prisoners. Many
military leaders are still angered that Taliban commanders freed under previous
peace initiatives have returned to the battlefield, he said.

"There have been several peace deals with the Taliban, and none of them have
worked, and I don't think things have diametrically changed," Hussain said.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Haq Nawaz Khan in Peshawar and Aimar Iqbal in Islamabad contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


