                             2672 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       April 20, 2014 Sunday 10:47 PM EST

Yellen: Full recovery could take hold by '16

SECTION: ; Pg. G02

LENGTH: 1231 words


Janet L. Yellen, in her first monetary policy speech as Fed chair, said that the
nation's economic recovery will be nearly complete within two years but
cautioned that the economy still needs the central bank's support. ¶ The Fed's
forecasts project that the jobless rate will bottom out and inflation will pick
up by the end of 2016, marking the first time in nearly a decade that the
economy is running close to full steam.  ¶ "If the economy obediently followed
our forecasts, the job of central bankers would be a lot easier and their
speeches would be a lot shorter," Yellen said. ¶ She framed the Fed's decision
on tightening its easy-money policies on  the labor market's health, inflation
expectations, risks from fiscal policies such as federal spending cuts and
turmoil in areas such as Europe.

Business

Yahoo's final bill for Henrique de Castro's 15 months at the company: $58
million.

General Motors is replacing executives for human resources and communications as
the automaker struggles with recalls over faulty ignition switches that have
been linked to at least 13 deaths.

A federal judge rejected a bid to compel GM to tell customers to stop driving
the 2.6 million cars that have been recalled, deferring to the National Highway
Traffic Safety agency.

The Mt. Gox bitcoin exchangein Tokyo is headed for liquidation after the Tokyo
District Court rejected its bankruptcy protection application. After Mt. Gox
went offline in February, its chief executive, Mark Karpeles, said 850,000
bitcoins worth several hundred million dollars were unaccounted for.

Weibo,of China,  priced its initial public offering at $17 per American
Depositary Share - the bottom of its planned range. The Twitter-like
microblogging service, owned by Web portal Sina, sold 16.8 million ADSs in the
offering, raising $285.6 million.

T-Mobile, which has taken up the mantle of being the "uncarrier" - the company
that knows what mobile customers hate - is ending domestic overage charges. But
users who go over data limits will see Web traffic speeds throttled back.

The Pentagon will cut 17 of the 343 F-35 fighters it planned to buy from
Lockheed Martin unless Congress repeals automatic budget cuts. The move would
save $1.7 billion in planned spending for the F-35, the costliest U.S. weapons
program.

The European Union's parliamentpassed laws to minimize the risks and costs posed
by failing banks. It created a European authority with the power to unwind or
restructure failing banks, as well as a system that will see banks' creditors -
not governments - take losses first when lenders fail.

A Canadian cybercrime unitarrested and charged a 19-year-old Ontario man for
allegedly hacking into the country's tax agency using the Heartbleed Internet
security bug. It was the first known case of a hacker taking advantage of the
security flaw for malicious purposes.

Michaels Storessaid 3 million debit and credit cards may have been affected by a
security breach.

Facebook's cautious rollout of the "Nearby Friends" app, which allows users'
locale to be tracked in real time, reflects a shift in its approach to privacy
concerns.

Google Glasswearable devices went on sale online for one day for $1,500 plus
tax. Wannabe owners had to be U.S. residents with a U.S. shipping address.

Deals

Google bought drone maker Titan Aerospace, in a bid to supplement its efforts to
connect parts of the world that do not have Internet access. The terms were not
disclosed.

Twitter bought its data partner Gnip, which analyzes the more than 500 million
tweets its users share each day - to advertisers, academic institutions,
politicians and other customers. Terms were not disclosed.

Earnings

American Express first-quarter profit climbed to $1.43 billion, as customer
spending increased 6 percent.

Bank of America posted an unexpected loss of $514 million after it took a $6
billion charge to cover litigation expenses, a figure that far exceeded the
legal settlements the No. 2 U.S. bank had announced.

Capital One Financial profit climbed 9.3 percent, to $1.15 billion, even as
revenue slipped 3 percent.

Coca-Colaprofit dipped to $1.62 billion as the amount of soda it sold globally
fell for the first time in 15 years. The drop was offset by stronger sales of
noncarbonated drinks, which include Minute Maid, Powerade and Dasani bottled
water.

General Electricprofit slid 18 percent, to $3.3 billion, dragged down by its
year-ago NBC Universal sale.

Goldman Sachs profit was $1.95 billion, down from $2.19 billion a year ago. It
posted its best investment banking revenue since 2007.

Google profit climbed 2.9 percent to $3.45 billion, hurt by rising costs.

IBMprofit shrank 21 percent, to $2.38 billion, as it struggles to keep up with
changes in the market for business technology such as cloud computing.

Intelprofit dropped 4.8 percent, to $1.95 billion, hurt by fewer PC sales.

Johnson& Johnson profit rose 8 percent, to $4.4 billion, as prescription drug
sales surge.

Morgan Stanley profit climbed 18 percent, to $1.45 billion, compared with $936
million a year ago, boosted by its wealth management and bond underwriting.

PepsiCoposted a $1.22 billion profit (vs. $1.08 billion a year ago) as the
company sold more snacks around the world and increased prices, including on its
drinks.

Yahooprofit fell to $312 million, from $390 million a year ago - but its
quarterly report offered a glimpse of the value of Alibaba, the private Chinese
online commerce company that is expected to go public at a valuation of $200
billion, which would make it the biggest IPO in U.S. history. Yahoo owns a 24
percent stake in the company.

Economy

Russia's holdings of U.S. government securitiesfell in February to the lowest
level since 2011, Treasury data showed. Russian holdings were $126.2 billion in
February, down from $131.8 billion in January in the fourth consecutive decline.
Russia may have sold Treasurys in an effort to limit a decline in the ruble.

Businesses boostedtheir stockpiles 0.4 percent in February after a similar 0.4
percent increase in January. Inventories held by manufacturers rose the most in
February, a gain of 0.7 percent.

Washington

The Congressional Budget Officelowered estimates of the federal health-care
law's cost by $104 billion over the next decade.

A federal appeals court said the Environmental Protection Agency can force power
plants to cut mercury emissions without considering the cost.

The Obama administration reportedly told mutual-fund and hedge-fund managers
that it was planning more sanctions against Russia over the conflict in Ukraine.

Transitions

China set out to "sweep out porn" and "strike at rumors" on the Internet, a move
critics said stifles dissent.

- From news services and staff reports

7.4%China's economic growth

China's economy slowed to a24-year low in the first quarter. That was down from
the fourth quarter's 7.7 percent and came in below the full-year official growth
target of 7.5 percent. After a decade of explosive economic expansion, Beijing
is trying to guide China to slower, more sustainable growth based on domestic
consumption rather than trade and investment.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


