                             2666 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 10, 2014 Thursday 2:42 AM EST

World Digest: April 10, 20

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 821 words


ISRAEL          Ministers cut contact with Palestinians

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ordered hisministers Wednesday to cut
off contact with their Palestinian counterparts, an official said,the latest in
a series of troubles plaguing floundering U.S.-brokered peace talks.

The move is retaliation for a Palestinian bid to join U.N. agencies, which the
official said was a violation of the Palestinians' commitment in the peace
talks. The Palestinians dismissed the Israeli move, saying both sides rarely
meet now as it is.

The latest Israeli-Palestinian spat came as Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas sought and secured a renewal of political and financial support
from his Arab brethren at a meeting in Cairo. Arab foreign ministers renewed
their commitment to give $100 million in monthly aid to Abbas's government and
blamed Israel for the talks' troubles.

- Associated Press

IRAN          Tehran sees progress toward nuclear deal

Iranian Foreign MinisterMohammad Javad Zarif said Wednesday that his country and
six world powers are in "50 to 60 percent agreement" on the shape of a deal
meant to crimp any potential Iranian attempt to build nuclear arms in exchange
for an end to economic sanctions.

Speaking for the six powers, European Union foreign policy chief Catherine
Ashton was less upbeat as the talks reached the halfway mark toward their
informal July 20 deadline. Ashton said that "a lot of intensive work will be
required to overcome the differences ahead." But Ashton suggested that some
progress was made and that negotiators are looking to the next round to "bridge
the gaps standing in way of a comprehensive agreement."

The future scope of Iran'suranium-enrichment program remains the toughest issue.
Iran denies any interest in nuclear arms and argues that it needsrobust
enrichment capacities to make low-enriched reactor fuel.

- Associated Press

SOUTH AFRICA          Pistorius undergoesfierce questioning

A shaken Oscar Pistorius refused to look at a gruesome photograph of his
girlfriend's bloodied head Wednesday, telling a prosecutor through tears, "I
don't have to look at a picture. I was there."

"It's time that you look at it," chief prosecutor Gerrie Nel retorted during a
fierce first day of cross-examination, in which he doggedly pressed the
double-amputee Olympian to "take responsibility" for the shooting death of Reeva
Steenkamp.

Gasps could be heard in the courtroom from spectators, including the dead
woman's mother, when the police photo suddenly appeared on multiple TV screens.
It showed Steenkamp's head turned to the side, her blond hair drenched in blood
and a mass of tissue on the back and upper parts of her skull.Pistorius turned
away and refused to look at the image.

Pistorius, 27, is charged with premeditated murder in theValentine's Day 2013
shooting of Steenkamp, who was shot three times - in the head, arm and hip - as
she cowered behind a locked toilet door. Pistorius says he shot the 29-year-old
model and law school graduate by mistake, thinking she was a dangerous intruder.

- Associated Press

British culture minister resigns amid scandal:British Prime Minister David
Cameron suffered a blow to his authority Wednesday when a scandal-hit minister
he had been doggedly defending resigned. Maria Miller, Britain's minister for
culture, stepped down after a backlash against her expense claims disrupted
efforts by Cameron and his ruling Conservative Party to woo voters ahead of
European Parliament elections next month. Cameron's party is expected to finish
a humiliating third in the vote behind the surging U.K.Independence Party, which
opposes E.U. membership. UKIP's leader had accused Cameron of making a
"catastrophic" error of judgment by failing to fire Miller.

Car bombs kill at least 25, injure 100 in Syrian city of Homs:Two car bombs
exploded Wednesday in a government-held district of Syria's battleground city of
Homs, killing at least 25 people and wounding more than 100, state media said.
The blasts hit a commercial street inhabited mostly by members of President
Bashar al-Assad's minority Alawite sect. Government forces have been imposing a
heavy siege on rebel-controlled districts of the centrally located city.

Suspect in killing of AP photographer questioned:Afghan central government
authorities on Wednesday began questioning the police commander being held in
the killing of Associated Press photographer Anja Niedringhaus and wounding of
AP correspondent Kathy Gannon. The Afghan Interior Ministry said it won't
speculate about a motive so early in its probe into the attack, but local
security officials who spoke with the suspect after he was first detained said
he seemed a calm, pious man who may have come under the influence of Islamist
extremists calling for vengeance against foreigners over drone strikes.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


