                             2647 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      March 13, 2014 Thursday 3:13 AM EST

A 'revolution' brews among some Iraqi Sunni leaders

BYLINE: Jane Arraf

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1377 words


AMMAN, Jordan - In offices above busy commercial streets here in the Jordanian
capital, Iraqi tribal and religious leaders are plotting a revolution in their
own country.

"It is a war," said Muthana al-Dari, surrounded by satellite maps of flash
points in western Iraq, where government security forces, tribes and
al-Qaeda-inspired insurgents are engulfed in a complicated clash.

Neighboring Jordan, long a haven for dissident Iraqi Sunnis, has quietly emerged
in the past two years as a base for tribal leaders who say they have launched a
new battle to topple Iraq's Shiite prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, and to roll
back Iranian influence in the region.

In recent months, the influential Association of Muslim Scholars of Iraq, led by
a group of Sunni clerics, has forged close links to a military command that
emerged after Iraqi security forces moved in January to try to reclaim the
western city of Fallujah from Islamist fighters, who had captured it in
December.

With an increasingly sectarian war in Syria rippling throughout the region and
Iraqi political alliances unraveling, the battle for Fallujah is now more
complex than it was 10 years ago, when U.S. troops essentially destroyed the
city to wrest it from al-Qaeda. Today, as the Shiite-dominated Iraqi security
forces strive to expel the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) from the
surrounding Anbar province, they are also struggling to win the loyalty of the
region's Sunni tribes.

"Tribes are really torn between different groups," said Iraq's deputy national
security adviser, Safa Rasul Hussein. "We've seen in some tribes, the father has
a position and his son has a different position. . . . Some from the tribes are
fighting with ISIS, but some are also fighting against them."

The new command, the General Military Council for  Iraqi Revolutionaries,
emerged as a unified leadership of what it calls regional military councils
coordinating attacks against Iraqi security forces and officials. The councils
include tribal leaders and former insurgent leaders but are headed by former
senior army officers - among the thousands of Sunni generals cast aside when the
United States disbanded the Iraqi army after the toppling of Saddam Hussein in
2003.

The Muslim scholars association said it is not a wing of the military council.
But it says it coordinates closely with the council, and some of its officials
acknowledge that they are in a temporary alliance with al-Qaeda, which disowned
ISIS in February.

"We consider the Iraqi government illegitimate because it is a result of [the
U.S.] occupation," said Dari, head of the association's information office and
the son of its leader, Harith al-Dari, who is accused by the United States of
links to terrorist groups.

After the U.S.-led invasion in 2003, several tribes in Anbar formed alliances
with al-Qaeda. The group's brutality alienated many Iraqis, and al-Qaeda retains
little popular support, but long-held Sunni grievances against the Shiite-led
government - including mass arrests, executions without fair trial, and a lack
of jobs and government services - are helping to fuel the current fighting in
Anbar.

"Maliki has attacked the people, so the people defended themselves, rose up and
revolted. So it has now been transformed into a revolution," Dari said.

Fragmentation and cohesion

Since the start two years ago of widespread Sunni protests, Iraq's Sunni
leadership has fragmented, and many have become more radicalized. Many Sunni
tribal leaders are still allied with the government, and the scholars
association and those fighting government forces are thought to represent a much
smaller constituency.

Nonetheless, it is posing one of the biggest challenges to central government
authority since U.S. troops left Iraq at the end of 2011.

Baghdad views the Sunni military council's daily communiques, which assert
responsibility for shooting down Iraqi army helicopters and burning tanks, as
exaggerated. But Iraqi and Western officials acknowledge that the uprising in
Anbar is militarily more proficient than the insurgency that gripped Iraq during
the U.S.-led war.

"They have improved 100 percent," said an Iraqi official, speaking on the
condition of anonymity to candidly discuss the Iraqi forces' campaign in Anbar.
Iraqi officials and Western security analysts say that those fighting Iraqi
special forces include skilled snipers and that they possess the explosives
expertise that has been the hallmark of al-Qaeda.

The fighters are armed with rocket launchers, machine guns and explosives, Dari
said, and their targets are Iraqi security forces and government installations,
including the Baghdad airport and the fortified Green Zone.

"Today we are in the midst of an armed rebellion with a central command. Because
of this, the whole thing has become much more organized and less random," said
Sheik Mohammad Bashar Faidhi, a key figure in the Muslim scholars association.

The military council, he said, increasingly has "the footprints of a
professional army."

Iraqi forces have been able to push back anti-government fighters, but officials
say they have been unable to hold the territory they have won. The Iraqi army is
so loathed in Anbar that commanders have not sent troops in to secure those
areas, and large-scale desertions of local police have left almost no other
Iraqi security presence.

Faced with the prospect of the government losing control of the province, where
more than 1,000 U.S.troops lost their lives trying to drive out al-Qaeda, the
United States has recently stepped up its assistance to the Iraqi government,
offering intelligence help as well as small arms, missiles, drones and attack
helicopters.

"The Americans are helping more," Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari said. "They
are haunted by Fallujah."

In Baghdad's Green Zone, officials in the prime minister's office say they see
the talk of revolution as vindication of their long-held warnings of a coup
attempt emerging from Anbar.

"Anyone who engages in any military actions is showing solidarity" with ISIS,
said Ali al-Mussawi, an adviser to Maliki. "They are considered one and the
same."

The battle in Jordan

Some of the battle is being waged from across Iraq's western border, in Jordan,
a kingdom that opposes any attempt to topple the Baghdad government but allows
Iraqi anti-government groups to operate within its borders.

Much of Jordan's almost exclusively Sunni population holds a deep suspicion of
Iraq's Shiite-led government. Some Jordanian politicians remain sympathetic to
Hussein's pan-Arab Baath Party ideology. And there are tribal links between Iraq
and Jordan, particularly with the tribes of Anbar province.

But the Jordanian government has also fought its own battles with Islamist
terrorists, including the Jordanian-born leader of al-Qaeda in Iraq, Abu Musab
al-Zarqawi, who was killed in a U.S. airstrike in 2006.

The Iraqi government has previously asked Jordan to extradite Harith al-Dari, a
request the Jordanians have refused. The United States six years ago accused
Dari of ordering and directing the kidnappings and killings of Iraqi civilians
as well as Iraqi and U.S. security officials.

"There is a view among the Jordanian intelligence services that they prefer to
have these people where they can keep an eye on them," said a Western diplomat
who was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly. Jordanian officials
declined to comment.

Bashar, the Muslim scholars association figure, said the aim of the tribes
fighting Iraqi government forces is to "liberate" the country from the influence
of Iran - like Iraq, a Shiite-majority country - and form a nonreligious
government that incorporates Sunni interests.

It is a very different vision from that of the Islamist fighters of al-Qaeda and
ISIS, who believe that Muslims should live in one Islamic state governed by
sharia law.

But some Sunni tribal leaders appear to have entered a marriage of convenience
with al-Qaeda, deeming it a lesser evil than the Iraqi government - for now.

"Sometimes [al-Qaeda] joins in the fight, and sometimes it doesn't fight - it
just watches," Bashar said. "We expect there will come a day when we will have
to fight with this group."

foreign@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


