                             2621 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     February 11, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

U.S. Consulate worker shot dead in Peshawar

BYLINE: Haq Nawaz Khan;Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 614 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -  A Pakistani employee of the U.S. Consulate in Peshawar was
shot and killed Monday while traveling home from work, the latest in a string of
targeted assassinations in that area, local officials said.

Najeeb Khan, a local police official, said the consulate employee was walking
home in the capital of Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province when gunmen opened
fire on him as he approached his house. The man, identified as Faisal Saeed, was
killed and the gunmen fled, Khan said.

Khan and hospital officials said Saeed was an employee of the U.S. Consulate.
Reached by phone, a friend said that Saeed, 30, worked as a computer programmer
at the consulate and was active in updating its Facebook page.

The friend, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of safety concerns,
said Saeed "was talking on his phone outside of his house when two armed men
shot him and fled."

"They did not take his belongings and his mobile," the friend said.

The U.S. Embassy in Islamabad confirmed the incident.

"Local authorities are investigating a tragic incident that has affected a
Pakistani national U.S. consulate Peshawar employee," the embassy said in a
statement. "We strongly condemn this brutal and senseless death and express our
heartfelt condolences to the family."

The United States maintains consulates in the Pakistani cities of Karachi,
Lahore and Peshawar, in addition to its embassy in Islamabad. But because of
specific threats over the summer, the consulate in Lahore, in eastern Pakistan,
was closed to the public in August. It remains closed for consular services.

Security also has been an ongoing concern for consulate staff in Peshawar. In
September 2012, two American employees of the consulate were wounded when a
suicide bomber struck a convoy in which they were traveling. In 2010, two
Pakistani employees were among eight people killed in a terrorist attack near
the consulate.

But Pakistani officials refused to speculate whether Saeed was targeted because
of his affiliation with the U.S. government. There has also been a spate of
targeted assassinations in Peshawar in recent months as Sunni militants attack
Shiite professionals.

Meanwhile on Monday, four women were killed when a suicide bomber detonated his
explosives during a funeral procession in Peshawar, police said. In Peshawar's
Hangu district, three teachers were also gunned down in the morning, according
to Pakistan's Dawn newspaper.

There was no immediate assertion of responsibility for any of the attacks.

Last week, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's government began preliminary peace
talks with Taliban insurgents to try to curb years of bloodshed. In the coming
days, a three-member delegation representing the Taliban is expected to release
its demands for reaching a negotiated peace settlement.

In recent days, various Taliban officials and news reports have indicated that
the demands would include imposing Islamic law in Pakistan, releasing all
Taliban prisoners, providing compensation for the victims of U.S. drone strikes
and cutting off ties with the United States. But other Taliban officials have
stressed that no final decision has been made on the group's demands.

While the talks proceed, a senior Taliban spokesman said Monday, the militant
group has agreed to curtail its attacks. But a group that had been affiliated
with the Pakistani Taliban, Ahar-ul-Hind, issued a statement saying it was
breaking ties with the Taliban due to the peace process.

"Sharia cannot be implemented through dialogue," said Asad Mansoor, a spokesman
for Ahar-ul-Hind.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Craig reported from Kabul. Aamir Iqbal in Islamabad contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


