                             2673 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       April 21, 2014 Monday 10:13 PM EST

SECTION: ; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 858 words


Have a heart: 'Flying nannies' swoop in

Etihad Airwayscontinued its support for medical services and research at
Children's National Medical Center in Washington, unveiling a Cardiac Intensive
Care room where patients with heart conditions and other cardiovascular ailments
will be treated.

Based in the United Arab Emirates, Etihad has become more charitable in
Washington since debuting daily nonstop flights from Dulles to Abu Dhabi last
year. The airline also co-sponsored the hospital's annual ball, which raises
money for research and facility improvements.

Yousef Al Otaiba, the UAE ambassador to the United States, and Ray Gammell,
Etihad's chief people and performance officer, attended the room's opening on
April 11. Also present were  Kurt Newman, the medical center's chief executive,
and Fox News anchorman Bret Baier, who sits on the board of the Children's
Hospital Foundation.

But the event wasn't all about formalities. Also on hand were Etihad's "Flying
Nannies," the name given to cabin crew members with child-care training, who
entertained young patients with games, magic tricks and face painting, according
to a news release.

-Steven Overly

Tackling poverty: Investing for impact

The D.C.-based Hitachi Foundation last week announced a new initiative aimed at
developing business solutions to help low-income Americans. The foundation is
teaming up Village Capital of Atlanta and Investors' Circle, two groups that
target entrepreneurs trying to make an impact on social or environmental causes.
The new initiative plans to select up to 15 socially minded entrepreneurs to go
through a business accelerator program run by Village Capital. The best ideas
are then eligible for investments from Village Capital, and Investors' Circle.
Nearly 80 business owners, investors and members of the philanthropy community
attended the announcement at the  National Press Club  where the foundation
introduced the initiative called, Solutions from Our Country's Entrepreneurs
(SOURCE). After a panel discussion, which included James Lee Sorenson, founder
of  the Salt Lake City, Utah-based James Lee Sorenson Global Impact Investing
Center, attendees broke up into groups to address problems that business owners
face when tackling issues that affect the poor. The Hitachi Foundation, which
provides grants that develop business practices to create economic opportunity,
gave $520,000 to kickstart the initiative.

-Vanessa Small

Justice for all: Lawyers celebrate

Sen. Rob Portman(R-Ohio) and Reps. Mike Quigley(D-Ill.) and Blaine Luetkemeyer
(R-Mo.) took a break from Capitol Hill April 9 to dine with about 100 lawyers
who flocked to Washington for ABA Day, the annual lobbying event for the
American Bar Association.

Held at the U.S. Institute of Peace, the dinner and awards ceremony honored
Portman, Quigley and Leutkemeyer (and Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand(D-NY), who was not
in attendance) for their work with the U.S. justice system.

One of the association's lobbying priorities this year was funding for Legal
Services Corp., the Georgetown-based nonprofit that distributes federal grants
to legal aid groups providing civil legal services to the poor.

-Catherine Ho

Leading edge: We still got it

Northrop Grumman chairman and chief executive Wes Bush made a pitch last week
for the innovation prowess of the defense industry, saying it  is every bit as
cutting edge as some of those Silicon Valley upstarts you might have heard
about.

What  is Northrop working on? asked Carlyle Group co-founder David M. Rubenstein
, who interviewed Bush during a breakfast get-together of the Economic Club of
Washington.

Bush said the company had recently successfully landed a robotic unmanned
vehicle (don't call it a drone, Bush warned) on the deck of an aircraft carrier.
"You can see it on YouTube," Bush said.

Rubenstein wanted to know if Bush, who earned a bachelor's and master's degree
in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ever
wanted to be an astronaut.

"I think we all want to be an astronaut at some point," Bush said.

The bookish Rubenstein, no fan of great heights, deadpanned: "I probably didn't
want to be an astronaut."

-Dan Beyers

Workplace honors: And the winner is. . .

The Alliance for Workplace Excellence announced last week the winners of its
annual awards that recognize employers who have built a strong office culture or
offer exceptional benefits. The Cabin John-based organization has selected 66
employers this year to receive commendations for excellence in workplace or
health and wellness programs, leadership on environmental issues, or commitment
to diversity in the workplace. This year's honorees include major local
employers such as Adventist HealthCare and Booz Allen Hamilton; nonprofits such
as the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association; and small businesses such
as Marstel-Day and Cassaday & Co. The winners will be honored at an awards
banquet in May at the Bethesda North Marriott Hotel and Conference Center.

-Sarah Halzack

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


