                             2627 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 16, 2014 Sunday 8:14 PM EST

Democrats' next leaders will grapple with schism

BYLINE: Dan Balz;Philip Rucker

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2479 words


With three years remaining in the presidency of Barack Obama, the party he has
led since mesmerizing members with his 2008 campaign has begun debating a
post-Obama future.

Though more united than Republicans, Democrats nevertheless face simmering
tensions between the establishment and a newly energized populist wing, led by
the unabashed liberalism of New York Mayor Bill de Blasio and the fiery rhetoric
of Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren.

The schisms are as much stylistic as substantive. But however defined, they
offer a challenge to the party's next leader, whether former secretary of state
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Vice President Biden or any number of lesser-knowns who
await a decision by Clinton before making their own.

All will have to grapple with this reality. The Democratic Party, by various
measures of public opinion, has moved to the left in the past decade. But that
does not necessarily mean that progressives have become the party's dominant
force or that the policies and messages they advocate can carry the day in a
national election.

"Nothing moves a party more than copying successful people," said Andrew Stern,
the former president of the Service Employees International Union, as he pointed
to the prominence of de Blasio and Warren. "I think the party tends to drift in
the direction of its successful innovators."

But Stern cautioned that the bigger test of who holds power inside the party is
proving those ideas can attract voters beyond staunchly liberal states or
cities.

"It is fair to say that more liberal places find politicians first who are more
willing to step out on these issues," he said. "But it is not a shift until it's
seen to work in Minnesota or Wisconsin or New Mexico or Arizona."

Adam Green, a co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, a
grass-roots group that has helped propel Warren's rise, said the populist wing
of the party is clearly ascendant.

"There's been consensus in both parties since the 1990s Clinton days where big
corporations run the show and both parties suck up to them and everything else
falls into place from there," he said. "The Elizabeth Warren wing really
believes in challenging the current state of who has power and who has
influence."

But other Democrats counter that the party must be careful about how it shapes
its message and policies. Delaware Gov. Jack Markell, who came up through the
centrist ranks of the party, noted that in the past when the progressive or
liberal wings of the party were flourishing - he cited George McGovern's
candidacy in 1972 and Walter F. Mondale's in 1984 - the party suffered major
defeats.

"The idea of us as a party not continuing to understand where the people of the
country are - we ignore all of that at our own peril," he said.

How big a shift?

The Democratic Party of 2014 is one shaped both by the influences of former
president Bill Clinton's New Democrat ideas and the more liberal policy
initiatives and cultural changes that have defined Obama's presidency.

Obama's tenure has intensified the debate over whether the Democrats are more
ideologically liberal than they were a decade or two ago.

Conservatives see a president who has brought government much deeper into the
health-care system, whose economic policies significantly increase the deficit
and whose bent is for more government and more spending. But progressives see a
president who lacks the populist edge they say the times demand and who has
fallen short of the promise of his first campaign.

By many measures, the party is certainly seen as more liberal than it once was.
For the past 40 years, the American National Election Studies surveys have asked
people for their perceptions of the two major parties. The 2012 survey found,
for the first time, that a majority of Americans describe the Democratic Party
as liberal, with 57 percent using that label. Four years earlier, only 48
percent described the Democrats as liberal.

(In the same survey, 59 percent said they saw the Republicans as conservative,
up from 52 percent four years earlier.)

Gallup reported last month that 43 percent of surveyed Democrats identified
themselves as liberal, the high-water mark for the party on that measurement. In
Gallup's 2000 measures, just 29 percent of Democrats labeled themselves as
liberals.

Still, liberals are a plurality of the Democratic Party, not a majority, which
is strikingly different from the Republican Party, where Gallup found that 70
percent identified themselves as conservative.

Joel Benenson, who was Obama's lead pollster in 2008 and 2012, said Democrats
are and always have been a progressive party, but they have balanced those ideas
with practical policies that have attracted voters.

Asked about claims by some grass-roots progressives that the party is now
Warren's party, he said, "I don't know what it means. Do you think that Harry
Reid thinks it's an Elizabeth Warren party? Do you think Chuck Schumer thinks
it's an Elizabeth Warren party? Do you think Hillary Clinton thinks it's an
Elizabeth Warren party? Do you think Barack Obama thinks it's an Elizabeth
Warren party? Or Nancy Pelosi?"

Democrats are most united on cultural and social issues, and it is here where
the party has most obviously moved to the left, particularly on same-sex
marriage and even the legalization of marijuana. But the party's shift reflects
overall changes in public attitudes that have kept the Democrats within a new
political mainstream on these issues.

Women's issues have provided even more cohesiveness within the party's
coalition.

"We've seen a gender gap for two decades now, but what we saw in 2012 was a
larger step toward women voters standing with the Democrats in a much, much
larger way," said Stephanie Schriock, president of Emily's List, a group that
helps elect pro-choice Democratic women. "There's such a contrast right now
between the two parties on issues impacting women and families."

On issues of national security and foreign policy, divisions remain. Obama may
be president because he opposed the Iraq war and Clinton voted as senator to
give then-President George W. Bush the authority to take the country to war.
Obama has ended the war in Iraq and is ending the war in Afghanistan, but some
progressives are at odds with him over other aspects of his national security
policies.

Clinton may continue to disagree with part of her party's base on these issues.
Her record in the Senate and as secretary of state is one in which she has been,
by evidence available today, fully supportive of the president's drone policy
and the National Security Agency's surveillance policies.

Economic challenges

On economic issues, the party is torn between two key parts of its coalition.

"One of the biggest failings of the Democratic Party," Stern said, "is that its
funders come from its traditional side of the economic spectrum and its voters
come from a more populist, distributive side of the economic agenda."

Former Montana governor Brian Schweitzer said, "I think the party increasingly
is responding to the special interests they need to get elected - the military-
industrial complex, big energy, pharmaceutical companies, banks."

Yet in both policies and tone, there are indications that Democrats have moved
to the left. Democratic candidates from all regions - including two potential
rising stars running for the Senate in conservative states, Michelle Nunn in
Georgia and Alison Lundergan Grimes in Kentucky - have embraced raising the
minimum wage. This is a centerpiece of Obama's agenda heading into this fall's
midterm campaigns.

Democrats favor raising taxes on the wealthiest Americans, a rallying cry dating
to the 1990s, but there are differences in the magnitude of tax increases and
whom they would impact. New York is a microcosm. De Blasio and Gov. Andrew M.
Cuomo both support expanding access to pre-kindergarten programs. But de Blasio
wants to pay for it by raising taxes on the rich in New York City, while Cuomo
objects to paying for universal pre-kindergarten through tax hikes.

Hostility to free-trade agreements is still deep among part of the Democratic
coalition, but that tension has existed for decades. While many better-educated,
upscale voters do not fear the impact of free trade, others, led by organized
labor, look at stagnant wages and the difficult job market and attribute those
hardships to trade.

Perhaps more than any other economic issue, income inequality has animated
progressive activists and voters. Party strategists say this energy is being
fueled by lingering fury at Wall Street tycoons, whom they blame for the
financial collapse, and deep unease about the nation's eroding middle class.

"There's a consciousness developing that's related to this issue of inequality
and the unfairness of our system and the wealth gap that has the potential to
really grow and develop into a strong movement that will be reflected in coming
elections," former Ohio governor Ted Strickland said.

William A. Galston of the Brookings Institution said, "It's not just a case of
the very rich getting richer. If that were the only thing going on I think we'd
be having a very different conversation. It's also a case of the people in the
middle at best treading water and in fact doing a little bit worse than that."

Warren, with her calls for tougher Wall Street regulations, and de Blasio, with
his campaign mantle of "a tale of two cities," have galvanized voters with fiery
lines and fresh thinking.

"Part of it is really expanding the debate beyond the sterile ideas that have
been in D.C. for a while," Green said. "When the question was should we renew
current interest rates for students or not, Elizabeth Warren said, wait, why is
that the norm? Let's give students the low rates that banks get, and she focused
attention on the sweetheart deals we give the big guys."

Obama and Senate Democrats running in difficult 2014 campaigns are adopting a
more moderate approach - especially in rhetoric, style and emphasis. Where
Warren speaks of economic justice and calls for Wall Street executives to be
brought to trial, Obama talks, as he did in his  State of the Union address last
month, of expanding growth and opportunity.

Matt Bennett, a senior vice president at Third Way, a centrist think tank, said
Obama's approach is more resonant for more voters.

"What folks out in the country are trying to do is find a way to maintain their
lifestyle," he said. "Other than an intellectual exercise, they don't see the
struggle as focused on rich people. It is about their own situation and their
own ability to make their way through a very difficult economy."

Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown, a leading liberal, said Democrats must not lose sight
of their tradition as the party of progressive ideas.

"Fundamentally, there's two things that elections and governing are all about -
the future and whose side are you on," he said. "Democrats win elections and
govern well when we keep that front and center. . . . It's always important to
put some new face on this, and it matters how you dress it up, but fundamentally
it's the historic difference between the parties."

Stern offered one caution to those on the left: "I think it's really not helpful
for the Democrats to turn this into an attack on the 1 percent. I don't think
it's in the American spirit, or at least the Democratic Party's future spirit.
As Republicans attack immigration, we attack rich people? If you learned
anything from the president, selling hope is better than selling hate."

Looking ahead

For Democrats who could lead the party in the future, the challenge will be to
articulate a new populist direction without denigrating the Obama record or
abandoning the contributions of Bill Clinton. At the moment, Hillary Clinton is
an overwhelming front-runner, and Democrats expect that, should she decide to
run, she would define their party for the post-Obama era.

There is an assumption that if she faces a primary challenge in 2016, it would
come from the left. Yet at this point, Clinton is as popular with the left in
her party as with moderates and conservatives.

The most recent Washington Post-ABC News poll tested Clinton against other
possible Democratic candidates and found 73 percent saying they favored her for
the nomination. She had the backing of 74 percent of liberals, men, non-whites
and those with college degrees. She had the support of 73 percent of moderates,
women, whites and those without college degrees.

But that does not take away from the fact that Clinton would be under pressure
to articulate a fresh economic vision to a party in which there is growing
demand for a more populist edge to the rhetoric.

"The really interesting question is what changes in the political environment
mean for the kind of economic policies she will advocate," Galston said. "I
don't think she knows. . . . I'm pretty sure two things will not work: number
one, pure undistilled populism; number two, a return to the centrist economics
of the past. Neither of those is a formula."

Some potential liberal primary challengers, like Schweitzer, are provocative but
would have difficulty mounting a serious national campaign.

"Remember the song that was blaring when the Clintons took office? Fleetwood
Mac, 'Don't Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow),' " Schweitzer said. "If we have a
candidate that's thinking about tomorrow, we'll be very successful. If we have
candidates that are the Beatles' song 'Yesterday,' we won't."

Biden looms as a more serious potential candidate. He has been a key player in
developing the Obama administration's economic program. He oversaw the stimulus,
led a middle-class task force and is focusing this year on job-training
programs.

Beyond Clinton and Biden, however, the party has few elected officials with
national standing. The 2010 elections cost the Democrats control of
governorships in states including Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania.
That has left them with a more limited pool of candidates with executive
experience and a record of action.

Governors often mentioned as possible candidates, especially with Clinton not in
the race, include New York's Cuomo, Martin O'Malley of Maryland and John
Hickenlooper of Colorado. California's Jerry Brown has already said he will not
run in 2016.

Attention also could turn to a liberal like former Wisconsin senator Russell
Feingold or a trio of female senators - Warren, Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and
Kirsten Gillibrand of New York. All three signed a letter last year saying they
would support Clinton but would factor into the conversation if Clinton opts
out.

One thing Democrats seem to agree on is this: If Clinton decides not to run,
there will be chaos inside the party.

dan.balz@washpost.com

philip.rucker@washpost.com

Scott Clement and Peyton Craighill contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


