                             2644 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      March 12, 2014 Wednesday 3:08 AM EST

Feinstein says CIA illegally spied on Senate

BYLINE: Greg Miller;Ed O'Keefe;Adam Goldman

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1391 words


A behind-the-scenes battle between the CIA and Congress erupted in public
Tuesday as the head of the Senate Intelligence Committee accused the agency of
breaking laws and breaching constitutional principles in an alleged effort to
undermine the panel's multi-year investigation of a controversial interrogation
program.

Chairman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) accused the CIA of secretly removing
documents, searching computers used by the committee and attempting to
intimidate congressional investigators by requesting an FBI inquiry of their
conduct - charges that CIA Director John Brennan disputed within hours of her
appearance on the Senate floor.

Feinstein described the escalating conflict as a "defining moment" for
Congress's role in overseeing the nation's intelligence agencies and cited
"grave concerns" that the CIA had "violated the separation-of-powers principles
embodied in the United States Constitution."

Brennan fired back during a previously scheduled speech in Washington, saying
that "when the facts come out on this, I think a lot of people who are claiming
that there has been this tremendous sort of spying and monitoring and hacking
will be proved wrong."

The dueling claims exposed bitterness and distrust that have soared to new
levels as the committee nears completion of a 6,000-page report that is expected
to serve as a scathing historical record of the agency's use of waterboarding
and other brutal interrogation methods on terrorism suspects held at secret CIA
prisons overseas after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

Displaying flashes of anger during her floor speech, Feinstein said her
committee would soon deliver the report to the White House and push for
declassification of a document that lays bare "the horrible details of the CIA
program that never, never, never should have existed."

The latest dispute is in some ways a proxy for a deeper conflict over that
document. The CIA and the committee are at odds over many of the report's
conclusions about the effectiveness of the interrogation program, but they are
battling primarily over tension that surfaced during the investigation.

Feinstein's remarks provided the most detailed account of that investigation,
describing an arrangement in which the CIA set up a secret facility in Northern
Virginia with computers where committee investigators were promised unfettered
access to millions of operational cables, executive memos and other files on the
interrogation program.

The disagreement between Feinstein and Brennan centers on whether agency
employees or committee staff members - or both - abused their access to that
shared network to gain an upper hand.

Feinstein implied that the CIA sabotaged the committee's efforts from the
outset, loading a massive amount of files on computers with no index, structure
or ability to search. "It was a true document dump," she said.

Over a period of years, investigators pored over more than 6.2 million
classified records furnished by the CIA, using a search tool that agency
technical experts agreed to install. But U.S. officials said the committee
gained access to a set of documents that the agency never intended to share,
files that were generated at the direction of former director Leon E. Panetta as
part of an effort to take an inventory of the records being turned over to
Feinstein's panel.

The two sides have engaged in heated exchanges in recent days over the nature of
those files and how they were obtained.

Referring to them as the "Panetta internal review," Feinstein insisted that
committee staff members discovered the documents during an ordinary search of
the trove. She said they are particularly valuable because in tracking the flow
of documents, CIA employees in some cases drew conclusions about their contents
that match the subsequent interpretations made by committee staff members.

Jeremy Bash, Panetta's former chief of staff, said Tuesday that that was never
the director's intent. Panetta "did not request an internal review of the
interrogation program," he said. "He asked the CIA staff to keep track of
documents that were being provided. . . . He asked that they develop short
summaries of the material, so that we would know what was being provided."

Meanwhile, a letter that Brennan distributed to the CIA workforce on Tuesday
raised questions about Feinstein's claims and her awareness of how and when the
committee obtained what she is calling the Panetta review files.

The letter, which Brennan sent to Feinstein on Jan. 27 and which was attached to
a message he sent the workforce, recounts a meeting they had weeks earlier to
discuss the matter. During that meeting, Feinstein said she didn't know that the
committee already had copies of the Panetta review. Brennan pushed her to
explain why the panel had recently requested the files when they were already in
its possession.

"You informed me that you were not aware that the committee staff already had
access to the materials you had requested," Brennan wrote, according to a copy
obtained by The Washington Post. Brennan urged Feinstein to work with the agency
to determine how the committee had obtained the documents, a request she
ultimately rejected, officials said.

The CIA began to suspect that the panel had obtained those files this year after
lawmakers referred to the supposed "internal review" publicly. U.S. officials
said CIA security personnel then checked the logs of the computer system it had
set up for the committee, and found that the files had been moved to a part of
the network that was off-limits to the CIA.

"They did something to get those documents," said a U.S. official briefed on the
matter. A security "firewall was breached. They figured out a work-around to get
it." The official declined to elaborate.

Feinstein said the review documents were "identified using the search tool
provided by the CIA" but she was careful not to say precisely how they were
obtained. "We don't know whether the documents were provided intentionally by
the CIA, unintentionally by the CIA, or intentionally by a whistleblower," she
said.

She acknowledged, however, that committee investigators made hard copies of
those files and whisked them away to its offices on Capitol Hill, in part
because the committee had previously seen cases in which more than 900 pages of
records disappeared from the database with no explanation.

Feinstein expressed outrage that the CIA referred the matter to the FBI. "There
is no legitimate reason to allege to the Justice Department that Senate staff
may have committed a crime," she said, describing the move as a "potential
effort to intimidate this staff, and I am not taking it lightly."

She also noted that the referral was made by Robert Eatinger, the CIA's acting
general counsel, who previously served as the top lawyer for the department that
ran the CIA's secret prisons, and who "is mentioned by name more than 1,600
times in our study."

Feinstein, who has been a staunch supporter of other CIA programs including its
drone campaign, said the agency may have violated Fourth Amendment protections
against unreasonable searches, as well as laws against domestic surveillance.

Although Republicans on the committee initially voted in favor of opening the
investigation, GOP members abandoned the effort after it began and none has
voted to endorse it.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), a member of the intelligence panel, told Bloomberg
News that the dispute is "more complicated than what's being put out there by
Senator Feinstein or others. . . . I don't think anyone has a clean hand and I
think it's important for the full truth to come out. I think people may be
surprised to learn that, in this case, there were no good guys and maybe two or
three bad ones."

[Read a full transcript of Feinstein's remarks.]

Brennan said he had ordered the CIA's inspector general to review the agency's
conduct. The inspector general, in turn, has issued a separate referral seeking
a Justice Department review.

Asked whether he would resign if the CIA was found to be in the wrong, Brennan
said he would let the president decide his fate. "If I did something wrong, I
will go to the president," the director said. "He is the one who can ask me to
stay or to go."

greg. miller@washpost.com

ed.okeefe@washpost.com

adam.goldman@washpost.com

Ellen Nakashima and Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


