                             2642 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       March 11, 2014 Tuesday 3:06 AM EST

Senate Democrats to pull all-nighter to talk climate

BYLINE: Ed O'Keefe

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 445 words


More than two dozen Senate Democrats planned to devote several hours late Monday
and early Tuesday morning speaking on the Senate floor in a renewed push for
congressional action on climate change.

Environmental groups, buoyed by President Obama's new aggressive strategy to
protect public lands and cut carbon emissions, have been pushing Senate
Democrats to adopt a strategy used last year by Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Ted
Cruz (R-Tex.), who steered hours-long filibusters to blast the Obama
administration's drone and spending policies that garnered widespread attention.

With environmentalists planning to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to help
Democratic congressional candidates this year, Majority Leader Harry M. Reid
(D-Nev.) has said that he will continue to devote Senate floor time to any
colleague eager to discuss the issue. He reiterated that vow while attending a
February fundraiser at the San Francisco home of billionaire businessman Thomas
Steyer that netted $400,000 for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

Steyer has quickly emerged as a new source of outside campaign money for
Democrats attempting to match the rise of conservative super PACs attacking
Democrats on the airwaves. He plans to use his advocacy group, NextGen Political
Action, to spend about $100 million helping Democrats this year. Steyer says
that half of the money will come from his fortune as a former hedge-fund
manager, while he hopes the other half will come from donors.

The group plans to stay out of races involving Democrats who oppose climate
regulation. That's why Democratic senators facing tricky reelection races this
year - including Sens. Mark Begich (Alaska), Kay Hagan (N.C.) and Mary Landrieu
(La.) - were not expected to participate Monday night.

But Sen. Brian Schatz (D-Hawaii) said he and other Democrats are eager to
discuss the issue and take action. "We're not going to rest until Congress wakes
up and acts on the most pressing issue of our time," he said, adding later:
"Climate change is real, it is caused by humans, it is happening now and it is
solvable."

Republicans dismissed the Democratic talkathon as an orchestrated thank-you gift
for Steyer and other environmentalists.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who is running for reelection in
a state dependent on the coal industry, said parts of Kentucky are in "an
absolute depression" because of the Obama administration's environmental policy.

"It's cruel to tell struggling coal families that they can't have a job because
some billionaire from San Francisco disagrees with their line of work," he said
in a floor speech Monday afternoon.

ed.okeefe@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


