                             2612 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 2, 2014 Sunday 8:14 PM EST

Al-Qaeda: A threat in need of definition

BYLINE: Katherine Zimmerman

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 930 words


What exactly is al-Qaeda? And who cares? Confusion about how to define the
terrorist group is rife. Was al-Qaeda involved in the  Sept. 11, 2012, attacks
in  Benghazi, Libya , that left four Americans dead? The Obama administration
says no. Are the groups proliferating around Africa and the Middle East really
part of the al-Qaeda that toppled the World Trade Center and hit the Pentagon?

There is no simple answer. Al-Qaeda is a global terrorist organization that
relies on secrecy to survive. Even al-Qaeda members are confused about each
other's status: The leader of the group in Yemen had to ask his Algerian
counterpart for clarification about Ansar al-Din's relationship to al-Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb. The covert nature of the network intentionally obscures
many relationships.

Here's the problem: According to recently declassified testimony of Gen. Martin
Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, before the House Armed Services
Committee in October, the U.S. military regards itself as legally barred from
going after the perpetrators of the Benghazi attacks (and, presumably, others
who attack Americans) unless they are affiliated with al-Qaeda. The Obama
administration's parsing of words to deny al-Qaeda's direct involvement
effectively precludes a military response in these situations.

But the United States can neither disrupt nor defend itself from an enemy it
cannot define. Nor are we safer because of arbitrary definitions. The question
demands an answer: What is al-Qaeda?

Al-Qaeda's leadership regulates the use of its name and resources; it has
formally and publicly recognized affiliates in Yemen, Iraq, Somalia, Syria and
West Africa. In each of these cases, the regional leadership pledged loyalty to
the al-Qaeda leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, who accepted their oaths. State
Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki may have been right when she said last month
that "they don't give out T-shirts or membership cards," but any sensible
definition of group membership must surely recognize the explicit and public
exchanges of oaths of loyalty and command between Osama bin Laden and Zawahiri,
on the one hand, and the leaders of overt franchises on the other.

Many experts disagree about the extent to which locally oriented militants are
officially part of al-Qaeda. The White House has focused on terrorists currently
targeting the United States, which form a small subset of the overall al-Qaeda
movement. In the course of the debate over Benghazi, that focus has narrowed
further to the question of whether "al-Qaeda core" ordered a specific attack.

There is even disagreement over the definition of "core" al-Qaeda. Most
administration officials suggest that it is the small group keeping company with
Zawahiri in Pakistan. Others define it as veteran members of the al-Qaeda
network, active before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. But this core has long been
dispersed, with only a small part still in Pakistan. Some members now lead
regional franchises: Nasir al-Wuhayshi , bin Laden's former secretary, is both
emir of al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and al-Qaeda's general manager.

In reality, al-Qaeda's goals are furthered by the so-called core, affiliates and
local groups that enjoy no formal relationships with the Zawahiri contingent.
The Jamal Network in Egypt, al-Mulathamun in the Sahel and the Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan (TTP) have a direct but informal relationship with al-Qaeda. The TTP
poses a particular definitional problem because it has neither sought nor
received formal membership in al-Qaeda, yet it conducted the attempted Times
Square bombing in May 2010.

The greatest al-Qaeda threat to the United States is AQAP, which has attempted
to attack the U.S. homeland three times since 2009 and whose leader is clearly a
member of al-Qaeda core, despite his location in Yemen. Still, most of AQAP's
efforts in recent years have gone into seizing control of parts of Yemen, making
it "locally focused." And what to make of al-   Shabab , the formally recognized
affiliate in Somalia that does not use the al-Qaeda name? It has been fixated on
Somalia but has conducted attacks throughout the region and recruits directly,
and in English, from the American Somali community.

Al-Qaeda today is the realization of bin Laden's broader vision. He did not
limit himself only to the founding and running of al-Qaeda but imagined a
network uniting like-minded groups extending far beyond state borders. The
al-Qaeda operatives around bin Laden's successor in Pakistan are - at least for
the time being - hemmed in by U.S. forces in Afghanistan, and they are under
siege from Afghanistan-based U.S. drone attacks. But the al-Qaeda network - a
defined set of groups running from West Africa to Southeast Asia - carries on
bin Laden's legacy and remains a danger.

An excessively narrow definition of al-Qaeda is just as dangerous as one that
includes every Sunni Muslim extremist group. Clearly not all parts of the
broader al-Qaeda network are equally dangerous. Nor does dealing with each
automatically require the use of military force. Decisions to use force against
al-Qaeda must be shaped by strategy and prioritization, like any other national
security decision. But excluding large portions of the al-Qaeda network from
consideration and hiding behind semantics guarantees strategic failure. Defining
the enemy down is not the answer.

Katherine Zimmerman, a senior analyst at the American Enterprise Institute's
Critical Threats Project, authored the report "The al-Qaeda Network: A New
Framework for Defining the Enemy."

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


