                             2786 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 13, 2014 Friday 11:27 PM EST

What Maliki has wrought

BYLINE: David Ignatius

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 811 words


The stunning gains this week by Iraq's Sunni insurgents carry a crucial
political message: Nouri al-Maliki, the Shiite prime minister of Iraq, is a
polarizing sectarian politician who has lost the confidence of his army and
nation. He cannot put a splintered Iraq together again, no matter how many
weapons the Obama administration sends him.

Maliki's failure has been increasingly obvious since the elections of 2010, when
the Iraqi people in their wisdom elected a broader, less-sectarian coalition.
But the Obama administration, bizarrely working in tandem with Iran, brokered a
deal that allowed Maliki to continue and has worked with him as an ally against
al-Qaeda. Maliki's coalition triumphed in April's elections, but the balloting
was boycotted by Sunnis.

Given Maliki's sectarian and authoritarian style, a growing number of Iraq
experts are questioning why the Obama administration continues to provide him
billions in military aid - and is said to be weighing his plea for lethal
Predator drones. The skeptics include some who were once among Maliki's
champions.

"I believe that Maliki has never had the energy or intent" to unify Iraq, says
Derek Harvey, a professor at the University of South Florida who advises Centcom
and is one of the leading U.S. experts on Iraq. "He was a bad choice in the
beginning and our embrace of him was an error."

A retired U.S. four-star commander asks in an interview: "How in the world can
you keep betting on this number [Maliki] given what's happened?" He believes
Maliki is incapable of retaking the territory he has lost, and he wonders when
Iran's Quds Force will intervene to rescue Maliki's collapsing army.

Maliki's U.S.-trained army has suffered a series of crushing defeats, as Sunni
insurgents from an offshoot of al-Qaeda captured the northern Sunni cities of
Mosul and Tikrit and swept toward Baghdad. Already the Sunni extremists control
most of western Iraq.

The Shiite-led Iraqi military has crumpled in battle, fleeing the battlefield
and leaving behind tanks, Humvees and other vehicles. In cities such as
Fallujah, cleared by American troops at great cost, al-Qaeda and its progeny are
now dominant.

Maliki's sectarian political style has helped create this disaster. He has
gutted the army of the commanders he suspected of plotting against him. One U.S.
expert likens him to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, who purged the Red Army on the
eve of World War II.

"He has replaced his generals with Shiite commanders who represent not
competency, but political loyalty" to Maliki and his Dawa Party, says Harvey.

The victors belong to an extremist Sunni faction known as the Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria. These pitiless, battle-hardened fighters, remnants of what was
known as al-Qaeda in Iraq, have attracted jihadists from around the world. One
of their most effective commanders in Mosul is said to have been a Georgian-born
Chechen known as Omar al-Shishani. The Chechen was also a key ISIS commander in
recent battles around the Syrian city of Aleppo - an illustration of the group's
potent cross-border reach.

ISIS forces have swept south along Highway 1 from Mosul, swelling their ranks by
liberating 2,000 to 3,000 jihadist fighters from a prison in Nineveh province.
The jihadists have captured so much U.S.-made equipment that it's reportedly
hard to distinguish friend from foe along the chaotic highway south.

Maliki's forces are said to be drawing their battle lines just above a huge arms
depot at Taji, about 20 miles north of Baghdad, which was a key U.S. logistics
base during the American occupation, from 2003 to 2010. By consolidating his
forces so far south, Maliki is, in effect, conceding the northern cities. Harvey
argues that only the pesh merga fighters of Iraqi Kurdistan are strong enough to
retake Mosul, but some experts doubt they would launch such a battle unless it
was a prelude to a fully independent Kurdistan.

Senior Obama administration officials said Thursday they recognize that Maliki
is seen by Iraqi Sunnis as a sectarian figure, and they are pressing him to
expand his base in "unity government." But they said there is no
"conditionality" in the U.S. offer of military assistance and that the
overriding goal short term is to help Malilki stop the Sunni extremists and
prevent the fall of Baghdad.

As the fabric of the Middle East rips apart along sectarian lines, the United
States and its allies face a fundamental strategic choice: Can they convene a
regional peace conference - which would seek to reconcile Sunni and Shiite
forces and their key backers, Saudi Arabia and Iran - in some new security
architecture?

Restitching the fabric of Iraq and Syria may be Mission Impossible. But with its
focus on counterterrorism and weapons supplies, the Obama administration seems
to have decided to treat the region simply as a shooting gallery.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


