                             2746 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 4, 2014 Sunday 10:48 PM EST

Night at theater may mean more than watching

BYLINE: Celia Wren

SECTION: ; Pg. E06

LENGTH: 1138 words


One minute you're a theatergoer, the next, you're an avatar in a cyber-thriller.

Such is the transformation one apparently undergoes at "15'000 Gray," an
interactive production that is part of the Zeitgeist International Festival and
Symposium, running May 10-12 at the Goethe-Institut Washington and Georgetown
University's Davis Performing Arts Center.

The festival focuses on "Participatory Theater: The Intersection of Theater and
Social Action." But that solemn rubric might not do justice to the adrenaline
quotient in "15'000 Gray," which was devised by Machina Ex, a German company
that specializes in fusing theater with the principals of digital gaming.
"15'000 Gray" (the title refers to a radiation level) conjures up the laboratory
of a scientist named Professor Hovel, whose trailblazing discovery is about to
fall into bad guys' hands. Audience members make decisions for the scientist
characters, racing to protect Hovel's discovery before a bomb goes off.

"Theater performance and gaming-arts culture combine really well, because they
give each other something that the other is missing," Philip Steimel, one of the
leaders of Machina Ex, said. Theater gives the computer- gaming format the
immediacy of live experience, he notes, while the fun vibe of gaming can
counteract the all-too-frequent assumption that theatergoing "has to be very
earnest and serious."

Moreover, added his colleague Laura Schaeffer, theater can bestow a mantle of
social significance that gaming culture covets. It is perhaps not surprising,
then, as Schaeffer says, that interest in theater-gaming hybrids "is
skyrocketing!"

Well, skyrocketing in Europe, perhaps.

"There are more pockets of folks thinking and speaking about a more immersive
theatrical experience" in Europe than in the United States, says Washington
thespian Rachel Grossman, who is co-facilitating the Zeitgeist symposium.
Grossman recalls that when her company, Dog & Pony DC ("Beertown," "A Killing
Game") began staging its brand of interactive theater a few years ago, "People
thought we were crazy" even though such involve-the-spectator experiences were
hardly new.

But there is increasing awareness among contemporary American audiences that
participatory productions constitute a valid subgenre of theater, says Grossman.
That uptick in recognition - combined with the fact that at least some
contemporary audiences appreciate being actively involved in culture (they may
well be tweeting and posting videos in their spare time) - lends an aura of
timeliness to this year's Zeitgeist proceedings.

Launched in 2011 by local director Gillian Drake, the Zeitgeist festival has
been co-produced annually by a group of local theater folk and European
diplomatic and cultural entities. Collaborating on this year's edition of the
project are the Goethe-Institut Washington, the Austrian Cultural Forum
Washington, the Embassy of Switzerland, and - from the greasepaint side of the
spectrum - institutions including the Laboratory for Global Performance and
Politics at Georgetown University, the Shakespeare Theatre Company and Studio
Theatre. (All the festival's events will be in English.)

Studio is partnering on the "15'000 Gray" production. The Shakespeare Theatre is
helping to present "Coffee & Prejudice," the Swiss company MerciMax's experiment
in pairing an audience member and a performer, one-on-one, across a table.

Georgetown's Laboratory for Global Performance and Politics is co-producing
"Love Club," created by the Austrian troupe God's Entertainment: In the piece,
audience members armed with devices reminiscent of gaming controls steer a
make-out session between two performers. The audience members can choose between
four instructions - touch, kiss, undress and "intensify" - says Georgetown
professor Natsu Onoda Power, who is directing the D.C. production. A performer
can quit whenever the intimacy becomes too uncomfortable. So, for the audience
member with the control, "You want your person to be romantically aggressive,
but you also have to gauge what the person's boundaries are," Onoda Power says.

"Love Club" might sound like a very personal - not to say racy - project for a
festival that has proclaimed its interest in "social action." But several of the
Zeitgeist organizers say that interactive theater implicitly poses questions
about civic and personal responsibility, power structures and even democracy.

Expect discussion of such matters at the May 12 symposium, in which Grossman
will be sharing facilitator duties with Georgetown's Derek Goldman and with
Michael Rohd, who heads Sojourn Theatre, a company with a national scope.

"Even if the content isn't social justice-related," participatory theater opens
a discussion about "responsibility, or what the rules are, or who is really in
control," Goldman says. The format builds the audience's sense of themselves "as
chroniclers of their own lives," and "there's a power to that," he says.

The Zeitgeist festival is of-the-moment. For international art with a
through-the-ages luster, you can turn to the upcoming D.C. appearances by the
Gundecha Brothers, virtuosos of the centuries-old Indian music form known as
Dhrupad. The Gundechas - two brothers sing; another  accompanies them on the
pakhawaj, a two-headed drum - will give a concert at the National Museum of
American History on Sunday. Then, on Monday at the Embassy of India, the
siblings will preside over an evening devoted to Dhrupad appreciation.

Dhrupad can be intensely meditative; it can also be stirring. Accompanied by
drone instruments, as well as - for some portions of the music - the pakhawaj,
the Gundecha vocalists sing in a duet format, known as jugalbandi, that involves
passing musical notes back and forth.

"You feel as if one is handing it to the other. One elaborates on the other's
[sound], improvises on it, and the other one picks it up from there. So there
has to be a perfect understanding [between performers], because it's so
improvisational," says Manjula Kumar, the Smithsonian project director who is
producing Sunday's concert.

Kumar has worked frequently with the Gundechas and has traveled to the academy
they teach at in Bhopal, India. She says even newcomers to Indian classical
music will enjoy the upcoming concert (to be live-streamed at
museumstudies.si.edu). The Gundecha Brothers' art can touch everyone "because of
its spirituality" and because it speaks in "the universal language of music,"
she says.

style@washpost.com

Zeitgeist International Festival and Symposium. May 10-12. Visit
www.zeitgeistdc.org

"Dhrupad: The Mysticism of Sound," with the Gundecha Brothers, at the National
Museum of American History's Warner Bros. Theater. 14th Street and Constitution
Avenue NW. Sunday at 2 p.m. For more information, visit museumstudies.si.edu or
e-mail kumarm@si.edu

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


