                             2777 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 6, 2014 Friday 12:35 AM EST

The honorablething to do

BYLINE: Eugene Robinson

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 736 words


Bringing Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl home was the right thing to do, and President Obama
did it in a mostly reasonable way.

The high-volume "debate" about Bergdahl's homecoming sounds like the raving
heard around the water coolers of Crazytown. Here, in descending order of
importance, are the issues the Bergdahl affair presents - and a rational way to
think about them.

1. "We leave no soldier behind on the battlefield." This is the commitment we
make to the men and women who serve in the U.S. armed forces. The promise was
made to Bergdahl, and the nation was honor-bound to respect it.

Five years ago, Bergdahl apparently walked away from his post in Afghanistan's
Paktika Province, near the border with Pakistan. Earlier, he had expressed his
disillusionment with the U.S. conduct of the war - more than that, his shame -
in an e-mail to his father. The Post reported Thursday that nearby villagers
reported seeing Bergdahl walking around in a daze, unwilling to accept food or
water, deaf to their warnings that he was heading into a dangerous area full of
Taliban.

It's pretty clear that he went AWOL. Was he a deserter? Quite possibly. Did he
somehow take leave of his senses? That seems possible, too. These are questions
for the military justice system to answer, and Bergdahl should be held
accountable. Deserting one's post in a combat zone is a grave offense.

But Bergdahl has not been found guilty of anything, or even formally accused of
anything. He was, until his release, an active-duty U.S. Army sergeant being
held by the Taliban. We cannot decide whether to secure a captive soldier's
release based on his or her political views - and we certainly cannot take into
account what the soldier's  father  might think about U.S. foreign policy.

Recent proof-of-life videos from the Taliban appeared to show that Bergdahl's
health was deteriorating. Meanwhile, the U.S. war effort in Afghanistan soon
will come to an end. The time to act was now.

2. Reports that six U.S. servicemen died on missions searching for Bergdahl have
been denied by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel. My impression is that this may be
a matter of semantics. For example, troops at an outpost under Taliban fire
might have been ordered not to evacuate if there were reports that Bergdahl
could be in the area. In my book, such duty should count as participation in the
search.

The nation's hearts should go out to the families of any who died looking for
Bergdahl. These men were bravely doing their job, as defined by their
commanders: Bring home a U.S. soldier being held by the enemy.

3. Was the price of Bergdahl's freedom too high? No, it wasn't. The five Taliban
commanders released in exchange should properly be described as one-time Taliban
commanders. I don't doubt that they were powerful, dangerous enemy leaders at
the time of their capture. But all have been held at Guantanamo since at least
2002. The war and the world have changed.

It defies credulity that any of them could emerge after such a long absence and
regain command; for one thing, many - if not most - of the fighters they once
led are dead. Drone strikes would be launched the minute one of the five
appeared on the battlefield. The release does boost the Taliban's morale,
however, so the deal is not cost-free. But I believe bringing Bergdahl home is
worth it.

4. I said the way Obama did this was "mostly" reasonable. The president should
and could have informed Congress that he was going ahead with a prisoner
exchange that he knew would be controversial.

I don't know whether Obama complied with the letter of the law when he described
the outlines of a possible deal to skeptical members of Congress in 2011. The
spirit of the law surely required the courtesy of a heads up.

5. The optics of the deal's announcement were unfortunate. The White House knew
there were serious questions about how and why Bergdahl left his post. Officials
also knew that Bergdahl's father, Robert, had coped with his son's captivity by
growing a long beard, studying Islam and learning Pashto, the language spoken by
the Taliban. Rose Garden ceremonies should be safe and predictable. This one
wasn't.

6. And finally, national security adviser Susan Rice. First she's given
incomplete talking points about Benghazi, then she's dispatched to say on the
talk shows that Bergdahl served with "honor and distinction." If I were Rice,
I'd start taking Sundays off.

eugenerobinson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


