                             2796 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 17, 2014 Tuesday 11:49 PM EST

Obama got it right on Iraq

BYLINE: Eugene Robinson

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 743 words


President Obama's instincts about Iraq and Syria have been sound from the
beginning: Greater U.S. engagement probably cannot make things better but
certainly can make them worse, both for the people of the region and for our
national interests.

First, credit where it's due: Colin Powell was prescient about Iraq, and Joe
Biden was right.

It was Powell, before the 2003 invasion to topple Saddam Hussein, who warned
George W. Bush that once U.S. military forces broke the Iraqi state, we would
own the "hopes, aspirations and problems" of 25 million people. Efforts over the
past decade to glue the pieces back together have obviously failed.

It was then-Sen. Biden who argued that rather than insist on a unitary Iraq, we
should accept the division of the country - along ethnic and religious lines -
into separate Shiite, Sunni and Kurdish states. This is effectively what is
happening now, but in the worst possible way.

Obama opposed the Iraq war from the start, seeing it as a strategic blunder. As
he campaigned on an end-the-war platform in 2008, even he had no idea just how
catastrophic the mistake would turn out to be.

Baghdad and the south are controlled by the sectarian Shiite-led regime of
President Nouri al-Maliki, who has cultivated a close alliance with Iran. Much
of the northwest is in the hands of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, a Sunni
fundamentalist militia whose brutality shocks even al-Qaeda. The northeast is
held by a Kurdish regional government that dreams of a Greater Kurdistan
incorporating slices of Turkey, Syria and Iran.

Obama's only mistake was to buy, for a time, the notion that Bush's troop surge
had miraculously healed ancient divisions and made the dream of a pluralist
democracy still possible. But Maliki sent a consistent message to Sunnis and
Kurds: Shiites are in charge. Deal with it.

Kurdish leaders responded by consolidating power in their own semiautonomous
region. The Sunni tribal chiefs who cooperated with U.S. forces against al-Qaeda
during the surge have made a tactical alliance with ISIS, apparently believing
that once an area of Sunni authority is demarcated, the fundamentalists can be
brought to heel. We shall see.

Would any of this have been avoided if Obama had left a substantial troop
presence in Iraq? The question is moot, since Maliki refused to reach an
agreement that would allow U.S. troops to stay. Critics who say that Obama
negotiated as if he didn't really want to make a deal should explain why making
concessions to Maliki's pro-Iran sectarian government would have been a good
idea.

The engagement crowd says that ISIS might never have existed, and certainly
would not have become so powerful, if Obama had done something in Syria. Just
what was Obama supposed to do? Well, um, engagement, of course.

Even the most bellicose hawks acknowledge that sending U.S. troops into Syria is
a terrible idea. Obama has been wary of sending heavy arms to the "good" Syrian
rebels for fear they will fall into the hands of the bad ones. Given that the
fundamentalists took the upper hand among the rebels very early in the civil
war, Obama's caution strikes me as prudent.

The president considered the one option that might have made sense: a punitive
airstrike against the regime of Bashar al-Assad for its use of chemical weapons.
But Congress told him no, and a deal was eventually reached under which Assad
has surrendered all but a tiny fraction of his chemical weapons to international
control. Doesn't that count as constructive engagement?

What's happening in the Middle East is the erasure of artificial borders drawn
by French and British diplomats almost a century ago. Engagement seems to mean
that today's great powers, led by the United States, should enforce those old
borders or impose new ones. Why should anyone think this is a recipe for
stability?

There are aspects of Obama's foreign policy that I question. His heavy reliance
on drone strikes may create as many terrorists as it eliminates. He should have
realized that the National Security Agency's bulk collection of electronic
communications, if revealed, would complicate relations with our allies. His
announced "pivot" toward Asia is yet to be realized.

But I can find no reason to fault Obama's unwillingness to intervene in Iraq and
Syria. His view is supported by most Americans, according to polls. Anyone who
disagrees should spell out just what they would like the president to do.

eugenerobinson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


