                             2760 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 23, 2014 Friday 12:11 AM EST

Updating the war on terror

BYLINE: Bob Corker

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 875 words


One week after the 9/11 attacks, Congress authorized the president "to use all
necessary and appropriate force against those nations, organizations, or persons
he determines planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist attacks
that occurred on September 11, 2001." More than 12 years later, the president
continues to rely on this  60-word authorization  to fight terrorist
organizations around the world. This week, the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee held a hearing on this subject, the first step in an effort to
reassert congressional oversight of this issue,  which has fundamentally changed
from the initial hunt for Osama bin Laden.

A recent State Department report revealed how the diminishment of al-Qaeda's
central leadership corresponds with the growing strength and proliferation of
its affiliates and other terrorist groups, contributing to a 43 percent increase
in global terrorist attacks in 2013. Today's terrorists may invoke the brand and
methods of al-Qaeda, but they have evolved in ways that suggest that our legal
foundation for conducting drone strikes or raids is outdated and inadequate.

For example, al-Qaeda's recent expulsion of the ruthless Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant from its ranks has forced the Obama administration's lawyers to
question whether, under the auspices of the 9/11 law, the president still has
the authority to target that group. In other words, there are legitimate doubts
about whether the president can take necessary actions against the most
dangerous terrorist group in Syria  in a conflict that - according to recent
congressional testimony from the director of national intelligence - has
attracted more than 7,000 foreign fighters from 50 countries, some with
aspirations to attack the U.S. homeland. This follows the testimony of Gen.
Martin Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who conceded that the
terrorists responsible for killing four Americans in Benghazi are not covered
under the current resolution.

These incidents seem to suggest that the September 2001  Authorization on the
Use of Military Force (AUMF) is too narrow and that the president is hamstrung
by stale semantic distinctions. But there are also legitimate reasons to believe
it is too broad. Both the Obama and Bush administrations have stretched the
resolution's authority well beyond its words to go after groups that have little
to no connection to the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.

Aware of these problems, the Obama administration has hinted that the 9/11 AUMF
might expire, at least in part, once combat operations ease in Afghanistan and
the president draws down U.S. forces. Yet the administration has offered no
legal justification for how important counterterrorism operations could then
continue in places such as Somalia and Yemen - nor has it explained what would
happen to enemy combatants held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Given the complexity and importance of these issues, I welcomed President
Obama's May 2013 speech in which he aptly pointed out that "the threat has
shifted and evolved from the one that came to our shores on 9/11" and pledged to
work with Congress on revising the 12-year-old resolution.

Unfortunately, the president has since failed to engage Congress on the issue.

Two of his top lawyers went before the Senate this week and said they had been
cleared to discuss the issue with senators but then refused to do so. The
administration's witnesses could not say whether the president acknowledges any
limits on his executive power to use force without congressional authority, and
they refused to identify which groups are and are not covered by the 2001 law.
Instead, they offered some support for repealing the 2002 Iraq AUMF. However,
this doesn't address the more important challenges facing us in the evolving
conflict against al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups.

An issue this critical to U.S. national security demands a robust debate to
ensure that counterterrorism efforts reflect American values and laws, while
respecting the president's authority and preserving the flexibility to employ
covert action in appropriate circumstances. The existing authority should be
both narrowed and broadened - to create a mechanism for regular congressional
oversight and reporting from the administration, including a possible sunset
date to revisit the law, and to allow for the addition of organizations that
were not involved in 9/11 but nonetheless pose a direct threat to the United
States and our interests.

Absent congressional action, the president will continue to operate under an
outdated authorization, leaving the door open for future presidents to claim
undue and unbounded powers that will, over time, erode the balance of power
fundamental to our constitutional system.

Terrorist groups with global reach will continue to present a serious threat for
the foreseeable future. Rather than abdicating the responsibility for
confronting them and leaving it to the executive branch - as it has done too
often - Congress should take advantage of this unique opportunity to act in a
bipartisan fashion.

The writer, a Republican, represents Tennessee in the Senate, where he is the
ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


