                             276 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Border Patrol Seeks to Add Digital Eyes to Its Ranks

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 894 words


PHOENIX -- Among the federal officials who gathered here this week for a
conclave on border security, there was little talk of building a fence along the
2,000-mile Mexican border. Instead, the chatter was all about technology: about
concentrating Border Patrol agents, equipped with late-model surveillance tools,
in areas of frequent illegal traffic, while using aerial drones to monitor
remote, lightly trafficked spots.

The chief of the Border Patrol, Michael J. Fisher, said the goal of the
strategy, begun a year ago, was to ''shrink the border,'' allowing agents to
focus on areas where criminal smugglers of migrants and drugs were most likely
to travel.

The plan is to cover 900 miles, or 45 percent of the border, by 2016 with a
''dense'' array of agents and technology, and to monitor 1,092 miles, the other
55 percent, with ''persistent surveillance'' informed by drones, Mr. Fisher
said.

The report from Mr. Fisher and other top Homeland Security officials was eagerly
received by hundreds of merchants who brought their wares to the Border Security
Expo, a technology bazaar in the convention center here filled with darting
robots, winged drones, high-powered microwave radios and video cameras that can
peer over fences and through walls, day or night.

House Republican leaders issued immigration principles in January saying that
the United States had a ''fundamental duty'' to secure the border but was
''failing in this mission.'' Republicans have since said they were unlikely to
take up immigration in the House this year. Last year, the Senate passed a
comprehensive bill with a $40 billion increase for border spending.

Homeland Security officials said they were not waiting for new action from
Congress, which has nearly doubled the size of the Border Patrol since 2006 to
more than 18,500 agents.

''Some would suggest that you have to seal the border 100 percent, in which case
we're going to need thousands and thousands more Border Patrol agents and
thousands and thousands more pieces of equipment,'' Mr. Fisher said. ''Even if
our budgets could sustain it, which I suspect they cannot, we had to come up
with an alternative plan this year.''

Mr. Fisher said he had asked field commanders to identify areas across the
rugged mountains and variable riverbeds of the border that were ''low risk''
because terrain or other factors made them hostile for people crossing
illegally. He said 115 areas were identified, and Predator drones began last
March to monitor them systematically to confirm there was no human movement.

If drones detect changes on the ground in those areas, a reconnaissance team is
sent within 24 hours to determine whether there was an incursion, Mr. Fisher
said. So far, detailed aerial images have been made of 388 miles of so-called
low-risk border so that changes there can be rapidly noticed.

In areas with higher traffic, agents patrol more frequently, backed up by
surveillance towers, mobile spy systems, remote video cameras, hidden ground
sensors and a host of other devices, some of them already proven in fighting in
Iraq and Afghanistan. Such technology has been in use for several years near
Tucson, until last year the busiest sector for illegal crossings. Now officials
are gradually spreading it to other areas, particularly South Texas, where
crossings are surging.

In 2013, the Border Patrol made about 330,000 apprehensions at the southwest
border, a third year at a low number not seen since the early 1970s. But almost
all crossers were smuggled by criminal organizations that are also moving drugs
and other contraband, officials said. As the authorities made it harder to move
on the ground, smugglers dug tunnels under the line and sent ultralight aircraft
to fly over it.

Vendors in the vast display hall insisted they had answers. Qinetiq North
America was offering a small robot that could scuttle into a makeshift tunnel to
deactivate traps.

AAI Corporation, in Maryland, had a drone, about 14 feet long, mounted with
daylight and infrared cameras, just the thing for the aerial mapping that Mr.
Fisher mentioned, said Jon Borcik, a representative.

''It's very covert,'' Mr. Borcik said. ''You really can't see it in the air, and
it's a very quiet vehicle also.''

Competition was intense to provide cameras mounted on collapsible towers that
agents could carry in their pickup trucks. John Moulton, from Tactical Micro, in
Virginia, had built a tower that could rise to 35 feet with a camera that could
see six miles and a laser spotter that could pinpoint a person at more than
eight miles.

Homeland Security officials are still smarting from a disastrous border
technology program started under President George W. Bush that cost more than
$1.1 billion and produced very limited results. After three years of
deliberations, last month the agency invested $23 million to purchase tall,
fixed towers for cameras and other devices, the first such effort after the
tower system failed in the earlier program.

At least one vendor, ITC Manufacturing of Phoenix, was actually trying to sell
the Border Patrol a fence. But that fence was made of thin bars of high-carbon
steel set less than an inch apart, said Wayne Lyall of ITC, resistant to the
most powerful bolt cutter. It did not look at all like the high metal barriers
that lawmakers in Washington often evoke when demanding more security at the
border.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/22/us/border-securitys-turn-toward-the-high-tech.
html

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A portable surveillance tower was on display Tuesday at the
Border Security Expo, a technology bazaar held in Phoenix that drew hundreds of
merchants.
 A Border Patrol agent at the expo. Part of a strategy on patrolling the border
involves using aerial drones to monitor remote, lightly trafficked spots.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY SAMANTHA SAIS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


