                             2759 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       May 21, 2014 Wednesday 4:25 AM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 403 words


Ex-Libyan general won't negotiateKhalifa Hifter, leader of an armed uprising,
said he will rely on force to achieve his objectives. A8

Higher GPA, higher payResearchers found that high schoolers' grade-point
averages influenced their earnings potential. A10

the world

The Justice Departmentwill release memos explaining justification for drone
strikes on U.S. citizens. A3

The United States sanctioned 10 Russians, accusing them of complicity in the
death of Sergei Magnitsky. A5

Thailand began its second day of martial law Wednesday with little visible
military presence in the capital.  A9

Bombings across Nigeria since nearly 300 schoolgirls were abducted have stoked
fears over Christian-Muslim tensions. A8

As Ukraine's military struggles with supplies and discipline, the nation's
richest man appealed for calm. A9

the nation

Pennsylvania's ban on same-sex marriage, the last one in the Northeast, was
struck down by a federal judge. A2

Cholesterol and fertility problems have been linked for the first time by
researchers. A3

Delays in paying offlarge medical debts have an unduly negative effect on
consumers' credit ratings, a watchdog agency said. A11

The White House is sending a top Obama aide to probe VA-linked deaths, while
Rep. Tammy Duckworth (D-Ill.), a former VA official and veteran who lost her
legs while serving in Iraq, said she is furious about the scandal. A5

the economy

General Motors is recalling another 2.4 million cars and trucks, bringing its
total this year to a record 13.6 million in the U.S. A11

the region

A federal judge declined to throw out corruption charges against former Virginia
governor Robert F. McDonnell and his wife or to grant their request for separate
trials. B1

Making public golf courses fancier is the goal of some District politicians,
despite protests by regulars. B1

With more than 810,000 cars expected on the roads this Memorial Day weekend, the
best time to leave town is . . . now. B1

A Maryland task force recommended that the state's public schools delay opening
until after Labor Day. B3

D.C. officials warned motorists that 14 new speed cameras have been stationed at
locations where speeding has been a problem. B4

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


