                             2764 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 27, 2014 Tuesday 3:01 AM EST

Nigerian of[#xfb01]cial says abducted girls' location is known

BYLINE: Pamela Constable

SECTION: A section; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 579 words


Nigerian official says girls' location known

Official says Nigerian military knows where kidnapped girls are being held but
cannot use force to free them.

LAGOS, Nigeria - A top Nigerian military official said Monday that the
government knows the whereabouts of several hundred kidnapped girls but cannot
reveal their location and cannot use force to rescue them, according to the Web
site of the Ogun state television service.

"The good news for the parents of the girls is that we know where they are, but
we cannot tell you," Air Marshal Alex Badeh, the government's chief of defense
staff, was quoted telling a group of visitors at his office in the capital,
Abuja. He reportedly told the group, "Just leave us alone, we are working to get
the girls back."

Badeh's comments could not be independently confirmed but were reported by Ogun,
Al Jazeera and other major TV channels in Nigeria. They marked the first time
that a Nigerian official has revealed having any information about the location
of the girls, whose abduction six weeks ago by the Islamist militant group Boko
Haram created an international uproar.

A U.S. Defense Department spokesman in Washington told the Associated Press that
the Pentagon cannot confirm the reports about the Nigerian girls.

Nigerian forces have been searching for the missing girls with help from U.S.
and other Western experts, as well as aerial surveillance provided by U.S.
drones. Until now, officials have said they believe the girls are probably being
hidden somewhere in the vast Sambisa forest in northeast Nigeria, but they have
not hinted at suspecting a specific location.

There have been unconfirmed reports in the past week that Nigerian officials
were close to making some agreement with Boko Haram in which they would release
the girls in exchange for the government freeing some captured members or their
relatives. The government denied the reports, with senior officials saying they
would not negotiate with the terrorist sect.

It was difficult to know how specific Badeh intended to be in his statement,
which appeared aimed more at reassuring his visitors - a group of Nigerians
concerned about security issues - that the military was doing its job but would
not use force to try and rescue the girls for fear of endangering their lives.

"We want our girls back. I can tell you that our military can and will do it,
but where they are held, can we go there with force?" he was quoted by Ogun as
saying. "Nobody should say Nigerian military does not know what it is doing; we
can't kill our girls in the name of trying to get them back."

The government has come under intense public criticism for failing to locate and
rescue the girls, who were abducted from a remote village school in Borno State
on April 15. Women's rights groups have held daily protests in the capital, and
a social media campaign, #BringBackOurGirls, has continued to draw wide support.

Badeh expressed concern that the military was being unfairly criticized and
defended its efforts to fight the Islamist militants. He said it was a difficult
mission because the adversaries are homegrown "brothers," rather than foreign
enemies. Many Boko Haram fighters are young, jobless Muslims lured by Boko
Haram's message of creating a pure Islamic state.

"We are not happy at all, because we are killing our own kinsmen and we are
killing mostly the youths," Badeh said.

constablep@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


