                             2787 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 14, 2014 Saturday 5:01 AM EST

Obama says U.S. will not send troops to Iraq

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1313 words


The Obama administration has decided to hold any military intervention in Iraq
in abeyance until it sees clear evidence that the country's politics and
governance are reforming, according to U.S. officials.

After near-nonstop crisis meetings since early this week, President Obama has
ordered options prepared for possible airstrikes in Iraq as well as a wide range
of direct military assistance short of American boots on the ground.

But after assessing that Baghdad's fall to advancing forces of the Islamic State
of Iraq and Syria is not imminent, the administration has opted for a short-term
strategy that it sees as offering potential long-term gain.

The United States "is not simply going to involve itself in a military action in
the absence of a political plan by the Iraqis that gives us some assurance that
they're prepared to work together," Obama said Friday in a statement outside the
White House.

Obama cautioned that whatever happens, it "is going to take several days. . . .
People should not anticipate that this is something that is going to happen
overnight."

The strategy addresses a dilemma. U.S. intervention to stop ISIS forces could
help spark all-out sectarian war if it were seen as enabling the Shiite
government of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to stay in power without making
concessions to the long-abused Sunni minority.

Failure to intervene could bring the same result if the Shiite majority
activates its own radical militias and rises up to protect the government.

"This will get even more entrenched," said a senior administration official. "It
has the potential to really ignite a sectarian conflagration."

The administration has been pressing Maliki and other political leaders for
years, with virtually no success, to accommodate the interests of Sunnis, Kurds
and other minorities. Instead, the sectarian divide that underlies Iraq's
current problems has grown worse, with Maliki and his allies seizing a greater
share of the central government and delaying power-sharing initiatives.

Many Sunni citizens of Mosul and other northern cities where ISIS took power
this week have greeted the militants with at least initial gratitude after the
departure of Iraq's largely Shiite and often-abusive army.

"This crisis may have the potential to concentrate minds in a way that nothing
that's come before has," the senior official said. In Baghdad, officials are
"looking over the abyss right now. . . . We can't say it will for sure, but it
has the potential to be a defining moment."

"We're talking to the entire leadership, starting with the prime minister, to
include everyone from all the different communities," said the official, who
spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations and policy
decisions.

Iraq's recent national election contributes to the administration's belief that
political actions can be taken quickly and visibly. Maliki's Shiite coalition
won an outright majority of parliamentary seats, in results that will be
certified in the next few days.

"Certification triggers a calendar that, among other things, requires the new
parliament to be seated within two weeks," the official said, and a series of
timelines for forming a new government and choosing a new president, prime
minister and other high-level officials.

"It's going to be very interesting to see the impact of this crisis on that
process," the official said.

There has been some speculation in Iraq that parliament, including some within
Maliki's own bloc, has grown increasingly weary of the man who has served as
prime minister since 2006. Since he began a second four-year term in 2010,
Maliki has kept the defense and interior portfolios for himself, in addition to
continuing as prime minister.

Among the signs the administration is waiting for is government action on
"legitimate grievances of the Sunnis . . . [and] reform of the security
services," the official said.

Asked about a risk of the security situation on the ground getting out of hand
while the administration waits for political movement, the official said, "That
line may well exist. We'll know it when we see it." Obama, he said, has ordered
military options prepared to "get ahead of" the line and to allow for quick
action, if necessary.

But "one thing we learned from our collective experience in Iraq" is the danger
of "taking any action without thinking through the consequences," the official
said, referring to the George W. Bush administration's 2003 invasion of Iraq.

The official said the Obama administration was closely consulting with regional
governments, which might be asked to provide assembly points or air bases for
U.S. military action. Those consultations do not include Iran, he said, where
talks with the United States remain limited to Iran's nuclear program.

As direct intervention and assistance is readied, the Pentagon's press
secretary, Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, told reporters Friday that "it's important
to remember that we have some 35,000 U.S. military personnel" already based in
the Middle East region. The aircraft carrier USS Bush and its strike group of
ships remain in the region but, despite some news media reports, have not moved
into the Persian Gulf.

The United States has also already provided substantial military equipment to
Iraq since the 2011 withdrawal of U.S. troops. This week, he said, the United
States had "intensified" its intelligence and surveillance assistance "at the
request of the Iraqi government."

The senior administration official cited Iraqi requests for additional military
assistance over the past year as evidence that politics in Iraq have already
begun to change. Before ISIS began to surface as a potent force in 2013, with
fighters moving back and forth from the civil war in neighboring Syria, the
Iraqis "really weren't looking to us for much," the official said.

Any kind of political solution in Iraq will require the cooperation of Sunni
tribal leaders who have long-standing grievances with the Maliki government.
"They now believe that the government of Iraq is a greater threat than the Sunni
militants," said Ben Connable, a Rand analyst who met with some of the tribal
leaders in March in Jordan.

U.S. troops forged close relationships with many of these tribal leaders in 2007
to push out forces aligned with al-Qaeda in Iraq. Since then, many have felt
abandoned by the U.S. government and under attack from Maliki and his security
forces. But many of these same Sunni leaders are now desperate for U.S. help and
support. "They are available, and they have reached out to the U.S. government,"
Connable said.

The cooperation of Sunni tribal leaders could rapidly shift the fortunes of
ISIS. "There are only a few thousand ISIS guys," said Colin Kahl, a former
Pentagon official who followed the Middle East. "The only way they can control
territory is if they have the complicity of the Sunni tribes."

The United States can play a critical role as an intermediary in negotiations
with Maliki to decentralize power and to offer tribal leaders greater autonomy
and a larger role in the security services. "Maliki has got to do all those
things. The question is whether he will listen," Kahl said.

The administration continued consultations with Congress on Friday, although
officials said they had not yet determined whether congressional approval was
required before taking military action.

Some lawmakers indicated that they have little patience for the administration's
strategy, and little belief that it will work. "The president and his team need
to be acting urgently - not 'reviewing options in the days ahead,' " House
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Edward R. Royce (R-Calif.) said in a
statement. "We shouldn't have boots on the ground, but we need to be hitting
these columns of terrorists marching on Baghdad with drones now."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

Greg Jaffe contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


