                             2766 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       May 28, 2014 Wednesday 3:12 AM EST

Nigerian's claim about girls adds to mystery

BYLINE: Pamela Constable

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 951 words


Nigerian official's claim is latest twist in search for girls

The country's military appears less worried about the girls amid reports of
secret mediation with Boko Haram.

ABUJA, Nigeria - A Nigerian military official's terse assertion Monday that the
armed forces know the whereabouts of 276 abducted schoolgirls drew surprisingly
little public reaction in the capital Tuesday, but it added a mysterious twist
to a string of contradictory official narratives about efforts to find the
missing girls.

The startling comments by Nigeria's chief of defense staff, Air Marshal Alex
Badeh, did not appear to signal a breakthrough in the dramatic saga of the
girls, who have not been seen since they were seized by Boko Haram extremists in
mid-April. But the remarks suggested that the security forces are less worried
about the girls' fates than previously indicated and are trying to figure out
the safest way to bring them home.

At an impromptu encounter Monday with military supporters gathered outside the
Defense Ministry, Badeh said, "We know where the girls are, but we cannot tell
you." He said the military was reluctant to free the victims by force for fear
they would be harmed in the process, and he asked that the public have patience
and confidence in the military's plans. "Just leave us alone; we are working to
get the girls back," he said in comments that were shown on state TV.

Officials added no information or details Tuesday to Badeh's brief remarks. A
government spokesman, reached by e-mail, said he was traveling and unavailable
to comment.

Monday night, suspected Boko Haram gunmen killed 54 people in two attacks in
northeastern Nigeria, the Associated Press reported.

At a rally in Abuja, the capital, more than 500 people from a pro-government
umbrella group called the Grand Coalition Against Terrorism gathered to express
support for President Goodluck Jonathan and the armed forces. Many participants
said that the military was right to use caution and avoid armed clashes with
Boko Haram militants and that they hoped a negotiated solution could be found.

"We trust our military, and we don't need them to tell us everything," said
Princess Miriam Onuoha, one of the rally leaders and a member of Nigeria's
hereditary tribal royalty, who met with Badeh on Monday. "They are on the right
track, and they should be patient so as not to harm anyone's human rights. It is
not too late to negotiate and resolve this at the table, but it does not need to
be done in public."

But several political opposition figures and human rights activists said they
were baffled by Badeh's seemingly casual reference to knowing the girls'
location after weeks of official statements about an intense ground search,
supplemented by aerial surveillance by U.S. drone planes, yielding no
significant breakthrough.

Observers said they were more confused than ever about the government's
continued mixed signals and seeming shifts on whether to hold talks with the
insurgents. Some senior officials have insisted that they will not negotiate
with terrorists, while others have hinted at elaborate behind-the-scenes
mediation efforts that were suddenly called off by the president.

"It's hard to know what to believe, but from what I am being told, there is no
activity, no searching - just a waiting game going on," said a politician from
Borno state, the northern region and Boko Haram stronghold from where the girls
were taken.

"I think they want to have a dialogue, but they are also worried about a
negative reaction from the international community," the politician said,
speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of discussing
Boko Haram.

The most widely reported mediation attempt involved a Nigerian journalist named
Ahmad Salkida, who fled the country several years ago after being threatened by
the government for interacting too closely with Boko Haram members. According to
Nigerian media reports, Salkida was called home by the government in early May
to act as a go-between with the militants.

He was then said to have traveled to the remote northeast forests and back to
the capital, saying on his return that he had found insurgents willing to talk
about swapping the girls for 100 of their detained associates and that he had
seen a group of the girls safe and in good health.

Officials denied that any such effort had taken place, while some media reported
that Jonathan had abruptly called off the initiative while meeting in early May
with neighboring heads of state and Western officials in Paris.

Despite the government's denial of Salkida's alleged trip, some at the Abuja
rally said such an encounter could well be the primary source of Badeh's
confident remark about knowing the girls' location and waiting for the right
time and method to rescue them.

It may also be a further indication that Boko Haram leaders are backing off from
their original threats to enslave the girls, forcibly marry them or sneak them
into neighboring countries. According to local media reports and some officials,
the militant leaders have since lowered their demands, first seeking the release
of fellow fighters and then asking only that their detained wives and children
be freed in exchange for the girls.

Nigerian military officials have expressed strong reluctance to use force
against the insurgents, many of whom are jobless youths drawn to Boko Haram's
mission of creating an Islamic state.Critics have accused the military of being
afraid to fight a hidden guerrilla enemy, but the newly organized movement of
civilian supporters has rallied belatedly this week to the government's cause.

pamela.constable@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


