                             2758 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      May 21, 2014 Wednesday 12:51 AM EST

Campaign of bombings in Nigeria sparks new fears of religious strife

BYLINE: Pamela Constable

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 858 words


Nigerian blasts spread fear beyond northern terror enclave

Bombings across the country in the past month have raised fears of spreading
terror, religious tensions.

ABUJA, Nigeria - While world attention remains riveted on the drama of 276
schoolgirls missing since their abduction by a violent Islamist sect in
mid-April, scattered bombings in the month since - including twin car blasts
Tuesday that killed at least 118 people in the city of Jos - have spread alarm
across the country and raised new concerns about tensions between Christians and
Muslims in this diverse nation of 175 million.

Witnesses described seeing bodies torn apart and consumed by flames in the
double blast at a busy bus station in Jos, the capital of Plateau state. The
state lies in a central region that splits Nigeria's mostly Christian and more
fertile south from the mostly Muslim and more arid north, where Boko Haram
militants have spread terror for five years.

The group did not assert responsibility for Tuesday's attack, but the blast
resembled other recent bombings in outdoor markets and bus stations, including
two explosions that killed more than 120 people in this capital city, one that
killed 25 in the northern city of Kano, and one in a village in Borno state, the
region where the girls were kidnapped. Boko Haram has asserted responsibility
for some of the attacks.

President Goodluck Jonathan issued a statement late Tuesday expressing sympathy
for the victims of the latest attack. In the statement, he "assures all
Nigerians that the government remains fully committed to winning the war against
terror, and [that] this administration will not be cowed by the atrocities of
enemies of human progress and civilization."

The Nigerian Senate on Tuesday extended a six-month state of emergency in Borno
and two other northern states, and government spokesmen expressed confidence
that Nigeria's security forces could handle the menace of Islamist militants.
The government has reluctantly accepted Western technical and security support
in searching for the abducted girls and their captors, including aerial
surveillance by drones.

"Our troops are out there, and our armed forces have sufficient capacity to do
the job," a government spokesman, Mike Omeri, said in an interview Monday. The
international assistance, he added, only "complements" national efforts. "The
effort will still be largely driven by Nigerian forces," he said.

But the deadly bombings since the mass kidnapping, many in densely populated
areas and some appearing to target Christian communities, have highlighted the
government's continued failure to curb Boko Haram's growing reach, which now
extends far beyond the group's stronghold in the rural northeast. Many officials
in the north are calling for negotiations with Boko Haram, which has made
shifting demands in return for releasing the girls.

The rash of attacks, coupled with the government's continued failure to find the
girls and their captors, has intensified public criticism of the government and
spawned a barrage of opportunistic faultfinding from the main opposition party,
which hopes to topple Jonathan in elections next year. Meanwhile, official
efforts to rally public support have been dampened by missteps such as
Jonathan's abrupt cancellation of a visit to the girls' village last weekend.

"We were all expecting him, and we were very disappointed. We are much more
skeptical now," said a district leader in the area where the girls were
abducted, speaking by telephone on the condition of anonymity for fear of
reprisal. "We just want our daughters to come back alive and healthy, whatever
it takes."

In a public park in Abuja, where a group of protesters has been gathering every
day for weeks, relatives of some of the missing girls spoke Tuesday of their
growing frustration at the lack of progress. One man said that his niece had
jumped off a truck and fled to safety as the militants sped away from her school
but that four other girls in the family could not escape.

"We don't know where they are or what is happening to them. We have been given
no information, and the government is doing nothing," said the man, Pudza
Habila, 43, a government employee.

At the outdoor Nyanya Market on the outskirts of the capital, there were few
customers Tuesday in a maze of tents and stalls where car bombings occurred
April 14 and May 2. Near the site of one blast, where the twisted hulks of
charred vehicles still rested, vendors squatted next to piles of sneakers and
umbrellas. They had once felt relatively immune to the wrath of the Islamist
militants; now they feel vulnerable and angry.

"We are told that Boko Haram did this, but what did anyone here ever do to
offend them?" demanded a 32-year-old shoe seller named Darlington, whose shack
was damaged in the first blast. "Everyone is scared, both Christians and Muslims
alike. These attacks are giving Nigeria a bad name now, but it is an
international problem. The only way to suppress the power of these terrorists is
to eradicate them from all of Africa."

pamela.constable@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


