                             2770 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 30, 2014 Friday 11:38 PM EST

Emptiness at West Point

BYLINE: Charles Krauthammer

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 768 words


It is fitting that on the day before President Obama was to give his grand West
Point address defending the wisdom and prudence of his foreign policy, his
government should be urging Americans to evacuate Libya.

Libya, of course, was once the model Obama intervention - the exquisitely
calibrated military engagement wrapped in the rhetorical extravagance of a
nationally televised address proclaiming his newest foreign policy doctrine
(they change to fit the latest ad hoc decision): the responsibility to protect.

You don't hear R2P bandied about much anymore. Not with more than 50,000
civilians having been slaughtered in Syria's civil war, unprotected in any way
by the United States. Nor for that matter do you hear much about Libya, now so
dangerously chaotic and jihadi-infested that the State Department is telling
Americans to get out.

And you didn't hear much of anything in the West Point speech. It was a somber
parade of straw men, as the president applauded himself for steering the nation
on a nervy middle course between extreme isolationism and madcap
interventionism. It was the rhetorical equivalent of that classic national
security joke in which the presidential aide, devoted to policy option X,
submits the following decision memo:

Option 1. All-out nuclear war.

Option 2. Unilateral surrender.

Option 3. Policy X.

The isolationism of Obama's telling is a species not to be found anywhere. Not
even Rand Paul would withdraw from everywhere. And even members of Congress's
dovish left have called for sending drones to Nigeria, for God's sake.

As for Obama's interventionists, they are grotesquely described as people "who
think military intervention is the only way for America to avoid looking weak"
while Obama courageously refuses to believe that "every problem has a military
solution."

Name one person who does.

"Why is it that everybody is so eager to use military force?" Obama recently and
plaintively asked about Ukraine. In reality, nobody is. What actual earthlings
are eager for is sending military assistance to Ukraine's woefully equipped
forces.

That's what the interim prime minister asked for when he visited here in March -
and was denied. (He was even denied night-vision goggles and protective armor.)
Two months later, military assistance was the first thing Petro Poroshenko,
Ukraine's newly elected president, said he wanted from the United States. Note:
not boots on the ground.

Same for Syria. It was Obama, not his critics, who went to the brink of a
military strike over the use of chemical weapons. From which he then flinched.
Critics have been begging Obama to help train and equip the outmanned and
outgunned rebels - a policy to which he now intimates he might finally be coming
around.

Three years late. Qusair, Homs and major suburbs of Damascus have already been
retaken by the government. The battle has by now so decisively tilted toward
Assad - backed by Russia, Iran and Hezbollah, while Obama dithered - that Assad
is holding triumphal presidential elections next week.

Amid all this, Obama seems unaware of how far his country has fallen. He
attributes claims of American decline to either misreading history or partisan
politics. Problem is: Most of the complaints are coming from abroad, from U.S.
allies with no stake whatsoever in U.S. partisan politics. Their concern is
their own security as they watch this president undertake multiple abdications
from Warsaw to Kabul.

What is the world to think when Obama makes the case for a residual force in
Afghanistan - "after all the sacrifices we've made, we want to preserve the
gains that you have helped to win" - and then announce a drawdown of American
forces to 10,000, followed by total liquidation within two years on a fixed
timetable regardless of circumstances?

The policy contradicts the premise. If you want not to forfeit our terribly
hard-earned gains - as we forfeited all our gains in Iraq with the 2011
withdrawal - why not let conditions dictate the post-2014 drawdowns? Why go to
zero - precisely by 2016?

For the same reason, perhaps, that the Afghan surge was ended precisely in 2012,
in the middle of the fighting season - but before the November election. A 2016
Afghan end date might help Democrats electorally and, occurring with Obama still
in office, provide a shiny new line to his résumé.

Is this how a great nation decides matters of war and peace - to help one party
and polish the reputation of one man? As with the West Point speech itself, as
with the president's entire foreign policy of retreat, one can only marvel at
the smallness of it all.

letters@charleskrauthammer.com

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


