                             2791 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 16, 2014 Monday 4:23 AM EST

U.S. reduces staffat embassy in Iraq as another city falls

BYLINE: Liz Sly;Abigail Hauslohner

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1118 words


BAGHDAD - Al-Qaeda renegades captured another major town in northern Iraq on
Sunday, forcing hundreds of families to flee into the surrounding desert as
their country descended into a new round of bloodletting.

The fall of the religiously mixed town of Tal Afar to the Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) raised the specter of deepening sectarian violence. It came as
the U.S. government announced that it was drawing down staff at its embassy in
Baghdad.

This is the first time since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003 that the embassy has
decreased its staffing levels in response to a threat posed by violence, and the
move was an indication of the level of concern that the unrest could reach even
into the fortresslike Green Zone, where members of the Iraqi government also
reside.

Citing the "ongoing instability and violence in certain areas," a State
Department statement said the embassy will also increase the number of security
personnel deployed at the heavily guarded mission. A separate Pentagon statement
said "a small number" of Defense Department personnel were being sent to augment
security at the facility.

The U.S. announcement compounded the sense that there is no end in sight to the
chaos that erupted a week ago when ISIS militants swept unopposed into the
northern city of Mosul, then rapidly advanced to within 60 miles of Baghdad,
scattering the Iraqi security forces in their wake.

Some diplomats will be relocated to the U.S. Consulate in Basra to the south;
others to the consulate in Irbil, in the northern Kurdistan region; and others
to Amman, Jordan, the statement said, adding that the embassy in Baghdad will
remain open.

The United States "strongly supports Iraq and its people as they face security
challenges from violent extremists," the statement said.

A plea for U.S. help

But a senior adviser to Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki said the United States
needs to do more if Iraq is to be saved. Ali al-Musawi appealed to the Obama
administration to commit air support and drone strikes to the fight against the
militants; "otherwise there is a danger terrorism will win," he said.

The United States is sending assistance, "and we are thankful," he said. "But it
is not the help that we are hoping for, given the scale of the dangers Iraq is
facing."

The Obama administration has dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Persian Gulf
as it decides how to respond to a crisis that threatens the stability of not
only Iraq, but also the entire Middle East.

Although there have been widespread reports that Iran has dispatched members of
its elite Revolutionary Guard Corps to help Iraq hold back the threat, the
Maliki government prefers not to accept Iranian help because of the risk of
inflaming sectarian sentiments, Musawi said.

He cited Iraq's Strategic Framework Agreement with the United States, which
spells out a range of areas of mutual interest and cooperation, as the basis on
which Iraq is hoping for increased U.S. military involvement.

"We have received a lot of offers of help, but we want support through legal
channels and not in a way that would provoke sensitivities," he said, a
reference to the widespread perception among Iraqis that Shiite Iran interferes
in the country to advance the interests of Shiites. (Shiites are the majority in
Iraq, but there are also sizable Sunni and Kurdish populations. The ISIS
fighters are Sunni.)

Claims of mass killings

Fears of sectarian killings have risen amid the mass rush to arms by thousands
of Shiite civilians across Baghdad and the Shiite south in recent days, after
senior clerics and the government issued an appeal to civilians to volunteer to
fight to reinforce the beleaguered security forces.

An ISIS claim that it had executed scores of men further underscored the risk of
sectarian slaughter. The group posted gruesome photos on a Twitter account
showing men in civilian clothes lying face-down, shoulder to shoulder and with
their hands bound, in a ditch in Salahuddin province, as masked fighters from
ISIS fired at them.

A separate tweet earlier announced that 1,700 men had been executed, but it was
impossible to verify the authenticity of the photos or the claim. By Sunday
afternoon, Twitter appeared to have suspended the account.

At a news conference in Baghdad, Maj. Gen. Qassim Atta, a military spokesman,
said the government had reasserted control over much of Salahuddin province, and
he showed a video of what he said were successful airstrikes on the town of
Balad in the region. All together, 278 people have been killed by the air force
in the past 24 hours, he said.

But the capture of Tal Afar, a town near the Syrian border with a large
population of ethnic Turkmens, many of them Shiite, suggested that the ISIS
onslaught was continuing.

Residents interviewed by telephone said a day of battles between local Shiite
militias and ISIS assailants came to an end Sunday night when the Sunni
militants suddenly swept into the town. Hundreds of families fled on foot
because the roads were barricaded, and they were planning to spend the night in
the desert nearby.

"We are in the middle of nowhere," one man interviewed by telephone said,
describing scenes of desperation as families with children prepared to camp out
in the wilderness.

'Far from normal'

In Baghdad, armed militias openly drive through the streets in pickup trucks and
SUVs, in scenes reminiscent of the dark days of the civil war a decade ago, when
gunmen roamed the capital. In some areas, the militias manned checkpoints,
according to witnesses, underscoring the extent to which the discredited army
and police are taking a back seat to the fighters.

The first workday of the Iraqi week was somewhat busier than previous days, with
many people heading to their jobs and opening their shops. But traffic still was
light, and the city was largely deserted by mid-afternoon.

The brittle calm of the past week was shattered by a suicide bombing that killed
14 people in a marketplace, according to state television.

Such attacks have been commonplace in Baghdad for months, but the explosion came
as a reminder that the insurgents have a presence in the heart of the city even
as the government seeks to rally citizens to its defense.

"Things are far from normal," said Haider Khadem, who was asked by police to
shutter his calligraphy store. He said he does not believe that the ISIS
fighters will reach Baghdad, "but we know they have some gunmen inside the city,
and people are afraid for their lives."

liz.sly@washpost.com

abigail.hauslohner@washpost.com

Hauslohner reported from Irbil. Loveday Morris in Kirkuk and Jason Rezaian in
Tehran contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


