                             277 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Keeping Track: Air Pollution and Drones

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 473 words


A Limit on Out-of-State Soot

In a victory for clean air, the Supreme Court on Tuesday voted 6-to-2 to uphold
the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency to find the most
cost-effective way of reducing harmful air pollution that crosses state lines.

Because soot and ozone from power plants don't respect borders, states are
required by the Clean Air Act to establish plans to avoid ''significantly''
polluting their neighbors. If the E.P.A. decides a state's plan isn't adequate,
or if a state doesn't establish one at all, the agency must make its own plan.

That's what it did in 2011, using a formula that required polluting states to
reduce emissions by the cheapest method possible. Industry groups and 14
''upwind'' states complained that the new rule charged them for more than their
fair share of pollution.

But it isn't technologically possible to determine exactly how much pollution
each state contributes to any other state. As Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote
for the majority, quoting the New Testament: ''The wind bloweth where it
listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it
cometh, and whither it goeth.''

Given this reality, and the broad language of the Clean Air Act, the court was
right to defer to the agency's expertise to manage a hugely complex national
problem, and to protect human health and the environment at the lowest cost.

In the Dark on Drones

The Obama administration says it wants to be more transparent about its
officially secret drone-strike program in Pakistan, Yemen and other terrorism
trouble spots, but it has resisted sunlight at every opportunity. This week, it
successfully killed a Senate proposal that would require an annual report on the
number of casualties from the drone attacks, whether civilians or combatants,
adding to the sense that its pledge was never serious.

The proposal had been approved by the Senate Intelligence Committee, but James
Clapper, the director of national intelligence, objected, saying it could hurt
the drone operations by disclosing too much information. Republican senators
agreed, and the committee's chairwoman, Dianne Feinstein of California, decided
to pull the provision from the larger intelligence bill to guarantee its
passage.

That's a setback. The United Nations says hundreds of civilians have been killed
by drones in Pakistan, but there has been no accountability by the C.I.A. or the
White House, which won't even acknowledge that the operations are taking place.
Mr. Clapper says the administration is exploring ways to ''provide the American
people more information about the United States' use of force outside areas of
active hostilities.''

That's hardly reassuring. If the White House is serious, there's a simple way to
start: explain what it's doing and why. Then the public can judge whether it's a
good idea.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/opinion/keeping-track-air-pollution-and-
drones.html

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


