                             2757 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 19, 2014 Monday 3:56 AM EST

Talk about race where racists are

BYLINE: Courtland Milloy

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 690 words


I appreciated Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. broaching the subject of
racism during a recent commencement speech at Morgan State University in
Baltimore. Except, why go to a historically black university to talk about
racism?

Why not Ole Miss, where a Confederate flag recently was draped over a statue of
James Meredith, the black student who integrated the school in 1962? Why not San
Jose State, where Confederate sympathizers reportedly held down a black student
last year and hung a bicycle lock around his neck? Or the University of
Michigan, where mounting racial tensions among black and white millennials belie
the notion of a post-racial society being at hand?

Of course, Holder would have to tweak his speech.

At Morgan State, he could get away with discounting "outbursts of bigotry" by
basketball team owner Donald Sterling, Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and a police
commissioner in Wolfeboro, N.H., named Robert Copeland.

"If we focus solely on these incidents - on outlandish statements that capture
national attention and spark outrage on Facebook and Twitter - we are likely to
miss the more hidden and more troubling reality behind the headlines," Holder
said.

But that take probably wouldn't fly on a campus rife with racial tension. It is
outlandish for a dorm to be defaced with Nazi symbols and the N-word, as
happened at Lehigh University. And more attention needs to be paid to that, not
less. Students at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro went to the
library and found racial slurs written on the covers of books, walls and desks
in the African American studies section.

What could be a more troubling reality for a parent who has mortgaged the house
to send a kid to college?

Such outbursts, whether by a Sterling or a skinhead, amount to a lava flow of
bigotry - and we can see how it oozes from a volcano of racism. The eruptions do
not hide a troubling racial reality; they reveal what's been hiding in plain
sight.

As honored as Morgan State students may have been to have Holder as a graduation
speaker, Morgan State does not have a race problem; the school was created
because America does.

My choice for a Holder speech on racism would have been Princeton, where Tal
Fortgang, a freshman from Westchester County, touched a nerve earlier this year
with an essay knocking the idea of "white privilege."

"The phrase, handed down by my moral superiors, descends recklessly, like an
Obama-sanctioned drone, and aims laserlike at my pinkish-peach complexion, my
maleness, and the nerve I displayed in offering an opinion rooted in a personal
Weltanschauung," he wrote in Princeton's conservative newspaper, the Tory.

Fortgang became an instant sensation - a bulwark against liberalism and all that
is wrong with the nation's colleges in the minds of America's right wing. You
can almost see Fortgang evolving into someone like Chief Justice John G. Roberts
Jr. - possibly brilliant, certainly clueless on matters of race.

"Student Takes Down Liberals Over 'White Privilege' Debate," was the headline on
a Fox News segment about him.

People like that often end up running powerful institutions, helping to maintain
a status quo of inequality that Holder would like to see changed.

Holder noted that black men receive sentences that are nearly 20 percent longer
than those imposed on whites convicted of similar crimes. He said that black
male students are three times as likely to be suspended from school than white
male students. He said that some states enacted voter ID laws that would make it
harder for some blacks to vote.

"(D)iscrimination does not always come in the form of a hateful epithet or a Jim
Crow-like statute," Holder said. "And so we must continue to take account of
racial inequality, especially in its less obvious forms, and actively discuss
ways to combat it."

But change it how? By changing minds. And institutions will follow.

Morgan State students didn't need Holder to enlighten them about racism. But
there are students at plenty of other colleges who could use some schooling.

courtland.milloy@washpost.com

[#xf14c] To read previous columns, go to www.washingtonpost.com/milloy.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


