                             270 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     December 24, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

Science fact matched science [#xfb01]ction in 2013

SECTION: Health; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 1019 words


At times, 2013 seemed like a science fiction movie come to life. The new DARPA
Atlas robots seemed to come straight out of "Terminator." Scientists made plans
to "de-extinct" long-lost animals much as they did in "Jurassic Park." A new
daily "password pill" - it has a chip inside to help you sign on anywhere - was
resonant of  "The Matrix." And, of course, there were the many nifty gadgets
that made a "Jetsons" future seem that much closer. Here, in no particular
order, are 10 of the most memorable technology trends and innovations of 2013:

1. The crowd got involved in space exploration. After launching in April, the
MarsOne project quickly signed up more than 100,000 people for the chance to
take a one-way mission to Mars. The crowd would also play a role by selecting
the four people chosen to become Mars astronauts in 2022 via a reality TV show,
and part of those application fees ($38 a pop) would go toward funding the
mission.

And that's not all. NASA recently unveiled a new asteroid-detection project that
would rely on the public for the detection of potential asteroid threats.

2. Global warming finally forced us to take futuristic new forms of
transportation seriously.

This summer, Elon Musk unveiled a wildly futuristic form of transportation known
as the Hyperloop that promised to send visitors between Los Angeles and San
Francisco in 30 minutes or less. The multi-billion-dollar system would be
solar-powered, earthquake-resistant and pod-based, giving travelers a welcome
alternative to traditional forms of transportation. That is, if the Hyperloop
ever gets built.

In November, a group of auto manufacturers led by Toyota unveiled
hydrogen-powered cars that they say might make their way to market as soon as
2015.

3. The military outsourced war to the machines. The Pentagon showcased two big
projects in 2013: the X-47B stealth fighter drone and the DARPA Atlas robots.
The military already had its drones, of course, but the X-47B set the bar even
higher when it became the first fighter jet capable of taking off and landing
from aircraft carriers on its own. The X-47B is also capable of carrying lethal
payloads and dropping them on enemy positions, without the need for a human
operator even to manipulate a joystick.

The Atlas robots are virtually indestructible metallic giants capable of
carrying out search-and-rescue missions in disaster zones or going door-to-door
in urban warfare environments with absolutely no risk to U.S. soldiers.

4. Scientists got serious about solving the world's future food problems.

A team of scientists grew a five-ounce burger patty from cow stem cells.
According to a panel of taste tasters, the burger may have been a bit on the dry
and chewy side, but that's nothing that a little mustard and ketchup couldn't
fix.

And if lab-grown beef isn't your thing, what about 3-D-printed beef? Billionaire
Peter Thiel is backing a venture, Modern Meadow, to 3-D-print beef using narrow
sheets of cells. One day, you might be able to feed these sheets of cells into a
printer the way you would a sheaf of paper, and out pops a tasty burger!

5. We went from 3-D-printing gadgets to 3-D-printing, well, just about
everything.

This was the year that people seemed to print just about anything using 3-D
printers, including houses, Smithsonian artifacts  and, controversially, guns.

6. Scientists announced plans to bring extinct species back to life.

The "Revive & Restore" de-extinction project aims to bring back extinct species,
such as the passenger pigeon, the saber-toothed tiger and the woolly mammoth
using the DNA of museum specimens and some fossils. In Australia, the Lazarus
Project hatched plans to bring back extinct frogs and possibly a Tasmanian
tiger.

7. Silicon Valley invented new ways to bring the Internet to the entire world.

Both Google and Facebook unveiled new initiatives to bring Internet and
smartphone access to the world's "next 5 billion." Mark Zuckerberg's
Internet.org hinted at a future of cheaper phones, better data plans and more
efficient smartphone apps for the developing world, while Google's Project Loon
proposed a system of giant helium balloons to bring WiFi connectivity to
hard-to-reach areas of the world.

8. Drones went from scary to cool.

In a "60 Minutes" feature, Amazon.com's Jeff Bezos - he's also the new owner of
The Washington Post - unveiled a drone designed to drop off packages to Amazon
customers in 30 minutes or less. At a time when many people associate drones
with military adventures or law enforcement initiatives, the drone concept for
Amazon Prime Air opened the discussion about the practical business case for new
forms of commercial drones.

Once the FAA offers a final ruling, perhaps in 2015, commercial drones may
become a mainstay of our everyday lives.

9. Wearable technology finally went mainstream with smart watches.

The concept of the smart watch - essentially, a wearable computer - had been
percolating for years, but the idea actually hit the mainstream in 2013. The
Pebble smart watch debuted  over the summer. In September, Samsung unveiled the
Samsung Galaxy Gear smart watch. Meanwhile, the wearable tech market continues
to wait for the commercially available Google Glass product in 2014.

10. Tech companies finally came up with something innovative to replace the
humble password.

With the hacking of e-mail and social media accounts becoming routine, there's
been a push to develop a password alternative. In 2013, Motorola led the way
with two new password concepts: digital tattoos and password pills. The digital
tattoos would be implanted under your skin, freeing you from the need to
remember passwords. The tattoos would come with all kinds of embedded sensors
and gauges, and might even become fashion statements in their own right. The
password pills, which could be ingested daily, would interact with gastric
juices in your stomach to "activate" your internal password. Apple made
fingerprint-scanning technology a new feature for user identification on its new
iPhone 5S.

- Dominic Basulto

This is an edited excerpt from the Post's Innovations blog.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


