                             2772 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 1, 2014 Sunday 11:47 PM EST

Theater

SECTION: ; Pg. E04

LENGTH: 1854 words


Critics' recommendations are indicated by black bars. Access our interactive
listings to find the latest showtimes, venue information and more events at
www.washingtonpost.com/goingoutguide.

OPEN"A Midsummer Night's Riot"

Rosemary Jenkinson's world premiere follows a hopeful golfer who practices his
swings during riots in the streets of Belfast. At Andrew Keegan Theatre. Through
June 5.

"Bat Boy: The Musical"

A woman attempts to help a half-bat, half-boy assimilate to life in a West
Virginia town. At 1st Stage. Through June 22.

"Cock"

During a break with his boyfriend, a man finds romance with a woman. At Studio
Theatre. Through June 22.

"Freud's Last Session"

Sigmund Freud and C.S. Lewis discuss life's big questions. At Theater J. Through
July 6.

"Henry IV, Part 1 and 2"

Stacy Keach stars in the repertory of Shakespeare's history plays. At Sidney
Harman Hall. Through June 8.

"Kwaidan"

Spooky Action Theater stages a play based on Japanese ghost stories. At
Universalist National Memorial Church. Through June 22.

"Ordinary Days"

A graduate students goes on a hunt through New York to collect her missing
thesis notes and in doing so affects the lives of those around her. At Round
House Theatre. Through June 22.

"Private Lives"

Noel Coward's comedy follows a divorced couple who have remarried others only to
reconsider their feelings for each other. At Lansburgh Theatre. Through July 13.

"Smokey Joe's Cafe"

The musical revue celebrates the careers of songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike
Stoller. At Arena Stage. Through June 8.

"The Last Days Of Judas Iscariot."

Witnesses make the case for whether Judas Iscariot should stay in hell or go to
heaven. Presented by Forum Theatre. At Round House Theatre. Through June 14.

"The Piano Lesson."

Set in 1936 Pittsburgh, August Wilson's play follows two siblings as they fight
over their family piano and whether to sell it for land or keep it as an
heirloom. At Olney Theatre Center. June 8.

"The Prostate Dialogues."

John Spelman's solo show puts a humorous twist on his experiences and others
with prostate cancer. At Theater J. Through June 29.

"Things You Shouldn't Say Past Midnight."

Three couples attempt late-night trysts in New York in this comedy by Peter
Ackerman. At Andrew Keegan Theatre. Through June 7.

"Three Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog)."

The comedy follows the exploits of three men as they leave their jobs in search
of adventure. At Synetic Theater. Through June 8.

"Titus Andronicus."

Faction of Fools turns Shakespeare's tragedy about war into a comedy. At
Gallaudet University. Through June 22.

"Wild With Happy."

The comedy follows a down-on-his-luck man who gets a pick-me-up from his Aunt
Glo. At Center Stage. Through June 29.

JUNE 2            "The Totalitarians."

A speechwriter develops a perfect slogan that she hopes will elevate her
candidate. At Woolly Mammoth Theatre. Through June 29.

3

"We Will Rock You."

Songs by Queen form the plot for the rock musical. At Warner Theatre. Through
June 8.

"West Side Story."

The musical follows two teens from rival street gangs who fall in love. At
National Theatre. Through June 8.

4           "Boeing, Boeing."

In No Rules Theatre Company's show, an unexpected visitor threatens to disrupt
the activities of a man dating three airline employees at once. At Signature
Theatre. Through June 29.

"The Wonderful World of Dissocia."

In the play staged by Theater Alliance, a woman travels to a fictional world to
regain a lost hour. At Anacostia Playhouse. Through June 28.

5           "Killer Joe."

In Tracy Letts' dark comedy, a hired killer decides to sleep with his employer's
daughter. At D.C. Arts Center. Through June 29.

6            CulturalDC's 2014   Source Festival.

The festival features 10-minute shorts, full-length plays, a talent show and
"blind dates," in which a pair of artists from different disciplines collaborate
to create a new work. At Source. Through June 29.

"Disney's Beauty and the Beast."

The animated musical about a cursed prince is given a turn on the stage. At Wolf
Trap, Filene Center. Through June 8.

"Healing Wars."

Bill Pullman stars in Liz Lerman's theatrical dance exploring the role of
healers in battles from the Civil War to the present day. At Arena Stage.
Through June 29.

7           "Happy Days."

In Scena Theatre's staging, Nancy Robinette plays a woman trapped in a mound of
earth struggling with her place in life. At Atlas Performing Arts Center.
Through July 5.

10           "Grounded."

The solo show follows a pilot who goes from flying fighter planes to flying
drones when she becomes pregnant. At Studio Theatre. Through June 29.

11           "Avenue Q."

The irreverent puppet musical is staged at Olney Theatre Center. Through July 6.

12           "Cloak and Dagger."

Four actors portray nearly 20 characters in a musical mystery comedy. At
Signature Theatre. Through July 6.

13              "As You Like It."

Chesapeake Shakespeare Company presents Shakespeare's comedy outdoors. At
Patapsco Female Institute Historic Park. Through July 20.

"Menopause the Musical."

Four women, either about to go through menopause or already experiencing it,
meet in a department store and begin singing about their plight. At Warner
Theatre. Through June 14.

14           "La Traviata (The Fallen Woman)."

The In Series stages the pocket opera about a couple in a socially taboo
relationship. At Gala Hispanic Theatre. Through June 28.

"Side Show."

The musical is based on the true story of Siamese twins connected at the spine,
but with very different personalities. At Kennedy Center, Eisenhower Theater.
Through July 13.

17           "Disney's The Lion King."

The animated movie is retold on stage with puppetry, music and dancing. At
Kennedy Center, Opera House. Through Aug. 17.

20           "Buyer & Cellar"

Michael Urie of "Ugly Betty" fame stars a comedy about a struggling actor.
Through June 29.

DC Black Theatre Festival.

The festival includes full-length plays, one-act battles, workshops and a
director's 10-day-play challenge. At various locations around Washington.
Through June 29.

"Enter Ophelia, Distracted."

Hamlet's female protagonist is the focus of Taffety Punk Theatre Company's show.
At Capitol Hill Arts Workshop. Through June 28.

"Pinkalicious."

After eating one too many pink cupcakes, a girl comes down with Pinkititis. At
Glen Echo Park, Adventure Theatre MTC. Through Aug. 31.

25           "The BFG."

Sophie and Big Friendly Giant team up to help stop other giants from eating
children. At Imagination Stage. Through Aug. 10.

27             "Good People."

A single mother in South Boston's Lower End attempts to rekindle an old
relationship with a now-wealthier man. At Silver Spring Stage. Through July 20.

JULY 1

"Yellow Wallpaper."

Pallas Theatre Company stages a feminist chamber musical about a depressed woman
obsessed with the wallpaper in the room where she is confined. At Anacostia Arts
Center. Through July 6.

8

"Rodney King."

Improvised poetry is used to explore the life of King from the police beating to
his drowning death. At Woolly Mammoth Theatre. Through July 20.

9

"Carrie the Musical."

Stephen King's novel about a bullied teen gets a rock-musical twist. At Studio
Theatre. Through Aug. 3.

10

Capital Fringe Festival.

The annual festival features a kaleidoscope of local and regional theater
projects. At The Shop at Fort Fringe. Through July 27.

11

"Abominable."

In the Hub Theatre's world premier a teen explores the connection between his
unnatural growth spurts and otherworldly footprints appearing around the town.
At The New School of Northern Virginia, John Swayze Theatre. Through Aug. 3.

18

"The Great American Century Songbook."

The music revue is presented by American Century Theater. At Gunston Arts Center
Theater II. Through Aug. 16.

"The Veil."

Quotidian Theatre Company stages Conor McPherson's play that explores Ireland's
history. At The Writer's Center. Through Aug. 17.

19

"Soul on Fire - the Musical."

A forbidden love in a utopian community forms the plot of this musical. At
Kennedy Center, Terrace Theater.

25

"Hamlet."

Shakespeare's Globe presents three performances of the Bard's tragedy as part of
its two-year, international tour. At Folger Theatre. Through July 26.

28

"Stupid F------- Bird."

Aaron Posner's loose update of Anton Chekhov's "The Seagull" gets another turn
on the stage with the same cast and creative team from its 2013 run. At Woolly
Mammoth Theatre. Through Aug. 17.

31

"Amaluna."

Cirque Du Soleil's show is set on a magical island where the ruling goddess's
daughter and a shipwrecked man fall in love. At Plateau at National Harbor.
Through Sept. 21.

AUG. 4

"Molly."

Playwright John Millington Synge's lover, Molly Allgood, is the subject of
Scena's world premiere. At Atlas Performing Arts Center. Through Sept. 21.

"Shining City."

In Scena's staging of Conor McPherson's play, a therapist's first patient might
be haunted by his wife's ghost. At Atlas Performing Arts Center. Through Sept.
21.

5

"Sunday in the Park with    George."

Georges Seurat's painting "A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte"
provided the inspiration for the play. At Signature Theatre. Through Sept. 21.

26

"Dirty Dancing."

Over the course of a summer, dancing brings together two lovers from different
worlds. At National Theatre. Through Sept. 14.

27

"As You Like It."

Shakespeare's romance is staged by the National Players. At Olney Theatre
Center. Through Aug. 31.

28

"Gidion's Knot."

A parent and teacher conference about a boy's death is the subject of NextStop
Theatre Company's play. At Industrial Strength Theatre. Through Sept. 14.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


