                             2753 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                         May 9, 2014 Friday 3:04 AM EST

Pakistan releases FBI agent

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 309 words


KARACHI, Pakistan - Pakistan freed an FBI agent on nearly $10,000 bail three
days after he was detained at an airport carrying knives and ammunition in his
bag, officials said, a relatively quick release that was likely to prevent the
situation from escalating into a diplomatic spat.

The arrest of the American, identified as Joel Cox of the bureau's Miami field
office, came amid thawing relations between a new Pakistani government dependent
on aid and a U.S. administration that needs Islamabad to help contain militancy
on the border with Afghanistan.

The two countries, uneasy allies since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, have had
strained relations because of a series of incidents: CIA contractor Raymond A.
Davis fatally shot two Pakistani men in Lahore in January 2011; the United
States unilaterally killed Osama bin Laden in the Pakistani city of Abbottabad
in May 2011; and American forces accidentally killed 24 Pakistani troops along
the Afghan border the same year. U.S. drone strikes in the country also have
angered Pakistanis.

Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Tasnim Aslam said the American man "was
not a diplomat and, therefore, had no immunity." She added that he was in
Pakistan on a short-term visit and had a valid visa.

A law enforcement official in the United States has said that the FBI agent was
in Pakistan as part of a multi-agency anti-corruption program. The official said
the agent  appeared to have made a mistake and didn't mean to carry bullets
aboard the plane.

Another U.S. law enforcement official familiar with the case identified the
agent as Joel Cox. Both U.S. officials spoke on the condition of anonymity
because they were not authorized to publicly discuss the case.

The Pakistani court directed Cox to submit a surety bond amounting to $9,800 for
his bail, police officer Rao Anwar said Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


