                             278 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 26, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran: State TV Shows Wreckage of a Downed Drone

BYLINE: By THOMAS ERDBRINK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 226 words


TEHRAN -- Iran's state television showed video footage on Monday of what it said
were the remains of an Israeli drone shot down by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps in the vicinity of a nuclear enrichment site in Natanz about 155
miles south of Tehran.

A gray tube could be seen lying amid sheared and burned wreckage, without any
visible Israeli markings. An Iranian general, Amir Ali Hajizadeh, said the
wreckage was the remains of an Israeli Hermes 450 drone, but added that the
drone had not taken off from Israel.

''The operational range of the drone indicates it did not start its flight in
Israel but departed from a country in the region,'' he said, adding, ''We have
some clues.''

Israeli officials declined to comment.

Sunday's announcement that an Israeli drone had been shot down near Iran's main
uranium enrichment came after President Hassan Rouhani had announced the latest
additions to Iran's missile arsenal in a speech emphasizing that the new weapons
were for defensive purposes only.

General Haijzadeh, who leads the Revolutionary Guards' air space forces, said
that Iran, in response to the ''invasion,'' would accelerate its efforts to arm
Palestinians living on the West Bank. But it is unclear how Iran would be able
to ship weapons to the West Bank.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/26/world/middleeast/iranian-tv-shows-remains-of-w
hat-it-says-is-downed-israeli-drone.html

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


