                             2778 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 6, 2014 Friday 12:39 AM EST

Mixing up themes at Source Festival

BYLINE: Maura Judkis

SECTION: ; Pg. T26

LENGTH: 721 words


Three is the magic number behind this year's Source Festival, an annual
incubator for new theatrical work by emerging playwrights from across the
country.

To begin with, there are three themes: revenge, quests and mortality. Then,
three programs for each of those themes - full-length plays, 10-minute plays and
what the festival calls "artistic blind dates," work created by artists who have
been matched up by organizers. In all, there are nine shows. You could schedule
out your festival experience like a game of tic-tac-toe.

"We wanted to be able to create more intentional groupings of the plays," says
Jenny McConnell Frederick, the festival's artistic director. "The thing I hope
audiences pick up on is the tightness of the themes."

A new style of programming for this year's festival, those themes were selected
based on the three full-length plays that were accepted to the festival, out of
more than 120 submitted scripts. Then Frederick put out a call for 10-minute
plays that fit the three categories, ultimately selecting 18 (presented in
groups of six within each theme). And as is the festival's longtime tradition,
nine artists were matched up for the blind dates, giving each team a chance to
create three works based on the themes. The blind dates are less traditional
theatrical experiences, incorporating dance and performance art as well.

All of the plays, Frederick says, share a sense of humanity. "Mortality is
something that's part of the human experience, and a quest is what drives you to
find something, to accomplish something in your time on Earth," she says. "And
revenge is what happens when something gets in your way."

Adds Frederick: "I'm always drawn to plays that have the capacity to surprise an
audience."

Here are a few highlights:

Mortality

In the full-length "A Bid to Save the World," by San Francisco playwright Erin
Bregman, people no longer experience death, but study it like a piece of
history. The artistic blind date in the mortality category, "Facebook in
Memoriam" by Elizabeth Dinkova, Rachel Hynes and Jennifer Restak, is a good
parallel, examining the digital records of lives left behind. The topic of
mortality, Frederick says, received more submissions than any other theme.

But back in the realm of the 10-minute plays, death is alive and heartbreakingly
real. In local playwright Stephen Spotswood's "Dressing Bobby Strong," a new
funeral director's assistant must prepare the body of her first love. And in
"Painted," by another local, Mariah McCarthy, a woman must make peace with her
dying mother.

Quests

Nathan Alan Davis's "Dontrell, Who Kissed the Sea" is about a young man who
ventures into the Atlantic Ocean to follow the course of a relative lost in the
Middle Passage. And memories of the past are the springboard for the artistic
blind date "We Forget, We Never Forget," by Layne Garrett, Rick Westerkamp and
Jessica Solomon, a "ritual investigation" of things forgotten.

The quests of the 10-minute plays, however, take audiences on journeys for a
special recipe (Benjamin Marshall's "Corn Bread With Raisins and Almonds"), a
magical genie ("The Reluctant Genie of Niamey," by local playwright Marine
Gassier) and even a visit to Abraham Lincoln's house (Philip Kaplan's "Local
Pilgrimage").

Revenge

Steve Yockey's play "Pluto," produced by Forum Theatre earlier this year, is
about a mother and a son dealing with a school shooting. His Source Festival
play, "The Thrush & the Woodpecker," is another tale of a troubled young man and
his mother. The son has been expelled from school and is living at home when a
mysterious woman shows up with secrets to share.

In "Countdown," the artistic blind date play by Meredith Bove, Swedian Lie and
Raymond Weilacher, artists must construct a device that is part gift and part
curse. In the 10-minute revenge plays, A.K. Forbes's "Collateral Damage and
Other Cosmic Consequences" is about a woman seeking vengeance against an
oppressive alien race, while John Kelly's "We Are Not Animals" is about an
operator of American military drones who is taken prisoner.

maura.judkis@washpost.com

Source Festival

Friday through June 29 at the Source, 1835 14th St. NW. 202-315-1305.
www.sourcefestival.org. $10-$20.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


