                             2771 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 1, 2014 Sunday 2:00 AM EST

Georgetown's Rafiu is trying to put fellow Nigerians in her own shoes

BYLINE: Sally Jenkins

SECTION: Sports; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 1127 words


Maybe it's true that the problems of Nigerian girls can be solved only by large
armies, billions of dollars and drones. But that's a pretty easy, frictionless
way to think, and what's encouraging about Ki-Ke Rafiu, Georgetown's
Nigerian-born women's basketball player, is that she chooses the friction of
trying to do something herself. As Rafiu sees things, it's amazing what a ball,
a concrete floor and some rubber soles can do. She can find two of those three
basic elements back home in Kaduna, Nigeria, but the soles are hard to come by,
and that's where Rafiu sees her chance.

Rafiu was 14 when she found her own chance on a concrete court behind a police
station in Kaduna, a northwestern town plagued by Muslim-Christian violence. One
day she saw a boy bouncing a basketball and asked what he was doing. He told her
it was a form of exercise, so she followed him, and that led to daily mile-long
walks to the court, which in turn took her to a charity youth camp established
by Nigerian pro basketball player Ejike Ugboaja.

That got her spotted by an American talent scout, Mike Flynn, who runs a
prominent AAU program in Philadelphia, and Flynn persuaded her skeptical parents
- her mother is a retired teacher, and her father works in a printing press - to
let her immigrate to the United States to play high school ball. Which was how a
Muslim teenage girl, whose given first name is Omowumi, which she told the
Philadelphia Inquirer means "desired child," found herself enrolled at  Neumann
and Goretti High School in Philadelphia, where she averaged 15 rebounds per game
to win a fistful of college scholarship offers, including one from Georgetown.

Now a 6-foot-2 junior forward for the Hoyas, Rafiu goes back to her family in
Kaduna every summer - she's there right now - and plays on her home court with
kids dressed the way she once was, in whatever scattered gear they can find. One
girl in particular haunts her, a kid with sneakers so tattered they were falling
off her feet. At the end of her freshman year in 2012, Rafiu looked in her
dormitory closet and saw that she had 10 pairs of hardly worn sneakers. So she
gathered them up. Then she went to her teammates and asked for their castoffs,
too, along with any shirts or jerseys they didn't want. She packed them up and
took them to Nigeria, where she handed them out.

"Without my home court in Nigeria, I would not be where I am today," Rafiu wrote
by e-mail from Kaduna. "The court and the people mean a lot to me. When I see
younger girls playing on the same court, it reminds me of the days when it was
difficult for me to buy basketball gear, and some of these girls are going
through this situation. This is the reason why I started this community service
of giving back to my home court."

You might ask what good an armful of sneakers for a few questing, hungering
girls can do against Nigeria's overwhelming problems. The problems include a
brand of Boko Haram  terrorism in northern Nigeria that burns schools and
kidnaps girls into sex slavery. "It could happen to anyone," Rafiu wrote. There
is also massive unemployment, with an illiteracy rate of 80 percent in some
areas.

Actually, sneakers may be the whole ballgame for Nigerian youth, according to
Margee Ensign, president of the American University of Nigeria. "Like young
people everywhere, they need meaning," she says. The university is a U.S.-style
campus that was established by the former vice president of Nigeria to foster
economic development and raise future leaders with problem-solving skills. But
it's uphill work. The school is in Yola, the capital of Adamawa, a hot spot
currently in a state of emergency because of Boko Haram attacks. In addition to
religious and ethnic conflict, there are large swathes with no power or water.
Secondary school teachers there haven't been paid in 18 months.

But Rafiu is on exactly the right track, according to Ensign. "I think it's
huge," she said. "You and I know what sports apparel does to people - it makes
them feel better about themselves. And it is hard to get here. I admire her for
doing that. I got a request just this morning for shoes; shoes are the hardest -
that's what everyone is asking for."

Though Ensign doesn't know Rafiu, she has been thinking along the same lines. A
year ago she and her university colleagues, including her daughter Katherine,
who is a teacher, launched a "Peace through Sports" initiative on the campus. It
scoops up vulnerable kids in the area, disenchanteds who don't have schools or
work to go to, and puts them on playing fields in new gear, using local
community leaders from every ethnicity as recruiters. They started with 32
soccer teams for boys and 14 volleyball teams for girls. It has since grown to
52 soccer teams and 18 volleyball teams, with 1,152 kids enrolled.

The program is a risky proposition: Hosting a thousand disaffected,
impoverished, unemployed young men on a campus with a private security force and
strict curfew because of the constant fear of a terrorist strike could be asking
for trouble. Yet Ensign insists it's worth the risk. "At the end of last year,
people said, 'Aren't you worried about all these boys on campus, because they
could be attracted to extremist groups?' My response is, that's why we're doing
it." She's trying to attract them to something else. Say, entrepreneurial
concepts.

There are a lot of blazers at the NFL, NBA, FIBA, FIFA and the International
Olympic Committee who like to talk about the virtues of diplomacy through sport
and how it can help in conflicted or impoverished places. But generally what
they contribute are massive profits for themselves, gross deficits for cities,
and even on occasion human rights violations. What Ke-Ki Rafiu understands is
the value of taking a small personal bite out of a big problem, how to genuinely
affect the most intractable problem in one of the toughest places on earth.
After graduation, her plan is to go to work for a nongovernmental agency, one
"that empowers less privileged girls," she wrote.

"It was rough for most of us that grew up in Nigeria, and we want to make our
lives and family's lives better," she wrote. "It is really simple: We see
basketball as a platform that will make us the great person we all want to be."

After Rafiu hands the shoes and the shirts out, she gathers the kids around and
sits them down to talk. She tells them what a basketball scholarship at an
American university is like and exactly what it takes to get one. "Success
always comes when preparation meets opportunity," she tells them. She makes them
believe it's possible. "It all starts within," she urges them. But the shoes on
their feet don't hurt.

sally.jenkins@washpost.com

For more by Sally Jenkins, visit www.washingtonpost.com/jenkins.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


