                             2782 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 9, 2014 Monday 4:38 AM EST

Ignatius's 'Director' hits all its marks

BYLINE: Philip Kerr

SECTION: Style; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 594 words


David Ignatius has been a respected journalist for the past 35 years, but now
that I've discovered "The Director," his latest spy novel, it's clear to me that
all this time he's been doing the wrong job. A man of his age and talent ought
to be every bit as famous as a lot of thriller writers with bigger names and
egos, and half as much intelligence.

The hero of this gripping story is Graham Weber, a businessman who's made a
fortune from telecommunications. The president of the United States asks Weber
to take over the "ghost hotel" that is the CIA, and, "flushed by the challenge"
of attempting the impossible, Weber agrees. It seems that he has time on his
hands, "and like many people who have succeeded in business, he wanted to be
famous for something other than making money."

He looks like an inspired choice to head an agency that has helped to squander
the country's moral authority with black ops, renditions, drone strikes and
waterboarding. But Weber has been polishing the agency's image for less than a
week when a Swiss-German punk hacker walks into the American consulate in
Hamburg (not as easy as it sounds) and insists that the CIA and all its support
systems have been hacked. Then he disappears, leaving Weber with a big problem,
very little time and a network of spies and bureaucrats who, in some cases, are
keen to see him fall flat on his handsome, tanned face.

Weber's gut decision to let James Morris, a young geek, run the resulting
operation looks like the breath of fresh air that Langley needs. At least it
does until Morris goes AWOL, leaving an almost invisible electronic exhaust that
suggests he may be playing not just both sides but a sophisticated game that
threatens to undermine the world economy.

I spotted but one error of fact: Berlin's Brandenburg Gate is not, as stated, at
the eastern end of Unter den Linden, but at the western end. Oh, and I do wish
that when writing dialogue spoken by English characters, American writers would
use the phrase "old boy" very sparingly or, better still, not at all. The thing
is, old boy, we talk like this only when we're characters in movies, and never
when we're talking to Yanks.

I've never met Ignatius - I've never met anyone at The Washington Post, for whom
the man writes a column, and no one from the paper has asked me to be kind to
this novel or go easy on it. I say that so you'll know that I'm not rolling a
log or exaggerating when I call this the best spy novel I've read since John le
Carré's "Smiley's People," way back in 1979.

God, is it really that long ago?

This is the kind of Smiley novel le Carré would probably write if he were 20
years younger, if he knew the CIA as well as he knows the British security
services and - post Snowden and Manning - if he were switched on about computers
and hacking. And I mean reallyswitched on - like, he knows his Tor from his
Wormhole.

Nor am I exaggerating when I say that I now intend to read everything that
Ignatius has written. I already know the movie, starring Russell Crowe and
Leonardo DiCaprio, that was made of "Body of Lies."  It wasn't a bad movie, but
I've a shrewd idea that it will be totally eclipsed by the book. Small wonder
that I'm told his novel "Agents of Innocence" is required reading for new
recruits at Langley. I can't answer for that book - at least not yet - but I
strongly suggest you read "The Director." It makes Tom Clancy look like an
episode of "Get Smart."

bookworld@washpost.com

Kerr is a British author. His latest novel is "Prayer."

THE DIRECTOR

By David Ignatius

Norton. 386 pp. $26.95

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


