                             2752 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       May 7, 2014 Wednesday 1:08 AM EST

FBI agent is arrested on anti-terrorism charges at airport in Pakistan

BYLINE: Tim Craig;Adam Goldman

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 660 words


An FBI agent is being held on anti-terrorism charges in Pakistan after
authorities found ammunition in a bag as he boarded a plane in Karachi,
Pakistani and U.S. officials said Tuesday.

The agent was detained by airport police in Karachi about 4 p.m. Monday when he
tried to board a Pakistan International Airlines flight to Islamabad. He was in
possession of 15 bullets and a magazine for a 9mm pistol, police officials said.

On Tuesday, he appeared in court on charges that he had violated local
anti-terrorism laws that prohibit the carrying of weapons or ammunition on a
commercial flight. A judge ordered that the agent be detained until at least
Saturday so Pakistani security officials can investigate the matter.

The American's arrest was news across Pakistan, and one television station aired
footage of the agent sitting in a jail cell in Karachi, the country's largest
city and one of its most dangerous .

U.S. officials in Washington confirmed that the agent, who is assigned to the
FBI Miami Field Office, was in Pakistan on temporary duty. They requested that
the agent's name be withheld, citing the sensitivity of the situation.

A U.S. official with knowledge of the case said the agent was not armed and had
apparently forgotten about the loaded magazine in his bag. The agent was in
Pakistan as part of a multi-agency effort to help the Pakistanis investigate
corruption, the official said.

Reached by phone, the agent's father said his son was scheduled to be in
Pakistan for about three months for "office-type work" with "a non-FBI-type"
entity.

An FBI spokesman in Miami referred questions about the arrest to the State
Department.

Meghan Gregonis, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad, said U.S.
officials are working to resolve the matter.

"We are aware of the reports, and we are coordinating closely with Pakistani
authorities on the matter," Gregonis said.

State Department officials also voiced optimism that the matter can be quickly
resolved. But a Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokesperson, speaking on the
condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive subject, said officials are
trying to gather more information about the agent's job in Pakistan.

It's common for FBI agents to be assigned overseas, where they often work out of
U.S. consulates or embassies.

One former FBI agent who used to work in Pakistan said agents are allowed to
carry weapons there. But the former agent, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity to be candid, said they are not allowed to carry weapons onto civilian
aircraft.

In recent years, several Americans have been detained in Pakistan on charges
that fueled diplomatic tension between the two countries. In the most
high-profile case, a CIA contractor was detained for nearly two months in 2011
in the killing of two men in Lahore.Raymond A. Davis, who was part of a secret
CIA team that had been operating in the eastern city, argued that he had acted
in self-defense after the two men tried to rob him.

The incident sparked violent protests across Pakistan and greatly strained
bilateral relations. Pakistan initially rebuffed requests from senior Obama
administration officials that Davis be granted diplomatic immunity. But he was
eventually freed after arrangements were made to compensate the relatives of the
victims.

At the time, anti-American sentiment was growing in Pakistan because of U.S.
drone strikes and disagreements over whether the Pakistani military was doing
enough to combat terrorism.

But in the past year, officials on both sides have stressed that relations are
on the upswing.

On Monday, the Pakistani military announced that the U.S. military was being
granted rare permission to use Pakistani airspace so it could more safely
transport vehicles and other supplies from Karachi to Afghanistan.

tim.craig@washpost.com

adam.goldman@washpost.com

Craig reported from Kabul. Julie Tate in Washington, Nisar Mehdi in Karachi and
Shaiq Hussain in Islamabad contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


