                             2842 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 25, 2014 Friday 11:57 PM EST

SECTION: ; Pg. T24

LENGTH: 4259 words


Capital Fringe          Mini Reviews

A check mark (g) denotes a show recommended by our critics. For more
information, call 866-811-4111 or visit www.capitalfringe.org. Tickets cost $17,
plus a one-time purchase of a $7 Fringe Festival button.

Newly Reviewed                       gBRICK PENGUIN TRIES ITS BEST

At the Fridge through Saturday

There are only so many questions you have about a sketch comedy show like "Brick
Penguin Tries Its Best." I will answer them now. Is it funny? Yes. Should I
bring children or extremely grown-up grown-ups? No. Is there a bar? Yes. Free
candy, too. The five-member sketch comedy group Brick Penguin has been working
together for three years and does a lot of shows, so their "best of" show is
quite polished. A wide variety of things are mocked and the group keeps its
energy high by freestyle dancing to music clips as the next scene is set up.
Each performer had a particular strength - Natalie Sayth's is withering scorn,
Murphy McHugh does a great straight man with a twist, John Calcerano shifts
gloriously from a benign character to a dangerous one, John Blakeslee sends up
the hero type and Amy Vance has gleeful, manic enthusiasm.

- Rachel Manteuffel

Friday and Saturday at 8. 516 Eighth St. SE.

CABARET XXX: EVERYBODY F---ING DIES

At the Baldacchino Gypsy Tent Bar at Fort Fringe through Sunday

The gang at Pinky Swear Productions imagines what would happen if they all died
in a plane crash and forced loved ones to perform songs at their funerals. The
Exes provide the musical accompaniment and every number sounds and looks
fantastic. While character fidelity is dubious, there are end-of-life anthems
for all tastes, from James Taylor to Pink. Likewise, the climax is not dramatic
so much as stylistic, a medley that pile-drives "Stairway to Heaven" into
"Candle in the Wind," and "I Will Remember You" into "Psycho Killer." The poor
deceased get short shrift from the living, who are more interested in finding
their own inner divas than honoring those who died. Everyone involved is a
talented actor as well as a singer, so it's a shame that there's so little real
dialogue or plot.

- Rachel Weiner

Friday at 9, Sunday at 3:30. 607 New York Ave. NW.

gTHE DISH

At Goethe-Institut through Sunday

Anyone who eats should be able to enjoy "The Dish." The premise: Two out of four
stars on a local cable access show will have a chance to rise to a legitimate
spot on the Food Network. The competitors: Paula Deen knockoff Rhonda Lee,
grandiose old aesthete Roger, brittle food blogger Nadia and bitter chef Philip.
Deciding their fates is Gwen, a cringing executive producer thrust suddenly into
power. Roger, Gwen and Rhonda Lee are enjoyable, familiar types played with all
the over-the-top silliness they deserve. Each show is slightly different,
featuring its own "special guest stars" and audience participation in a cookoff
between Nadia and Rhonda Lee. "The Dish" is gentle satire, done well. It never
strains too far or tries too much, but what you get is pretty tasty.

- R.W.

Friday at 8:30, Sunday at 2:45. 812 Seventh St. NW.

gFEISTY OLD JEW

At Caos on F through Friday

"It all started at breakfast," begins the aptly titled "Feisty Old Jew," a wry
bit of storytelling from San Francisco-based solo performer Charlie Varon about
an elderly man named Bernie. He's a fight-picker, and before long he's
schlepping from a retirement home to the other side of town and making a bet
with a young punk that he can surf. As Varon tells it, Bernie's eye for detail
is as sharp as his wrath as he treks across San Francisco. The monologue, which
Varon developed with David Ford, his longtime collaborator and director, is
peppered with observations about generational frictions in a rapidly changing
society - changes that are particularly abundant in the tech mecca of San
Francisco. It's also inventive and consistently droll: The flinty Bernie is
magnetic but unpredictable, and the golden-voiced Varon is plainly entranced by
the old man's undimmed vibrancy. There are no theatrical embellishments here,
just Varon, in black trousers and a red shirt, detailing Bernie's shaggy
crosstown saga with authority and wit.

- Nelson Pressley

Friday at 7:45. 923 F St. NW.

GIANT BOX OF PORN

At Warehouse through Sunday

In this comic drama, a giant box of porn mysteriously pops up in the small
apartment living room of young marrieds Kate and Ron. The imposing hoard of smut
poses deep questions: How did it get here? What does it mean? Kate wants it all
hustled out. Ron wants to solve the unexpected riddle. The nicely surprising
script is by Patrick Flynn, and it gets the audience into a pleasant laughing
rhythm for its first 45 minutes. Then the 90-minute play loses stamina and
inventiveness for a while, merely going through the motions of what settles into
a standard relationship drama. Flynn's D.C.-set, four-character script
rediscovers its mojo toward the end, and the production by the new Field Trip
Theatre is consistently acted with brisk humor. The show is more demure than the
title suggests, even with moanin'-groanin' sound effects as Kate and Ron finally
watch a tape together. Director Maureen Monterubio's staging is admirably direct
and never forced. As its chirpily funny start sobers into earnestness, "Porn"
keeps its pants on.

- N.P.

Sunday at 6. 645 New York Ave. NW.

gINTERROGATION

At Mount Vernon Place United Methodist Church, Undercroft Theatre through
Saturday

Our huge, shadowy intelligence complex trains an unblinking eye on us all, it
seems. That's the unsettling view of reality plumbed in John Feffer's satiric
and occasionally dramatic "Interrogation." He makes his audience a central
player from the start. Rangy and unassuming, with a Bluetooth device embedded in
one ear, Feffer makes his entrance. He is our interrogator, John Miller. Mr.
Miller turns his attention to the audience, announcing pleasantly that the exits
have been blocked and that we're all going to sit for a group interrogation
relating to an imminent terror threat. Pulling raffle tickets from a bowl, he
calls "winners" to the stage for questioning. From the start, however, we learn
far more about Miller and his history than we do about us: He suffers from
"swimmer's ear," for example, which causes stabbing headaches that could be
viewed as pangs of guilt. But about what? The line of questioning keeps curving
back to Feffer's John Miller, and all we in the audience need to do is wait for
the other shoe to drop.

- Jane Horwitz

Saturday at 1. 900 Massachusetts Ave. NW.

ISIS & VESCO INVESTIGATE THE CURIOUS DEATH OF DR. FREUD

At Redrum at Fort Fringe through Saturday

"I am Isis, greatest goddess of old!" proclaims a statuesque blonde (Cate
Brewer) while unfurling her silver cape. That pronouncement kicks off the
comic-mythic whodunit. The hour-long piece by Monique LaForce earns lots of
laughs, but it overplays its conceit like the kind of "Saturday Night Live"
sketch that should have ended sooner. Isis starts talkin' tough, announcing that
she's working undercover as an NYPD detective. She aims to avenge the very, very
long-ago homicidal attack on her husband, the god Osiris, by his brother Seth.
Isis's new partner is Vesco, a financial fraudster who is avoiding jail by
"consulting" with the cops; he comes on to her from the get-go. She kinda hates
it and kinda likes it. Toss in LaForce's rhyming film-noirish dialogue, the
jazzy soundtrack, the gods and mortals slipping in and out of the Afterlife, and
you have quite a smorgasbord.  Osiris, who  works undercover in the Afterlife,
poses as a hip-hopper, relating fake dreams to Dr. Freud. Leaving us to ask:
why? And what does the CIA have to do with it? LaForce cleverly sends up
cop-show cliches, psychobabble and the ancient deities' bizarre family trees,
but the narrative and timelines in "Isis and Vesco" digress and confuse
unnecessarily.

- J.H.

Saturday at 4. 612 L St. NW.

gSELF PORTRAIT

At Gearbox through Saturday

"When you paint yourself, you remember things you thought you forgot." That
maxim guides Sasha Sinclair's one-woman show, which takes her back to a
childhood in Southern Virginia, her creative ambitions stifled by proud and
fearful grandparents and stoked by a glamorous great-aunt. She escapes into
theater club and then Washington. Then, pulled back south to care for her ailing
grandmother, she doubles back to reveal the secrets she has uncovered. It's a
lot to unpack. Changes of time and place are sometimes abrupt, and characters
are submerged as soon as they appear. Sinclair tries to cram so much in that
several years are relegated to PowerPoint slides teasing stories left untouched,
summarizing her whole college career and a series of apartment evictions. The
rough edges are smoothed over by song, the strongest weapon in Sinclair's
storytelling arsenal and compelling evidence that she is the diva she set out to
become. At show's end, when she finally revealed her painted self-portrait, an
audience member at a recent performance exclaimed, "Oh, it's beautiful." She
wasn't wrong.

- R.W.

Saturday at 10. 1021 Seventh St. NW.

gTHE TOURNAMENT

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Saturday

It's possible you do not like stage combat, even when it's awesome. It's
possible you do not like awesome things. It's possible you don't like jokes.
Other than those cases, I'm having a difficult time tempering my recommendation
for "The Tournament." Basically, you will enjoy it. Live Action Theatre is
spoof-pastiching fight movies, from "Kickboxer" to "Fight Club." To get the
jokes, you will probably have to have seen a movie produced in the past 40
years, one in which an underdog triumphs over adversity, or there's a big
competition, or a mysterious man is pulling all the strings for mysterious
reasons. The whole cast of 11 gets to fight and dance aggressively with a
variety of weapons, many of which sail onstage at opportune moments and hit
Brian. The perfect audience for "The Tournament" is probably people who would
never go see a show in the Capital Fringe Festival because plays are lame. If
any such people read this far down into this review, go get yourselves a button.

- R.M.

Saturday at 8:45. 1333 H St. NE.

Continuing                       gA DREAM WITHIN A DREAM

At Union Stylus through Sunday

This visually smart, absorbing project unfolds over two floors of an empty
building. It's a sort of haunted house and a scavenger hunt as a small audience
of no more than 10 is guided from station to station, listening to lunatic
ravings and hunting for clues about Edgar Allan Poe's last wishes. The hour-long
experience makes references to lots of Poe, but literature isn't the hook.
"Dream Within a Dream" is all about atmospherics. The cavernous spaces on both
floors are dimly lighted to create an ominous hollow effect, yet each small
gallery area is meticulously rendered, sometimes with video projected on the
walls. You can lose the story amid all this mood; at times the melancholy rants
really are incoherent. But you may not notice or care much, especially after the
mystery is solved.

- N.P.

Friday at 7:30, 8:45 and 10, Saturday at 1, 2:15 and 3:30, Sunday at 2, 3:15 and
4:30. 629 New York Ave. NW.

gCROSS THE LINE

At the Shop at Fort Fringe through Friday

The idea behind producer-director Jenna Selby's project is simple: Too often we
are too busy or too defensive to really connect with the people around us. Once
the performance begins, the cast addresses us directly, introducing themselves
and then playing all kinds of roles as they reenact true tales, both lofty and
earthy, of reaching out. A man crying in public gets consoled by a little girl
who sings to him. The hungry get fed. The lonely find company. This celebration
of random acts of kindness would seem perfectly natural as a documentary film,
but Selby does surprisingly well making it work as theater. The 50-minute show
unfolds with style and purpose. In form and content, "Cross the Line" has a
1960s impulse, and it comes across as a certain kind of church. It insists that
for just less than an hour, anyway, you check your snark and irony at the door.

- N.P.

Friday at 6. 607 New York Ave. NW.

DECADES

At Gearbox through Sunday

Ready to time-travel? 4&9 Productions takes unscripted theater to the 1950s,
'60s, '70s and '80s. Sadly for nostalgia-minded comedy lovers, the conceit never
quite reaches light speed. Ideas for each show come from the audience members,
who are invited to choose a family-friendly topic of conversation and an
occupation that attracts men and women. Improvisational comedy is a high-wire
act. Just avoiding dead air for a solid hour is an accomplishment. The best
scene of a recent performance featured three characters smoking weed in a park
(in the '60s, of course). Costumes were also a high point, with suits that ran
the gamut from British Invasion velvet to disco leather to glam-rock spandex.
The show-ending improvised song also was a highlight. Inventing a musical number
on the fly is even more of a challenge than standard improv. Here the risk pays
off with a flight of fancy that's truly transporting.

- R.W.

Sunday at 2:15. 1021 Seventh St. NW.

DISTRICTLAND

At Mount Vernon Place United Methodist Church, Undercroft Theatre through
Saturday and Redrum at Fort Fringe through Sunday

"Districtland" opens with a recitation of familiar D.C. cliches and spends the
next 90 minutes lovingly skewering them. The play focuses on a crew of
archetypal Washington roommates. There's Frank, a harried unpaid Hill intern;
Maria, a Rhodes scholar with a job in the State Department and a cellphone glued
to her ear; Charity, a returned Peace Corps volunteer who works for a nonprofit
group but dreams of writing poetry; and Dave, an unemployed recent law school
graduate with a trust fund and a penchant for "networking." Over the course of a
day, the four play out a series of equally stereotypical experiences. Though
"Districtland" is well-stocked with all the key components of a Dupont happy
hour, it struggles to piece them together into a story. But in its best moments,
"Districtland" hilariously taps into the kinds of D.C. experiences that only a
Washingtonian will understand. These are the moments that will have audience
members with tears in their eyes - either because they're laughing so hard, or
because it's all a bit too real.

- Sarah Kaplan

Saturday at 8:30. Mount Vernon Place United Methodist Church, Undercroft
Theatre, 900 Massachusetts Ave. NW. Sunday at 6:15. Redrum, 612 L St. NW.

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?

At Warehouse through Saturday

Although there's no couch or bearded shrink, the six lead comics use stand-up,
sketch comedy and improv much as they would a therapist's office: to talk
through their feelings on dating, their parents, sex, race, gentrification and
the sources of inspiration for their comedy. The jokes don't always stand up to
the weighty topics they address, but the show, which consists of a series of
individual stand-up routines that are then acted out by the other cast members,
has a number of sketches that get the entire audience laughing. Best of all is a
sketch about a dating game show that's won by a giant panda - yes, there is a
furry black-and-white suit involved, and no, his ideal date does not involve a
trip to the zoo. Much like the subjects of a therapy session, some of the
routines in "Do You See What I See?" could use some working through. But for
people who need more stand-up, improv and panda costumes in their lives, this
variety show offers all three in abundance.

- S.K.

Saturday at 3:45. 645 New York Ave. NW.

DREAM LOVE

At the Shop at Fort Fringe through Saturday

Ryan Tumulty's piece follows a familiar path with the story of a love triangle
among Milo, his girlfriend, Lia, and his best friend, Daemon. Each of these main
players also has a confidante. These relationships offer a bit more context to
what at first seems like a pretty straightforward case of girl leaves boyfriend
for best friend. In truth, none of the dialogue is nearly as illuminating as the
portions of the production that are merely movement. Many of the verbal
exchanges occur simultaneously. It can feel a bit gimmicky and without offering
time to let the words land, the approach only highlights how relatively
unimportant words are here. But the dance is exceptional. The choreography,
ranging from explosively acrobatic to gracefully balletic, telegraphs real
emotions.

- Stephanie Merry

Saturday at 7:15. 607 New York Ave. NW.

gTHE HELLO GIRLS: UNKNOWN HEROINES OF WWI

At Caos on F through Saturday

With the sunny demeanor of a favorite high school teacher, Ellouise Schoettler
talks about American women who served in uniform at the front in 1917 and 1918
as bilingual switchboard operators. They were needed to speed up and clarify
messages transmitted between the trenches among the English- and French-speaking
allies. Soldiers and officers called them the Hello Girls. Apart from the
excitement, danger and patriotic thrill of it, one aspect of the story got
Schoettler's goat: It took decades for the women to receive proper recognition
for their wartime service. Although the operators were sworn into the Army, put
in uniform and sent near the front, says one of the women she profiles, they
were denied proper discharge papers and medals honoring their battlefield
service until nearly 60 years after the fact. Schoettler's "who knew?" look at
women in the Great War does what she no doubt intends. It makes you want to
learn more.

-  J.H.

Saturday at 8:15. 923 F St. NW.

I F---ED YOUR COUNTRY

At Goethe-Institut through Sunday

Twanna Hines has a lot to deliver here - she promises sex ed for adults and
prizes to win, as well as thrilling, true tales of her loving 'round the world.
Fun sex education and analysis is Hines's game, as writer/proprietress of the
Web site Funky Brown Chick and expert interviewee for TV spots. Hines checked
off finished bits on her notecards, adding to the unguarded, improvisational
feel of the evening. Her stories, too, wandered, and seemed not terribly
well-rehearsed. But that allowed some of the night's best moments - such as
Hines's truly impressive ad-lib when a phone rang in the audience. Some things
are more enjoyable unrehearsed. The sexual travelogue in particular could
benefit from some editing and rehearsal for a little more payoff. I was
expecting more countries, more details and more lessons learned, though I did
learn more than I expected to about condoms. There has also got to be a story
about how Hines, a self-described 22-year-old virgin with her legs "nailed
shut," became an internationally syndicated sex columnist and educator sharing
her losing-it story with a laughing audience. But that just might mean there's
plenty of material for Hines's second time.

- R.M.

Sunday at 2:30. 812 Seventh St. NW.

THE INAUGURAL ELECTION FOR PRESIDENT OF MRS. JACOBSON'S SIXTH GRADE CLASS

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Saturday

Dirty tricks start early in politics - very early in this windily titled Fringe
show that is as innocent as it sounds. Yes, there are betrayals and
backstabbing. But things can only get so venal in a plot that kickstarts with a
deceased classroom hamster, a tragedy that inspires an election. The goal: to
teach the students something about individual responsibility and democratic
process. Writer-director Kevin Finkelstein's script has the directness of those
old instructive after-school specials, but the tone is light and amiable as
seven adult actors engagingly play the sixth-graders and grown-ups navigating
the inevitable high jinks and crises of a campaign. All six kids run for
president, but quickly there are scandals - an inappropriate picture on a
cellphone, a funny revenge setup that knocks out the popular boy, etc. "And then
there were four," intones Jenny, an energetic girl who wears her ambition on her
sleeve. The show is presented by the resonantly named Federal Theatre Project.
It's ripe for the middle-school crowd.

- N.P.

Saturday at 1:45. 1333 H St. NE.

gMEDEA'S GOT SOME ISSUES

At Warehouse through Sunday

Don't worry, Euripides. Sure, you come in for some gleeful skewering in this
witty solo show that No Rules Theatre Company and Spain Arts & Culture have
brought to Capital Fringe. But this spoof, penned by Emilio Williams, also takes
aim at other targets, including academia, "A Streetcar Named Desire," the
institution of the Greek chorus and the D.C. theater scene. Channeling all this
satire is an energetic Lisa Hodsoll, who stalks a stage archly decorated with
giant phalluses and miniature Greek columns. Hodsoll portrays both an
exasperated Medea - the Euripides protagonist who killed her kids to spite her
unfaithful husband - and an exasperated version of an actress playing Medea. The
former is peeved at men - especially her ex, Jason, who ditched her after she
helped him steal the Golden Fleece. The latter is peeved at a theater industry
that has relegated her to a black-box Fringe venue. "Medea's Got Some Issues" is
funniest when it get most meta - when Hodsoll drenches two dolls in ketchup
while chatting to the audience about how crowd-pleasing Medea's infanticide
scenes always are.

- Celia Wren

Sunday at 2:15. 645 New York Ave. NW.

THE MONSTER SONGS

At Gearbox through Sunday

Can you be sinister and winsome at the same time? Yes, if you are a married
couple skilled at clowning and music, and you put together a droll 45 minutes
worth of ambitious yet kid-friendly tunes. This is "The Monster Songs," and it
comes from Toby Mulford and Rachel Spicknall Mulford, regulars with the D.C.
commedia dell'arte troupe Faction of Fools. He plays the slightly severe Dr.
Dour, who egotistically presumes he's the natural center of attention. She plays
Peach, the chipper assistant whose warm smile counters Dour's pallid, powdered
face. He plays a complicated 10-string touch guitar. She plays cello, and for
one song, a banjo. The idea is that Dour is, in his words, "an
ethno-crypto-zoo-musicologist," specializing in the study of monsters. They
weren't always on top of their game during a recent performance, which had its
musical and comedic fits and starts. But that winsomeness is potent, and they
finished strong with a whimsical Western number that was amusing and smart.

- N.P.

Sunday at 6. 1021 Seventh St. NW.

THE OLD MAN NEVER LET IT GO

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Saturday

Hemingway without the language? In "The Old Man Never Let It Go," deaf actor
Hector J. Reynoso proves that it's doable. You mine the story for action and
keep the stage buzzing with vivid imagery and moody music. Vistas include
sparkling beaches and scorching sun, but there is a dreamy quality, too,
although as Reynoso rows around the stage in a little boat against a glistening
ocean to a lightly jazzy Spanish guitar tune, the performance drifts
uncomfortably toward bland music video doldrums. The book resists the stage a
little, but then Reynoso's 30-minute take is more a poetic distillation than a
full-bodied adaptation. The bearded, bushy-haired Reynoso is charismatic as the
old man, padding about in baggy trousers and a rumpled hat. Comfortably
enveloped by the compelling technical design, he pantomimes a simple life and
then the epic, solitary struggle at sea. The brief show winds up as a limited
but likable portrait of deep pride and passion.

- N.P.

Saturday at 7:45. 1333 H St. NE.

THE PROGRAM ASSISTANT

At the Redrum at Fort Fringe through Sunday

Charlie and Laura are GWU graduates and best friends who just moved into their
first "big-kid apartment," and both women are searching for work. What unfolds
then is two paths in parallel as Laura does the 9-to-5 thing and comes to terms
with being an underemployed office drone, and Charlie takes a job waitressing.
Both women are miserable at work, but they're also sad at home. The play has
some kinks, not the least of which is the tendency for performers to swallow
their lines. The dialogue is great, but a couple of the actors have trouble
projecting. More distracting still are the countless scene changes, all of which
require some amount of set alterations.

- S.M.

Friday at 8, Sunday at 2:15. 612 L St. NW.

gWAITING FOR ARMAGEDDON

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Friday

In the early stages of "Waiting for Armageddon," Ron Litman looks like a
freaked-out monk. Let's be clear: Litman is fabulous at this. He also has an ace
partner in keyboardist-composer Tom Pile, who helps Litman pepper this show with
funny and infectious protest songs. Litman, 64, sustains a pace that's best
described as controlled frenzy: The words come in crisp torrents, and the dances
that go with the songs are nicely wacky. In fact, critical selling points of
Litman's act are his sly humor and a healthy Strangelovean sense of the absurd.
Spiritually, this rabble-rousing performance belongs on a busy corner or in a
public park: It's old-school, high-energy street theater. Dudes: Amen.

- N.P.

Friday at 9:45. 1333 H St. NE.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


