                             282 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            March 27, 2014 Thursday
                               THU FINAL Edition

Army eyes Pi\xF1on for drones

BYLINE: Tom Roeder

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 295 words


COLORADO SPRINGS The Army wants to train with drones and other new equipment at
the Pi\xF1on Canyon Maneuver Site, east of Trinidad, and has put in formal
notice to seek a new environmental impact statement for the 235,000 acre
training area.

The filing in the Federal Register says the Army will seek to restrict air space
above the site to accommodate helicopter and drone training as well as the use
of new targeting and jamming gear.

"Advances in equipment and weapons systems, to include their incorporation into
tactical units, dictate changes in how the Army trains, alterations to ranges
(including range air space) for maneuver training and doctrinal changes to
accommodate mission essential training prior to global deployments," the Army
said in the notice.

In the past, the Army has used small drones, which fly at low altitudes, in
Pi\xF1on Canyon training exercises. Using larger, high flying drones and other
aircraft would require closing the airspace above the site to civilian air
traffic.

"This reclassification is required to conduct integrated and realistic air and
land training and to accommodate high angle, indirect fire weapon systems and
airborne laser target sighting system training," the Army said.

The Army now has closed air space over Fort Carson for drone flights and the Air
Force Academy has closed air space for drone training.

The notice says the Army will keep its 30 year old promise to not use explosives
on the site, but would continue to use machine guns and inert rocket rounds.

The Army also expressed interest in adding staff and buildings to the training
area.

The move comes months after the Army nixed earlier plans to expand the site. The
Army pledged to conduct its training on land it already owns and to be a better
neighbor.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


