                             2894 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 26, 2014 Tuesday 11:08 PM EST

Stepping back into the fray

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 480 words


AFTER YEARS of downplaying the gathering threat from Islamist extremists in
Syria and Iraq, the Obama administration seems to be swinging toward a view that
the self-styled Islamic State must be stopped. This new appreciation is welcome,
if it is shared by President Obama and accompanied by a seriousness of purpose.

Earlier this year, Mr. Obama was dismissing al-Qaeda offshoots as the junior
varsity of terrorism and promising Americans that the tide of war was receding.
Now his secretary of state, John F. Kerry, calls the Islamic State an "evil"
that must "be destroyed." Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel says it is "as
sophisticated and well-funded as any group that we have seen . . . beyond
anything that we've seen." Gen. Martin Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, says it "will eventually have to be defeated."

What would it take to defeat the Islamic State, which continues to rack up
military victories in Iraq and Syria, including the capture of another air base
Sunday? When Mr. Obama was urged to support the moderate opposition in Syria
three years ago, one reason given was that a failure to do so would leave an
opening for more radical factions that would eventually spill out of Syria and
threaten the region. The longer the president waited, the more the need for
action would become obvious - but the more unappetizing his options would be.

Now the Islamic State is well-funded, with steady revenue from oil fields it has
captured and, as we've learned recently, ransom payments; it is well-armed,
including with captured U.S. weaponry; and it is highly ambitious.

No serious approach to the group can focus only on Iraq, as the United States
has  done thus far. The extremists treat Iraq and Syria as one area of
operations, and the United States must do the same. In that theater, as Mr.
Obama has said, the United States must find partners: Kurds in Iraq and Syria,
Sunni tribal leaders in Iraq, the Iraqi government if it can become more
inclusive, what is left of the Free Syrian Army. Aiding them does not require a
U.S. invasion, but it will need "boots on the ground," as Mr. Obama already has
acknowledged by sending close to 1,000 special forces back to Iraq. They will be
needed for training, to assist in air targeting and perhaps more. As The Post's
Greg Miller reported Sunday, the United States suffers from "persistent
intelligence gaps" in Syria; these can be filled only with a human presence in
the region, not by drones or satellite technology alone.

If Mr. Obama formulates a coherent goal and a strategy to achieve it, and
explains both to the American people, he will have a reasonable chance of
winning congressional authorization, which he should seek. The options are
indeed unappetizing, but the longer the United States waits - and the more
firmly the barbarous Islamic State ensconces itself - the worse they will
become.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


