                             2818 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        July 4, 2014 Friday 3:31 AM EST

France is eager to write a new chapter in battle with Germany

BYLINE: Rick Maese

SECTION: Sports; Pg. D07

LENGTH: 1052 words


France eager to erase recent World Cup woes

Just four years removed from an embarrassing performance, Les Bleus are suddenly
contenders.

RIO DE JANEIRO - French Coach Didier Deschamps tries to stay alert. Early in the
World Cup, he halted a practice session and alerted FIFA officials when he
suspected a drone plane was hovering over his players' workout.

"We don't want an intrusion into our privacy," he said.

As this tournament was just getting underway, the 45-year-old coach sat on a
dais and seemed to know the question was coming. When a British journalist
finally asked about France's recent troubled history on the field - particularly
its 2010 World Cup debacle - Deschamps didn't even bother putting on headphones
to hear an English-to-French translation of the question.

"I haven't understood everything . . . but I heard 'South Africa,' " he said,
"and you shouldn't mention South Africa. We are now in another World Cup. We are
in Brazil. We are not going to be judged by what we did four years ago."

His team promptly spent the next two weeks making the same case. The result:
Just two years removed from complete organizational chaos, France enters
Friday's quarterfinal match against Germany with as much a shot at winning this
tournament as any team.

France is barely recognizable from just a few years ago. Only four players on
this year's squad were in South Africa. The turnover has reached every corner of
the program, with all new coaches, staff, players - and very few lingering bad
memories.

"As far as we are concerned, we live [in] the present, the present moment" said
goalkeeper Hugo Lloris, one of the few holdovers. ". . . We want to write our
own history, obviously."

Deschamps knows a thing or two about rebounding programs. During his playing
days, the French failed to even qualify for the 1990 or '94 World Cup
tournaments. But in 1998, with Deschamps serving as team captain, France was not
only in the field, it hoisted the championship trophy on its home turf.

Less than a decade later, Les Bleus began an embarrassing nose dive, one that
kept finding new, unchartered depths. France lost the 2006 World Cup final after
Zinedine Zidane, perhaps the most talented player the country has ever known,
was red-carded for a foolish head butt.

In 2010, Coach Raymond Domenech got in a confrontation with one of his players,
sending Nicolas Anelka home. The rest of the team showed its displeasure with a
mass revolt, skipping a training session. Days later, they were all ousted from
the tournament, scoring just one goal in three games and failing to get out of
group play.

Then with Laurent Blanc serving as coach, the team spiraled further out of
control at the 2012 European Championship, plagued by infighting. Blanc stepped
down and France turned to its former captain, Deschamps, to resuscitate the
program. He had just two years to summon a near-miracle.

Deschamps boasted he tried to assemble the best team, not necessarily the best
collection of individual players. With a tough qualifying draw and players still
learning to play together, France barely made the World Cup field.

On Thursday at the historic Maracana stadium, following his team's final
practice session of the week, Deschamps was asked about his program's fast
turnaround. "November 19 was the key," he said matter-of-factly.

Prodded to elaborate, Deschamps explained the stakes were laid bare in November
in France's qualifier against Ukraine - "To qualify or stay at home?" - and his
newly assembled squad answered the call, posting a 3-0 win.

"That's what changed everything," he said. "There were other major elements
before and after that made it possible for us to reach this particular state,
but the history of my players, the history of my staff and myself has changed
totally since November 19."

They've played four friendly matches and four World Cup contests since that day.
They haven't lost, outscoring opponents 25-3. Forward Karim Benzema, 26, has
been one of this tournament's most outstanding players, notching three goals and
two assists in four games, and Lloris has posted three shutouts in goal.

"Of course, France is a team on the very top," German midfielder Toni Kroos
said. "We know what is coming our way. We know that they have top players. They
have shown a performance of a team which perhaps wasn't the case before."

France hasn't yet faced a challenge quite like Germany, which won Group G with
seven points and topped Algeria, 2-1, in its round-of-16 matchup on Monday. The
two nations last faced each other in a friendly in February 2013 - a 2-1 Germany
win - but they also squared off in one of the most memorable and deplorable
matches the World Cup has seen.

In the 1982 World Cup semifinal, German goalkeeper Harald Schumacher barreled
his shoulder through Patrick Battiston, knocking the French player unconscious
with a broken jaw and two missing teeth. The match went into extra time, and
with the score tied at 3, it resulted in the first penalty shootout at a World
Cup, which Germany won, 5-4.

Deschamps has been careful this week, not allowing his players to think past
Friday's tough match, but he also making sure they don't dwell on the past.

"History is what it has been," Deschamps said, "and tomorrow we'll write a new
page in history maybe. We're try to make it as pleasant as possible."

rick.maese@washpost.com

More on the World Cup:

Sally Jenkins:             How I learned to stop worrying about U.S. soccer and
love Colombia

Brazil-Argentina rivalry reaching fever pitch expectation of World Cup final
matchup

Fifty random thoughts about the World Cup

Is the pressure getting to Brazil's players?

Why Brazilians are so good at soccer

Argentine fans lead tourist invasion at 'Latin American Cup'

FIFA officials says U.S. should bid for 2026 World Cup

As U.S. soccer head home from World Cup, Klinsmann turns the page

Landon Donovan criticizes Klnsmann's tactics in loss to Belgium

The biggest free agents at the World Cup

World Cup knockout bracket | Individual stats leaders

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


