                             2863 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 9, 2014 Saturday 11:24 PM EST

Warsaw's lonely fight for liberty echoes today

BYLINE: Marc A. Thiessen

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 877 words


WARSAW

Most Americans know the story of the "boys of Pointe du Hoc," the brave Army
Rangers who scaled the cliffs of Normandy and liberated France from Nazi
occupation. But 70 years ago, the city of Warsaw was liberated by  actual boys
and girls - many of them teenagers and children armed with makeshift guns and
molotov cocktails - who helped take back the Polish capital from its Nazi
occupiers on Aug. 1, 1944, and held it for 63 bloody, courageous days.

My mother was one of those young insurgents. At an age when most kids are going
to school and playing dodge ball, she was dodging German sniper fire, running
orders across the city as a courier for the Polish Home Army. Today, seven
decades on, she and her fellow veterans move more slowly, but at celebrations
across this city last week they have been lovingly embraced by the people of a
free Poland.

On Aug. 1 at 5 p.m., sirens wailed across Warsaw, and every streetcar, bus and
automobile in the city came to a halt, as people poured into the streets waving
flags and lighting off flares to mark the "W" hour - the exact moment when the
Warsaw Uprising began. Hundreds of thousands have come to concerts, memorials
and open-air Masses to honor those who fought and died for freedom here. Their
story is being told in a new feature film, "Warsaw 44," and lines stretch around
the block to enter the incredible museum documenting their heroic struggle.

The uprising was supposed to last just three days, until the Red Army arrived
from the east. But instead of helping the insurgents, the Soviets stopped and
waited for the Germans to crush the uprising and destroy the leadership of a
free Poland for them.

The Warsaw Poles were abandoned by the West as well. Winston Churchill tried to
enlist President Franklin D. Roosevelt in pressing Joseph Stalin to allow Allied
planes carrying arms for the insurgents to refuel on Soviet air bases. After
Stalin rejected their first appeal, Churchill told Roosevelt that they should
try again and send the planes anyway if Stalin refused and "see what happens."
But Roosevelt replied, "I do not consider it advantageous to the long-range
general war prospect for me to join you in the proposed message to Uncle Joe."

Churchill decided to send planes anyway, and an estimated 360 British, Polish
and South African airmen died in the skies over Warsaw. Eventually the United
States sent one air mission, but it was too little too late.

When the Poles finally surrendered, Hitler ordered Warsaw razed to the ground.
As my mother was marched out of Warsaw to be deported to a POW camp in Germany,
she looked back and saw the orange glow of her beloved city on fire. By the time
it was over, 85 percent of the city was destroyed. Some 200,000 civilians and
16,000 members of the Home Army had been killed by the Germans.

That is almost the equivalent of the death toll of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks . . . every day . . . for 63 days.

A week after the Polish surrender, Churchill traveled to Moscow and brought with
him the prime minister of the Polish government-in-exile, who thought he was
there to negotiate Poland's postwar boundaries. Instead, he was informed by
Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov that Churchill and Roosevelt had
ceded Poland to Soviet control a year earlier in Tehran. The Western betrayal of
Poland was complete.

After the war, the heroic sacrifice of the Polish Home Army was largely
forgotten. In Poland, leaders of the uprising were arrested and sent to Moscow
for show trials. In the West, few cared to remember the Allies' shameful
abandonment of Poland. The Warsaw Poles were not even allowed to march in
victory parades after the war, because the Allies had recognized the communist
government installed by Stalin.

But the spirit of the uprising lived on in the conspiratorial hearts of the
Poles. The underground movement that briefly liberated Poland from Nazi
occupation in 1944 paved the way for the Solidarity underground that freed
Poland from Soviet domination in 1989.

If the story ended there, it might have been an uplifting conclusion to a
terrible saga. But today, 70 years later, the tragedy of Warsaw is repeating
itself in other parts of the world. In Syria, when the insurgents of the Free
Syrian Army rose up against the brutal Assad regime and asked the United States
for help, America did nothing and allowed some 200,000 people to be massacred -
about the same number as were killed in the Warsaw Uprising. In Iraq, when the
government pleaded for a year for U.S. drone strikes to prevent the advance of
the terrorist army of the Islamic State, those requests were repeatedly turned
down; when airstrikes finally came this week amid a full-scale humanitarian and
strategic disaster, they were too limited and way too late. In Ukraine, when
Kiev appealed to Washington for weapons to fight neo-Soviet aggression, all that
the United States agreed to send were MREs (meals ready to eat).

The lesson of Warsaw is that the fight for liberty is a lonely endeavor.
Freedom's enemies are brutal and determined, and freedom's friends are often
unreliable. But in the end, it is impossible to extinguish the desire for
liberty from the human heart.

Just ask the boys and girls of Warsaw.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


