                             2836 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        July 20, 2014 Sunday 3:56 AM EST

2 Israeli soldiers killed in Gaza clash

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan;William Booth;Ruth Eglash

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1226 words


JERUSALEM - Hamas militants intensified their attacks on Israeli forces
Saturday, killing two soldiers on Israeli soil and attacking others with
antitank missiles, machine guns, even a donkey laden with explosives, apparently
undaunted by Israel's incursion into the Gaza Strip.

As the conflict stretched into its 12th day, the militants' resilience seemed to
upend the narrative provided by Israel of a Hamas severely weakened by the
Israeli ground offensive, airstrikes, artillery barrages and the ongoing
destruction of its tunnel network.

In their most audacious attack Saturday, Hamas fighters dressed in Israeli army
uniforms slipped from central Gaza into Israel through a tunnel and attacked an
Israeli army patrol, killing two soldiers and injuring two others. The army
returned fire, killing one militant and forcing the rest back through the tunnel
into the Palestinian territory.

In all, three Israeli soldiers have been killed since the ground offensive began
Thursday night.

Hamas, military analysts said, is much better prepared militarily than in its
two previous conflicts with Israel, in 2009 and 2012. Since then, the Islamist
group has invested millions in building large quantities of short- and
long-range rockets as well as acquiring other sophisticated weaponry.

At the same time, Hamas's political and economic situation is in its worst state
since the group seized control of Gaza in 2007. It no longer has the support of
Iran, Syria or Lebanon's Hezbollah militia because of its refusal to back
President Bashar al-Assad in Syria's civil war. In Egypt, the Muslim
Brotherhood, of which Hamas is an offshoot, is no longer in power. Much of the
Arab world, in fact, no longer supports the militants, crippling them
financially.

"They are really stressed. They have to work very hard to achieve meaningful or
strategic developments," said Kobi Michael, former head of the Palestinian desk
at Israel's Ministry of Strategic Affairs.

"They are much more violent and extremist than in previous campaigns," he added.

In a second attempt Saturday to enter Israel through their tunnels, Hamas
militants were found carrying handcuffs and tranquilizers in an apparent attempt
to kidnap soldiers, Israel's military said, adding that the militants were
killed. In a third incident, a militant emerged from a concealed tunnel entrance
in southern Gaza and began firing at soldiers.

Saturday's attempted infiltrations into Israel, coming as thousands of Israeli
soldiers focus on dismantling the Hamas tunnel network along Gaza's border,
suggested that the number of tunnels could be far greater than believed. If
Hamas continues to use them to kill and injure Israeli soldiers or target
civilians in Israel, it could prompt Israel to widen its ground offensive and
push deeper into Gaza, swelling civilian casualties.

The Palestinian death toll from the conflict rose Saturday to more than 330,
including about 60 children, according to the Gaza Health Ministry. An
additional 2,200 have been injured. The United Nations estimates that 80 percent
of the casualties are civilians, many of them children.

More than 60,000 Palestinians are seeking refuge in U.N. shelters. By Saturday,
large swaths of the coastal enclave, including Gaza City, had been without
electricity for 24 hours. Residents worry about their water supply, since they
need electrical power to pump water to their rooftop tanks.

Citing its concern about reports of severe shortages of medicines, Israel
briefly opened its Erez crossing into Gaza to allow medical supplies in.

Israeli troops and Gaza militants engaged repeatedly in exchanges of small-arms
fire. A midday gun battle near the no-man's land between the fence and populated
areas in central Gaza left several Israeli soldiers injured. An overnight attack
by a militant near Beit Lahiya wounded three Israeli soldiers. And in southern
Gaza, three more soldiers were injured when an explosive device planted by Hamas
militants detonated.

"The resistance is roughly as we were expecting, maybe a little bit lower," a
senior Israeli military official told reporters Saturday, speaking on the
condition of anonymity in accord with military protocol. "We expect Hamas to
fight."

In one incident, militants strapped a donkey with explosives and pushed it in
the direction of Israeli soldiers, Israel's military said, adding that soldiers
"engaged the donkey and it exploded at a safe distance" without injuring any
troops.

Much of Hamas's ammunition and weaponry has been smuggled in from Iran or Sudan,
through tunnels that stretched from Egypt into Gaza, according to Israeli
intelligence officials.

So were raw materials used by Hamas engineers to assemble sophisticated homemade
rockets and other weapons. There are also reports that Hamas has acquired
drones.

But since the ousting of the Muslim Brotherhood last year, Egypt's military has
destroyed most, if not all, of the tunnels entering Gaza and closed off its
border.

A high-ranking Israeli intelligence officer told reporters in a briefing
Saturday that Hamas's fighters were unable to match Israel's firepower and that
Israel was "using its power on the ground to ruin those tunnels." He said
Hamas's weapons arsenal had been reduced by about half and that the Israeli army
"believes that it has caused a lot of damage" to the group.

Still, as they tangled with Israeli troops on the ground, Hamas and other
militant factions continued to fire a steady barrage of rockets from the Gaza
Strip into Israel.

Since Israel's ground offensive began Thursday night, some 160 rockets have been
fired, Israel's military said, saying the number represented a "limited
decline."

"Not a big change, but the numbers are smaller than in the past couple of days,"
said Capt. Eytan Buchman, an Israeli Army spokesman.

In southern Israel, though, a Hamas rocket killed a Bedouin man - the second
Israeli civilian killed in the conflict - and badly injured an infant girl
Saturday, said officials with Magen David Adom, Israel's first aid agency.
Twenty-nine people were slightly injured in the attack.

Sirens rang over communities in southern Israel all day.

During the ground offensive, Israeli troops have attacked more than 300 Hamas
targets, including 112 command centers and 95 rocket launchers, the military
said, and have found 13 tunnels from Gaza into Israel, with 31 openings.

In Gaza, evacuees watched from the top floor of an elementary school northeast
of Khan Younis, one of the enclave's hardest-hit areas, as round after round of
Israeli tank and artillery shells fell a mile or two away.

Ten men who were in front of a grocery store were killed before dawn when an
Israeli missile struck the pavement. Small BB-size pieces of shrapnel flew from
the explosion and flecked the walls with pinpoint holes.

The men's funerals were sponsored by Hamas and Fatah, the other leading
Palestinian party. Their bodies were draped in the flags of their movements,
while religious and martial music blared.

Sanna Siri - whose sons Mohammad, 17, and Yahiva, 20, were killed - cried out to
God and cursed the Israelis minutes after the funeral procession left her home.

"My sons went to the heavens as angels," Siri said. She called the Israelis
"pigs" and said she hoped they suffer.

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Booth reported from Gaza City.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


