                             2850 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 31, 2014 Thursday 2:59 AM EST

Families in Gaza weigh the risk of staying together

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 947 words


JABALYA, Gaza Strip - The Balatas, like many Palestinian families, disliked
Israel but also sought to distance themselves from Hamas.

For more than three weeks, as the conflict has stretched on, the Balatas' lives
have revolved around how to best protect their large family, extending over
several generations, in one of the most war-torn enclaves in Gaza. Now, trapped
between the ambitions of Israel and Hamas, they have paid a heavy price.

Eleven members of the family were killed in a single strike Tuesday, their
bodies now buried in two fresh graves on a sandy hilltop cemetery near their
homes. The corpses - one man, eight women, a boy and a baby - were shrouded in
white, in accord with Muslim custom.

As the conflict rages, displacing hundreds of thousands, U.N. and Palestinian
officials say some families have made a macabre calculation: to split up, with
each group seeking refuge in different parts of Gaza. If one part of the family
gets killed, others will live on to help the survivors and keep their dynasty
alive.

But most families, officials say, still move together as a source of strength
and comfort. Some are now living with other relatives, further increasing their
familial size, while others have taken shelter in U.N.-run schools and other
refuges. The war, though, has increasingly tracked them down in their havens.

"Unfortunately, many families have lost whole portions of their family," said
Adnan Abu Hasna, a spokesman for the U.N. Relief and Works Agency, which is
assisting some 200,000 Palestinians in its 85 schools. "The families gather
together as a kind of protection, psychological mostly. . . . It's a cultural
thing. They say, 'If we die, we die together as a family.' "

The Balatas, too, opted to stick together.

Three days ago, Naim Balata, 45, an electrician, arrived at his elder brother's
house with his wife, six daughters and sons Yahya, 7, and Allah, who is in his
early 20s. They had been warned by the Israeli military to leave their section
of Jabalya because of an impending offensive against Hamas militants. There was
another reason: Their roof was not made of concrete, so they worried a shell or
rocket could pierce it, relatives said.

After lunch Tuesday, Naim took a nap, as did his brother, Abdul Karim. The women
cleaned up and chatted, reconnecting. That is when the first hit occurred, an
explosion that tore through the house, sending bricks, metal and dust flying,
recalled Abdul Karim who had woken up and ran outside, along with his son and
wife.

Then a second one came, throwing Abdul Karim to the ground. When he got up, he
ran back into his house to help his relatives.

"I found my nephew, Yahya, on the ground and picked him up," Abdul Karim said.
"Half his face was ripped apart."

Nearby lay his grandson and namesake. He was 14 months old. His hand was nearly
severed, and he was covered in blood but still alive. When he saw him, Abdul
Karim lost consciousness. An ambulance arrived and took the infant to the
hospital.

Family members later found the bodies of Naim, his wife and his six daughters in
the rubble. They were all in his bedroom, as if they had gone there to wake him
up after the first explosion. The body of Abdul Karim's 18-year-old daughter,
Hadeel, was also in the debris.

By nightfall, the Balata family had buried their dead in the cemetery, steps
away from the house. On Wednesday morning, the baby died of his injuries in the
hospital. He was later placed in one of the graves.

At a memorial service Wednesday afternoon, Allah Balata sat solemnly in a chair.
Now, he was the last surviving member of his family, the only one who will carry
on his father's name. Allah showed a photo in his cellphone of his brother Yahya
proudly clutching a certificate for scoring high marks on his final exams.

Neighbors and local officials, in interviews, said the family was not linked to
Hamas or any other Palestinian militant faction. Abdul Karim, a driver with a
Palestinian news agency, said he had no ties to the insurgency and does not
understand why his house was attacked.

There were dozens of men at the service, held in a building where 52 members of
the Balata family lived. But unlike at most wakes in Gaza, there were no calls
for revenge, no vocal denouncements of Israel. There were also no Hamas flags or
Palestinian flags.

When asked whether he felt Hamas was partly responsible for his family's woes,
Abdul Karim did not quickly reject that idea or extend unwavering support for
the resistance, like many Palestinians in Gaza typically do in interviews.

"I am against violence and killing from both sides," Abdul Karim said. "The
Israeli children are precious for them. Our children are precious for us."

He added that he hoped Hamas leaders will meet with other Palestinian factions
and work out a lasting cease-fire with Israel. He did not insist, as many Gazans
have done in recent days, that a cease-fire must come only if all Palestinian
demands are met - or that Hamas should fight Israel until that happens.

"Of course I support the peace process. Who likes their family to get hurt?"
Abdul Karim said. "All of us have psychological problems. We all need shrinks in
Gaza."

Moments later, he clutched a passport-size photo of his daughter, Hadeel. She,
too, had scored excellent marks on her exams. She wanted to become a doctor and
join the United Nations, said her father, his voice trailing off, representing
the hopes of upward mobility for every Balata.

"They have destroyed my family's future," Abdul Karim said.

Outside, another artillery shell exploded in the distance, and an Israeli drone
buzzed overhead relentlessly in the clear, blue sky.

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


