                             2897 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 29, 2014 Friday 12:08 AM EST

World Digest: Aug. 28, 2014

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 838 words


PAKISTAN          Army chief steps in to resolve political crisis

Pakistan's military has stepped in to mediate between the government and
opposition protesters who have been camped out in the capital for two weeks
demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif over alleged voting
fraud.

Cricketer-turned-politicianImran Khan and cleric Tahirul Qadri, who have led
parallel protests, met with Gen. Raheel Sharif, the army chief, late Thursday
after saying they had agreed to his role as "mediator and guarantor" in talks
with the premier.

The move marks a tentative return to politics for the military barely a year
after Nawaz Sharif became prime minister in Pakistan's first democratic transfer
of power.

The country has a long history of political turmoil and military interventions
in politics. Sharif was ousted from office  during a previous stint as prime
minister in a military coup in 1999.

Pakistani Defense MinisterKhwaja Mohammad Asif welcomed the offer of mediation,
which came after the premier asked the military to broker talks.

Meanwhile, authorities accepted a key demand by Qadri and registered a murder
case against Nawaz Sharif in the killing of 14 of the cleric's supporters in
clashes with security forces in June.

- Associated Press

SYRIA          Islamic State kills more than 160 troops

The Islamic State group killed more than 160 Syrian troops seized in recent
fighting, posting pictures Thursday of terrified young conscripts stripped down
to their underwear before meeting their deaths in the arid Syrian countryside.

The slayings were the latest massacre attributed to the extremist group - which
has seized broad swaths of northern Iraq and Syria - and are part of a
stepped-up campaign by the militants to target President Bashar al-Assad's
forces.

Most of the dozens killed were rounded up Wednesday near the Tabqa air base in
north-central Raqqah province, three days after Islamic State fighters seized
the facility.

The troops were stuck behind front lines after the airfield fell to the
jihadists.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said about 120 captive
troops from Tabqa were killed near the base. Islamic State fighters also killed
at least 40 more soldiers, most of whom were taken prisoner in recent fighting
at other bases.

A statement posted online and circulated on Twitter claimed that the extremists
killed about 200 government prisoners captured near Tabqa. It also showed
photographs of what it said were the prisoners. The photos could not be
verified.

- Associated Press

EGYPT          Militant group posts beheading video

An al-Qaeda-inspired militant group in Egypt has posted a video online showing
the beheading of four men in the Sinai Peninsula who were accused of spying
forIsrael and whose bodies were found earlier this month.

Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, which means "Champions of Jerusalem" in Arabic, posted a
30-minute video showing purported confessions of the men. The four said that in
exchange for money they helped Israel target the group's members with drone
strikes in the northern Sinai Peninsula.

Among those killed in thealleged strikes was Khaled el-Menaei. Egyptian
authorities have said that Menaei and others were killed in clashes with
security forces at the end of July.

But the video showed footage of burned bodies of men identified as Menaei and
his companions.

The video was posted on the group's Twitter account early Thursday. An Egyptian
security official confirmed the authenticity of the video.

- Associated Press

Turkey's Erdogan sworn in as president:Recep Tayyip Erdogan was sworn in as
Turkey's first popularly elected president, a position that will keep him in the
nation's driver's seat for at least five more years, and he promptly appointed a
close ally to form a new government. Erdogan has indicated that he wants to
transform the largely ceremonial presidency into a more powerful position and is
expected to hold sway over the running of the country.

Dutch, German police detain 3 in Syria jihad probe:Dutch and German authorities
detained three Dutch citizens on charges of inciting hatred, recruiting
militants and plotting attacks in Syria and Iraq, Dutch police said. A man and a
woman from The Hague were held in Germany, a day after a man was detained in The
Hague, police said. Authorities in the Netherlands estimate that 120 Dutch
citizens have fought inSyria's civil war.

Morsi accused of leaking secrets to Qatar: Egypt's state prosecutor is
investigating allegations that ousted Islamist president Mohamed Morsi leaked
secret documents to Qatar via the Doha-based Al Jazeera broadcaster, according
to judicial officials. If the charges are referred to court, it would be the
fourth case underway against Morsi, who was ousted by the military last summer.
Morsi and others are accused of passing state security files toQatar, a close
ally of his Muslim Brotherhood group, which has been outlawed by the state.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


