                             2822 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 10, 2014 Thursday 3:05 AM EST

Israel hits Gaza homes

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1079 words


GAZA CITY - Israeli aircraft are targeting houses in the Gaza Strip as never
before, firingprecision-guided missiles into family living rooms. They have
killed at least five known militants with the tactic - but they appear to have
killed more civilians, including a growing number of women and children.

Israeli defense officials say their mission is not only tostop Hamas and other
militantgroups in the Gaza Strip from firing ever-more-powerful rockets deeper
into Israel, as they did Wednesday, but also to weaken Hamas by killing its
commanders.

But by targeting 60 houses in 48 hours, Israel's risk of inflicting collateral
damage has soared. The Gaza Health Ministry reported Wednesday evening that 41
residents of the crowded coastal enclave had been killed in Israeli strikes
since the conflict began early Tuesday, and that 13 of the dead were 16 years
old or younger. At least seven were women and a handful were elderly, such as
Naifeh Farjallah, who was 80.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Wednesday night that Hamas is to
blame. "Hamas is thus committing a double war crime," he said. "It targets
Israeli civilians while hiding behind civilians."

With the conflict intensifying and no sign of a cease-fire in sight, Palestinian
militants fired rockets that flew well beyond Tel Aviv, Israel's commercial
capital, and landed in the country's coastal high-tech corridor.

The major Mediterranean port city of Haifa, about 100 miles north of the Gaza
border, ordered the opening of its public bomb shelters Wednesday after rockets
hit seaside towns to the south at Zichron Yaakov, Caesarea and Hadera. It was
the first time that rockets from Gaza had flown that far into Israel.

The Israeli military said a Hamas rocket that struck Hadera, about 70 miles
north of the Gaza border, was of the M-302 class, similar to ones found aboard a
freighter that Israel intercepted in the Red Sea in March. The ship was ferrying
a load of Iranian-supplied arms to Gaza, the Israelis said.

The group Human Rights Watch on Wednesday declared that because the Palestinian
rocket attacks on Israel are both indiscriminate and target civilian population
centers, they amount to war crimes. The group also said, "Israeli attacks
targeting homes may amount to prohibited collective punishment."

Israeli F-16 fighter jets, Apache attack helicopters and armed drones have hit
more than 500 targets in the Gaza Strip over the past two days.

Awad al-Nawasra was sleeping under a dusty orange tree during the long, hot
afternoon Wednesday when, he said, "I heard the voice of the rocket and then I
was floating."

When he awoke, the front of his two-story house had been torn away by an Israeli
airstrike. His 24-year-old son was dead alongside his wife. Buried in the rubble
were his two grandsons, ages 4 and 2.

Nawasra said he had nothing to do with Hamas or militants. He said his son was a
telephone technician.

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas condemned the airstrikes on Gaza
and compared the Israeli operation to a form of "genocide."

"This war is not against Hamas or any faction, but against the Palestinian
people," Abbas said.

The Israelis say Hamas does not maintain traditional forces or military bases,
but hides its weapons caches and launchpads among the populace while its
commanders live at home with their families. The Israelis have killed at least
five known militants from the groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad.

"We use everything at hand to try to avoid and avert civilian casualties," said
an Israeli military spokesman, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner. "We phone up our enemies
and tell them that we are going to blow up the building, we throw non-explosive
munitions, and that is a sign they are supposed to vacate the building. Only
once we have seen them vacate the building - and we are talking about
command-and-control places and not the terrorists themselves - then we hit."

At least 300 people, more than half of them women and children, were injured
seriously enough to be taken to area hospitals in the past two days, said Gaza
Health Ministry spokesman Ashraf al-Qidra.

On Wednesday morning, two Israeli missiles struck the side yard of the home of
Zaher Hamdan, who was found an hour later slumped against a neighbor's wall in
the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, sobbing and cursing the Israelis.

"The Israelis feed off blood," he said. "If they want to knock down my house,
knock it down! But they kill. They love killing."

Hamdan said he had nothing to do with Hamas or other militant groups. He said
there were no phone calls or warning rockets before the strike.

Hamdan's sister-in-law, Sahar al-Masri, 40, and her 14-year-old son, Ibrahim,
were sitting beneath a shade tree in the garden when two rockets struck. The
second one killed them both.

Two of Masri's daughters were wounded. One of the daughters, a toddler, was
vomiting and crying in the back of an ambulance at nearby Beit Hanoun Hospital,
her right leg and chest pocked by shrapnel wounds.

A surgeon at the hospital, Ayman Hamdan, said the young girl's mother and
brother died of massive bleeding. "They were dead when they arrived," the
physician said. "The rockets are designed to kill. They are very powerful, very
lethal."

The surgeon said his small hospital had treated nine patients seriously injured
by Israeli airstrikes in the past two days. Eight other patients either died in
surgery or arrived dead in the ambulance.

"We are not seeing wounded or dead fighters," he said. "Most of these people
look to me like civilians."

Many Israelis want their military to do whatever it takes to stop the rocket
fire from Gaza.

Miri Eisin, a military analyst and former deputy head of the Israel's combat
intelligence corps, said that while it is sad that civilians are sometimes
killed, Israel has the right to hit its enemy Hamas where it lives, which is in
dense urban areas.

"We have the right to protect our citizens," Eisin said. "We do not put them in
the line of fire."

Yaniv Mizrachi runs a shwarma restaurant near city hall in the southern Israeli
city of Ashkelon, where air raid sirens have been sounding hourly. He defended
the current military operation as the only way to restore a "normal life" to his
city.

"This has been going on for years," he said. "This time, I hope the army sorts
it out once and for all."

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Eglash reported from Tel Aviv and Ashkelon, Israel. Islam Abdul-Kareem in Gaza
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


