                             2843 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 26, 2014 Saturday 2:53 AM EST

World Digest: July 25, 2014

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 481 words


MALI          Weather likely cause of Air Algérie crash

French soldiers secured a black box from the Air Algérie wreckage site in a
desolate area of restive northern Mali on Friday, the French president said.
Terrorism hasn't been ruled out, but officials say weather was the most likely
cause of the crash that killed all onboard.

At least 116 people were killed in Thursday's disaster, nearly half of them
French. President François Hollande put the toll at 118, a discrepancy that
couldn't be immediately clarified.

One of two black boxes was recovered from the wreckage in the Gossi region of
Mali near the border with Burkina Faso, and was taken to the northern city of
Gao, where a French contingent is based, Hollande told reporters in Paris after
an emergency meeting  with his cabinet.

"There are, alas, no survivors," Hollande said. "I share the pain of families
living through this terrible ordeal."

- Associated Press

JORDAN          Air force downs 'target' near Syria

Jordan's air force shot down an "aerial target" near the Syrian border on
Friday, a Jordanian military official said. Witnesses said the object was a
drone.

It was not immediately clear where the object came from, but there have been
reports of intense fighting in the southern Syrian province of Daraa, which
borders Jordan. Syria's civil war is now in its fourth year.

The target was followed by Jordan's air force and shot down at dawn over Mafraq
province, said the Jordanian official, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
"The armed forces will not allow any infringement of the country's security," he
said.

- Associated Press

Senior Iraqi cleric calls for political change:Iraq's most influential Shiite
cleric made a thinly veiled appeal to Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to step
down, calling upon political leadersnot to "cling" to their posts at the expense
of political stability. Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani's comments, relayed by a
representative during Friday prayers in the Shiite holy city of Karbala, came a
day after Iraq's parliament elected a new president. Fouad Massoum now must
select a candidate for prime minister.

Son of S. Korean ferry owner captured:South Korean police detained the eldest
son of the owner of the ferry that sank in April, leaving more than 300 people
dead or missing. YooDae-gyun was seized near Seoul after two months on the run
and three days after his billionaire father was confirmed dead, police said.
Officials suspect corruption by the Yoo family may have contributed to the
Sewol's sinking.

Nigeria confirms first Ebola death in current outbreak:Nigerian officials say a
Liberian man died of Ebola in a Lagos hospital Friday after arriving in the
country Tuesday. It is the first Ebola case to be confirmed inNigeria since an
outbreak began in West Africa earlier this year.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


