                             2862 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 9, 2014 Saturday 2:47 AM EST

BYLINE: Adam Taylor

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 866 words


Why bombs are falling in Iraq and not in Syria

If you had said, one year ago, that the United States would have been militarily
involved in a Middle East crisis, few people would have batted an eyelid.
President Obama had spent months trying to convince the American public and
Congress that the country needed to intervene militarily in Syria.

But the way that this intervention has panned out would surely surprise many.
The United States is not intervening against President Bashar al-Assad and the
Syrian regime, as Obama had proposed. Instead, it is striking at one of Assad's
biggest enemies, the extremist militia that calls itself the Islamic State. And
this intervention is not in Syria, but in neighboring Iraq.

Obama's calls for intervention in Syria ultimately failed, and now bombs are
falling in Iraq. Why? There are at least four big factors.

l              Intervention against Assad strongly opposed: When Obama pushed
for military action against the Syrian regime last year, other countries pushed
back. Russian President Vladimir Putin, a key ally of Assad's, even went so far
as to write a chiding op-ed column in the New York Times (which looks a little
ridiculous after Crimea, but still). Iran, another key Syrian ally, also pushed
back.

Even among European nations that supported the rebels, the support wasn't
powerful. In Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron suffered a humiliating
political defeat when he asked Parliament to support intervention. France,
perhaps the most hawkish of the European nations, refused to take the lead.

l              Islamic State is isolated but a threat to America: The Islamic
State has few allies. International powers such as Russia do not support it, and
important regional powers such as Iran are opposed to it. Even al-Qaeda, the
group that birthed the Islamic State, is now against it. While the group is
believed to receive funding from groups in Saudi Arabia and Qatar, no one will
complain if U.S. forces decimate the Islamic State. Britain and France have
also, tentatively, indicated that they may join military action.

Even so, the Islamic State, as isolated as it is, could pose a threat to the
United States. If nothing else, it has displaced al-Qaeda as the international
face of Islamist extremism. Its practical threat may be limited at present, but
in the future it could grow.

The Islamic State apparently relishes the idea of taking the fight to the United
States. "Don't be cowards and attack us with drones. Instead, send your
soldiers, the ones we humiliated in Iraq," Abu Mosa, a spokesman for the group,
said in a new documentary from Vice News. "We will humiliate them everywhere,
God willing, and we will raise the flag of Allah in the White House."

l              Limited airstrikes can make a difference: This is a limited
intervention, with limited targets. Laser-guided, 500-pound bombs have been
dropped, specifically targeting artillery being used by Islamic State fighters
to attack Kurdish troops defending Irbil. The current situation in Iraq means
that limited involvement like this can have a big impact, and while the Islamic
State forces have shown themselves to be smart tactical fighters, they have
limited means when fighting an assault from the air.

Iraq's central government and the Kurdish regional powers are also keen for U.S.
intervention. As far back as June, the Iraqi government was actually criticizing
the United States for not providing air support yet. "This is not only
endangering Iraq but the whole world," Ali al-Musawi, a government spokesman in
Baghdad, said at the time.

l              The United States feels a duty to act: In a speech defending his
decision to take military action in Iraq, Obama mentioned the U.S. military
personnel in Irbil and how he has a duty to protect them. But it is worth
thinking about why those troops are there in the first place. Irbil is a
regional capital for Iraq's Kurds, who have been key allies for Washington in
the country and will be vital in any plans to return Iraq to a functioning
state. The United States and the Kurds have a long, complicated history that
also plays a factor here.

Then there is the pressing issue of the Yazidis, a Kurdish-speaking religious
minority that has been targeted by the Islamic State. As many as 40,000 remain
stranded on a mountain in Iraq, dying of hunger and thirst, The Washington
Post's Loveday Morris has reported. "When we face a situation like we do on that
mountain," Obama said in a statement late Thursday, "and when we have the unique
capabilities to help avert a massacre, I believe the United States of America
should not turn a blind eye." Officials have suggested that the Yazidis'
situation could amount to "genocide."

Then, of course, there is the U.S. legacy in the region. Many of Iraq's current
problems are a direct or indirect result of the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq.
While the Obama administration and much of the public at large likely loathe the
idea of wider military action, there is still a sense that this is our mess, and
we have to help fix it.

- Adam Taylor

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


