                             289 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 14, 2014 Monday 11:52 AM EST

Israel shoots down Hamas drone;
Israel says the drone, the first of its kind, was hit by a Patriot missile over
the southern city of Ashdod.

BYLINE: William Booth;Griff Witte

LENGTH: 687 words


GAZA CITY - Israel shot down a drone that flew from the Gaza Strip and was
circling a city in southern Israel on Monday morning, the first reported
deployment of unmanned aircraft by the Palestinian militant group Hamas in this
conflict and a potential new threat for Israel.

The Hamas drone was shot down by a U.S.-supplied Patriot missile as it flew over
the southern city of Ashdod. An Israeli military spokesman said a search was
underway for the debris.

The Hamas military wing, the al-Qassam Brigades, announced Monday that it had
launched drones from Gaza for "special missions" over Israel, including
overflights of military installations.

The Hamas group claimed its engineers had manufactured three types of unmanned
aircraft, including those that could be armed or used as a guided missile, a
kind of suicide drone. The claims of armed drones or overflights of Israeli
military installations could not be confirmed.

On Sunday, tens of thousands of panicked residents fled their homes in the
northern Gaza Strip after the Israeli military dropped leaflets from the sky
warning those who stayed behind that they were risking their lives because a
large, intense operation was imminent.

Residents in Gaza were whipsawed by growing anxiety and frustration. More than
17,000 people poured into makeshift shelters as Israeli commandos entered the
coastal enclave early Sunday to knock out a Hamas rocket-launch site. A gun
battle with Hamas militants ensued and left four Israeli soldiers lightly
wounded, an Israeli army spokesman said.

The brief incursion by commandos followed the single deadliest Israeli bombing
of the six-day campaign.

Israeli missiles hit a house where Gaza's police chief, Tayseer al-Batsh, was
praying Saturday night. The explosions killed 18 members of his extended family,
including six children, and sent the top Hamas law-enforcement officer into
intensive care, where he was clinging to life Sunday.

The latest violence in Gaza came as Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
indicated that Israel has no interest in halting its assault. Israel's
objective, he said at his weekly cabinet meeting, is to inflict "a significant
blow on Hamas" that will yield "the restoration of quiet for a long period."

That goal closely tracks Israel's ambition in two previous offensives against
Hamas - in the winter of 2008-2009 and in late 2012 - both of which succeeded in
setting back the Islamist movement's capabilities, but not for very long. In
each case, Israel won just a few years of relative calm, even as Hamas's arsenal
and the range of its rockets expanded.

The cycle has come to be known in Israel as "mowing the lawn" - a temporary
disruption of Hamas's ability and will to fire rockets.

Pressure is growing in Israel to make sure that this time is different.

"The army should not stop until they wipe out Hamas," said Avner Peretz, 46,
just minutes after the windows in his brother-in-law's house were blown out by a
Hamas rocket attack in the southern Israeli town of Netivot over the weekend.
"The last two conflicts, we came out looking like the losers. This time, we need
to be the winner."

So far, there's no doubt that Israel has inflicted far more damage than Hamas
has, but that's consistently true in this deeply asymmetrical fight.

There have been 166 residents of Gaza killed in the current Israeli operation,
including 36 children and 24 women, according to the Gazan Health Ministry. The
United Nations estimates that three-quarters of the dead are civilians.

Hamas and its allies have fired hundreds of rockets into Israel - including 130
on Sunday - but most have either landed in open areas or been shot down by
Israel's sophisticated anti-missile system, Iron Dome. Several Israelis have
been seriously injured by the rocket fire, but none have been killed.

Israel Radio reported late Sunday that two rockets were fired at Israel from
Syria, apparently from Syrian army positions. Israel responded with artillery
fire.

william.booth@washpost.com

griff.witte@washpost.com

Witte reported from Tel Aviv. Ruth Eglash in Jerusalem and Islam Abdel Karim in
Gaza contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


