                             2879 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       August 17, 2014 Sunday 4:52 PM EST

To protect, serve and be paid differently

BYLINE: Karla L. Miller

SECTION: ; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 469 words


Reader: I am a police officer. My department claims that police and fire
departments are exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) requirement that
all overtime work over 40 hours in a week be paid at time-and-a-half.

We are scheduled to work 40 hours per week - 160 hours during any "28-day FLSA
period." If we work more than 160 hours, we get our straight hourly wage for the
first 11 hours of overtime worked. It is not until the 12th hour of overtime
during the FLSA period that we earn time-and-a-half. After 28 days, a new work
period starts, and we start all over.

I have spoken with people at the Labor Department and cannot get an answer as to
why this is, other than, "Because you are first responders and need to be
available in case of emergencies." Of course we have to respond, but does that
mean we should not be compensated like every other American worker? Could you
please explain why first responders are exempt?

Karla: Let's start with the historical and legal reasons. In 1974, Congress
expanded FLSA's overtime provisions to cover almost all public employees.
However, because law enforcement and firefighters generally work atypical
schedules - firefighters, for example, generally work one 24-hour shift followed
by 48 hours off, or 56 hours a week on average - state and local governments had
protested that they wouldn't be able to afford to pay them overtime without
raising taxes or cutting services. So Congress created a special overtime
exception for state and local public safety workers: the "7(k) work period
rule," which bases overtime calculations on a work period ranging from 7 to 28
days, instead of a 40-hour workweek.

Under this rule, in a 28-day period like yours, a police officer has to work 171
hours  and a firefighter has to work 212 hours before overtime pay kicks in.

I learned from law enforcement representatives in Maryland and Virginia that
state and local agencies have developed myriad approaches to compensating
emergency responders within budget limits and the 7(k) rule. For example,
Maryland State Police employees are scheduled in 8- or 10-hour shifts; if a
shift runs long, they receive time-and-a-half pay for the extra work time. On
top of that, although they're paid every two weeks, their schedules are arranged
over 28-day periods to ensure they don't exceed 171 hours, which would result in
overtime pay under FLSA.

That was the easy answer  to your "why." But I suppose you're really asking why
public servants who already risk their lives have to give even more to receive
the same benefits as the average hourly drone. I can't help you there. But I'll
keep it in mind next time I'm fuming about being pulled over.

Special thanks to Declan Leonard of Berenzweig Leonard and Aaron Michael of
Maryland's State Law Enforcement Officers Labor Alliance.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


