                             2804 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 22, 2014 Sunday 10:33 PM EST

Are you ever too old to rent a car?

BYLINE: Christopher Elliott;Zofia Smardz;C.E.;Z.S.;Becky Krystal;Carol
Sottili;C.S.;

SECTION: ; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 944 words


Mondays at 2 p.m., we answer reader questions about all things travel at
live.www.washingtonpost.com. Edited excerpts from our most recent discussion:

Q

We're headed for San Francisco in September and need to rent a car. We are in
great health, no accidents ever, but we're both 82 years old. Does Hertz have a
limit on what age they'll rent to?

A

Hertz's Web site lists minimum age requirements for certain vehicles, but not
maximums. It varies by country, but in the United States, there doesn't appear
to be a limit.

Christopher Elliott

I'm traveling to Warsaw and Budapest in September with my 9-month-old baby. How
can I prepare for the flight? Are there things you would recommend to help me
entertain him while flying? And to get between Warsaw and Budapest, would you
recommend a night train or flying?

Bring along any favorite toys  (preferably not noise-making ones) and lots of
little snacks - Cheerios and whatever else he likes  - which I always found
distracted my children well on flights. Otherwise, let's hope that the drone of
the aircraft will have him nodding off quickly. As for travel between Warsaw and
Budapest, with a little one, I'd fly. The night train is 12 hours, and unless
you buy a sleeper ticket or a couchette, it'll be like the flight all over
again, plus you'll get very little rest if the baby is fidgety. The flight is
only a little over an hour and not expensive.

Zofia Smardz

Next month, I'm taking Amtrak from Chicago to Los Angeles. I'm flying into
Chicago and arriving at about 10:30 a.m. My train is at 3, so my connection is
at risk only if there's a flight delay of three or more hours. But I still have
that nagging "what if" feeling. Is there missed-connection trip insurance that
could cover me if the plane's so late that I miss the train?

If your flight is late and you have coverage for trip interruption and
cancellation, then you could file a successful claim. I wouldn't delay a
decision on insurance - some policies require that you book within a few days of
reserving your trip. For what it's worth, I think you'll be fine.

C.E.

I have an opportunity to visit Edinburgh this summer. For a number of reasons, I
don't have a credit card and don't plan to get one. Am I okay going with just a
debit card? I'm doing all large purchases (train tickets, hotel for an
overnight) in advance.

It's not as ideal as having a credit card, but you should be okay with the debit
card. Just be sure to let your financial institution know that you'll be using
the card abroad, so that they don't freeze your funds. Also doublecheck with
them that your PIN will work overseas. (If it's four digits, you should be fine.
If it's more than that, you may need to request a new PIN for use overseas.)
Also ask about currency transaction fees, just so you're aware if they're going
to be especially high. Once in Scotland, you can use your card to withdraw cash
at any bank or financial institution that displays the ATM network logos found
on the back of your card. To be safe, I'd bring along a reasonable amount of
cash to get you started.

Z.S.

A friend and I would like to do a fall foliage tour this year. I've looked at a
couple of tours, but they're limited to a handful of locations and seem pricey.
Do you suggest a tour or independent travel? If independent, how many days
should we allocate, and are there any must-see locations?

For a domestic trip like this, I'd go independent. You can go where you want
when you want. A week would be nice. So much of Maine is scenic, but Acadia
National Park is probably at the top of most people's lists. Other locations to
consider: New York's Finger Lakes region, and a more local tour near the
District - locales such as Shenandoah National Park; Harpers Ferry; West
Virginia (New River Gorge is spectacular); and the I-81/Route 11 corridor.

Becky Krystal

I'm 55 years old and have never taken a real vacation. I'd like to take a cruise
to the Bahamas, but I've never planned a trip like this. Would it be better to
go to a travel agent or book the flight and cruise myself?

You don't need a travel agent to plan a cruise, but it couldn't hurt. The price
will be about the same as if you did it yourself. It would also be a good idea
to do some research first. Cruise Critic is a good site for information on the
various cruise lines. Also, if you're going alone. a good agent can steer you to
lines that offer single cabins or cheaper supplements. And finally, cruises to
the Bahamas are often lively, noisy affairs, and there'll be few singles on
board. Think that through.

Carol Sottili

My son has been diagnosed with severe food allergies. How responsive are
airlines to this? Is it worth a phone call? What about meal service on a flight
to Europe?

You should definitely let your airline know in advance, preferably in writing.
Most airlines have special service desks that handle these types of requests,
and they're usually very responsive.

C.E.

I'm expecting my first child in August, and my husband and I are planning a
babymoon for July or August. Our idea was to fly to San Francisco for a couple
of days, then rent a car and drive down the Pacific Coast Highway to L.A.

I'm not sure about flying when you're nearly nine months pregnant. Some airlines
and lots of doctors say no to flying about 30 days before your due date. And
sitting in the car for that length of time doesn't sound all that fun. I'd stick
closer to home and head to a local mountain resort, such as the Homestead.

C.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


