                             284 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            December 3, 2013 Tuesday

Let Slip the Drones of Peace

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 380 words



HIGHLIGHT: The United Nations proudly announced the deployment of its first
peacekeeping drone on Tuesday, in the Congolese city of Goma.


The United Nations proudly announced on Tuesday the deployment of its first
peacekeeping drone, an unmanned aerial vehicle that will be used to monitor the
forested border between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda, looking for
fighters from the defeated M23 rebel group and other militias.

Hervé Ladsous, the United Nations under secretary general for peacekeeping, was
present as the craft took off for the first time , the Congolese city that was
recaptured from the rebels with the help of United Nations troops in recent
months.  As my colleagues Nicholas Kulish and Somini Sengupta reported, that
more robust use of force around Goma has earned the international organization
rare praise.

In his remarks, Mr. Ladsous was careful to stress that the drone would be used
only for surveillance and would not be armed.

H.Ladsous: Les Drones ne sont pas des engins armés, il s'agit d'engins
exclusivement  destinés à la surveillance, observation & information.

- MONUSCO (@MONUSCO)3 Dec 13

As the former New York Times correspondent Howard French explained in an Op-Ed
article on the mission last month, the United Nations mission's newfound
assertiveness came after years of less effective efforts to keep or enforce
peace.

The passive, old approach involved nearly 20,000 peacekeepers who never managed
to keep a lid on things, much less really keep any peace. When the M23 sacked
Goma, the biggest city in the east, last year, the Congolese Army ran away and
peacekeepers passively stood by.

Shock and embarrassment over this performance - in effect, a dismal return on
the international community's investment - prompted a turnaround. Earlier this
year, the United Nations brought in a tough-minded general from Brazil, Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, to lead the peacekeepers. Their mandate changed to
encourage engagement: That is, actually going after the bad guys. Meanwhile,
motivated and disciplined combat units from South Africa and Tanzania were
pushed to the fore.


     ·    Drones Are Flying, Despite U.S. Shutdown
     ·    Full Text of U.N. Report on Chemical Attack in Syria
     ·    Malala Yousafzai, Girl Shot by Taliban, Makes Appeal at U.N.
     ·    Video of Samantha Power's 2002 Remarks on Imposing Peace on Israel
          Could Haunt Her, Israeli Paper Says
     ·    What Pakistan's Election Means to Its People


LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


