                             2857 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       August 3, 2014 Sunday 10:18 PM EST

The House's dizzying reversals

BYLINE: Dana Milbank

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 797 words


After conservatives on Thursday  brought down House Speaker John Boehner's bill
to address the border crisis, the new House Republican leadership team issued a
joint statement  declaring that President Obama should fix the problem himself.

"There are numerous steps the president can and should be taking right now,
without the need for congressional action," the leadership quartet proclaimed,
"to secure our borders and ensure these children are returned swiftly and safely
to their countries."

Who's in the what now?

Just the day before, House Republicans had voted to sue Obama for using his
executive authority. They called him lawless, a usurper, a monarch, a tyrant -
all for postponing deadlines in the implementation of Obamacare. Now they were
begging him to take executive action to compensate for their own inability to
act - even though, in this case, accelerating the deportation of thousands of
unaccompanied children coming from Central America would likely require Obama to
ignore a 2008 law.

This was not a momentary lapse but a wholesale upending of reason.

Rep. Hal Rogers (R-Ky.), the Appropriations Committee chairman who had been
leading the GOP side in the border legislation debate, told reporters much the
same thing after the legislation was pulled from the floor. "I think this will
put a lot more pressure on the president to act," he told   The Post's Ed
O'Keefe and other reporters. "He has the authority and power to solve the
problem forthwith."

Apparently, if Obama is using his executive authority to advance a policy House
Republicans support, it's a meritorious exercise of presidential authority; if
he uses that same authority to aid a policy they oppose, it's time to write up
articles of impeachment.

In another action this  last week, Republicans acknowledged, at least tacitly,
that Obama has the executive authority to postpone deportations. The House
majority drafted legislation that would forbid the executive branch from
anything that would "expand the number of aliens eligible for deferred action."

But in proposing such legislation (which was pulled from the floor Thursday but
then approved Friday night) Republicans implicitly acknowledged that Obama has
such power now. Therefore, until both chambers of Congress can pass such a law
by veto-proof margins, Obama retains the power. This is probably why House
Republicans, just two weeks earlier, scoffed at the suggestion that they pass
this sort of legislation when the idea came up before the Rules Committee.

If the GOP position sounds contradictory, that's because it's less about the
Constitution than cleavages within the party. There are real questions about
Obama's abuses of power - say, the spying on Americans by the National Security
Agency or the use of drones to kill U.S. citizens overseas - but the opposition
party has left those largely untouched. The planned lawsuit was a bone thrown to
conservatives to quiet their impeachment talk. The legislation restricting
Obama's executive authority on immigration was a similar effort to buy off
conservatives who had been encouraged to rebel by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.).

But the efforts to placate conservatives aren't working. The new House GOP
leadership team took over Thursday, but a mere two hours after Rep. Eric Cantor
gave his valedictory as majority leader on the House floor, his successor did a
face-plant.

All morning, GOP leaders had been predicting that they had sufficient Republican
votes to pass Boehner's border bill. But then conservatives, under pressure from
Cruz and far-right interest groups, began to go squishy, and the new leader,
Kevin McCarthy, announced that he was pulling the border bill from the floor and
that members could depart early for their five-week summer break.

What followed was as close as Congress gets to one of those fistfights in the
Taiwanese parliament. Mainstream Republicans besieged Boehner and McCarthy on
the House floor, noisily demanding that they do something about the border
crisis before going on holiday. Half an hour later, McCarthy announced that
"additional votes are possible today."

Boos and jeers rained down on the new leader. The speaker pro tempore, Virginia
Foxx (R-N.C.), banged the gavel violently for order. Some lawmakers had to be
called back from National Airport.

The hapless new majority leader, and his equally hapless new majority whip,
Steve Scalise, called Republicans to an emergency meeting, where after fierce
argument it was decided . . . that they would meet again on Friday.

Boehner, earlier in the day, tried to be philosophical. "I take my job one day
at a time," he said.

The problem with day-by-day leadership, though, is inconsistency: What you do on
Thursday has a way of contradicting what you said on Wednesday.

Twitter: @Milbank

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


