                             2873 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 14, 2014 Thursday 4:30 AM EST

'I want to come back, but I'm afraid'

BYLINE: Carol Morello

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1125 words


Quiet has made an uneasy return to Kibbutz Nahal Oz, so close to Gaza City that
residents can see its battered skyline on the edge of their wheat fields now
crisscrossed by tank tracks.

Since the latest cease-fire between Israel and the Palestinians, which was
extended for five days Wednesday night, the birds have come back, their songs
mingling with the mechanical whirr of a surveillance drone overhead. Code Red
alerts no longer blare several times a day from loudspeakers warning of incoming
rocket fire from Gaza. And for a few brief hours, children's laughter rang out
as some families returned this week for their first visit since evacuating a
month ago when war came to their doorstep.

"We came back for the day, just long enough to smell home," said Gali Idan, a
mother of four.

For the past month, "front-line communities" such as Nahal Oz and a neighboring
kibbutz, Kfar Aza, resembled ghost towns. Most residents fled what had become a
combat zone, with Israeli artillery whooshing above them and Gaza rockets flying
the other way, sometimes landing on rooftops or in gardens and schoolhouses.

The Israeli military and government have urged them to return home, saying they
have destroyed the "terror tunnels" that Gaza militants built to sneak in to
Israel - at least, those they know about. But after raised hopes were dashed
when previous cease-fires gave way to renewed rocket fire, many residents do not
trust the assurances that it is safe to do so and are staying away for now.
Their hesitation seemed vindicated Wednesday night when a rocket was fired from
Gaza into the Ashkelon region two hours before the truce ended, but that was
quickly followed by the five-day extension.

Only the day before, Maayan Katzav came home to clean her house of a thick coat
of dust churned up by tanks. She and her three children hung around for a
communal outdoor dinner with a few dozen childless residents who stayed through
the fighting. Then they left again for her mother-in-law's house, far from Gaza.

"I want to come back, but I'm afraid," said Katzav, 40, a schoolteacher who has
lived all her life in Nahal Oz. "If I had the option, I'd take a year off to see
how things go."

Noam Stahl, 47, a plastics consultant who was born and raised in Kfar Aza, said
he worries that some may never return to the kibbutz, which got 15 direct hits
from Gaza rockets.

"People are so tired of living as refugees in their own country," said Stahl,
who left but returned after two weeks.

Fear and flight are nothing new for Kfar Aza and Nahal Oz, both founded in the
1950s as outposts against invasions from then-Egyptian-occupied Gaza. Occasional
incursions in the region by militants sometimes resulted in the loss of Israeli
lives.

But starting in 2001, rockets and missiles from Gaza landed more routinely,
sometimes several times a month, sometimes nothing for a month or two. In a
display of the dark humor that comes from living here, residents call those
attacks "tif tuf," Hebrew for a drizzling rainfall.

The history of the decades of attacks are written in the fortified architecture
and landscaping.

Kfar Aza has hundreds of bomb shelters, from large underground communal ones to
small concrete hives placed beside walkways, bus stops and soccer fields. But
Israel's Iron Dome missile and rocket interceptor is of little use here. The
proximity to Gaza two miles away means residents have 10 or 15 seconds of
warning, often less. So a few years ago the Israeli government built "safe
rooms" attached to every home, with fortified cement and steel plates over
windows. Blast walls and extra roofs strong enough to withstand a missile attack
were added to old schoolhouses; new ones are basically large bomb shelters.

To deter laser-guided missiles, straight roads were redesigned with many curves
and trees, creating a "defensive forest." So many Qassam rockets have fallen on
Kfar Aza over the years that the shells are used as planters and garden
decorations.

But nothing compared to the recent downpour of rockets and mortar shells.

Of Kfar Aza's 750 residents, 90 percent left in the early days of the month-long
conflict. Only 60 of Nahal Oz's 350 residents stayed, all middle-aged or older.
Anyone with children left to stay with friends, relatives or as a group in
distant northern schools.

Someone had to milk the dairy cows at Nahal Oz and feed the chickens at Kfar
Aza. More important, someone had to be there to put out the fires ignited when
rockets landed, turn off the utilities and check for the injured. They slept in
their safe rooms, and many evenings got together in a basement pub where popular
Israeli singers, comedians and storytellers came to entertain them.

Their choice carried dangers. A woman in Nahal Oz was seriously injured when a
rocket slammed through her roof. Many were rattled when the entrance to an
underground tunnel was found in the fields and a Gaza militant popped out and
killed five Israeli soldiers.

Some residents say they realize Gaza experienced more damage and trauma than
they have.

"I hear my children speak of the experience of the Palestinian children, and I
agree with them," said Stahl. "We know they suffered hard. But I worry about my
own kids before I worry about neighbors' kids."

Residents patiently answer questions about why they don't move somewhere safer,
as if it were so obvious it needs no explanation. Where in Israel is safe?

"In Tel Aviv, five years ago, people were afraid if they got on a bus it would
explode," Stahl said. "Jerusalem was the same. At Kiryat Shmona in the north,
for 15 years they had Katyusha rockets come at them from Lebanon. If I decide
it's no longer safe to live here, if I take my family and move elsewhere in
Israel, who can guarantee we won't be the target of a terrorist attack in our
new home?"

Still, some acknowledge that the equation is different when children are
involved. Mandy Damari, who has lived at Kfar Aza for 25 years after emigrating
from Britain, said she was thrilled when her son married last year and settled
with his new wife on the kibbutz where he was raised.

"Now I'm not sure," said Damari, 53, thinking of future grandchildren. "I think
I'd prefer they live a little bit further away."

Few are optimistic that peace talks in Cairo will produce a breakthrough.

Ofah Hartuv prayed for peace during the 1973 Yom Kippur War so her son, then 7,
wouldn't have to go to war. Now he is 42, and she said she prays the same for
her 16-year-old grandson.

"This is our home," said her husband, Dov, the kibbutz archivist. "It happens to
be a place that's very dangerous. What keeps us going is we believe in the
future, maybe 20 or 30 years, there will be a lasting peace. If we didn't
believe that, we wouldn't remain in Israel."

carol.morello@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


