                             2800 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 4:07 AM EST

CIA toyed with a bin Laden action figure

BYLINE: Adam Goldman

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1040 words


For more than a decade, the CIA has deployed drones, satellites, spies,
informants and tracking devices to thwart al-Qaeda in Pakistan.

The spy agency also considered a plan to wage war with toys.

Beginning in about 2005, the CIA began secretly developing a custom-made Osama
bin Laden action figure, according to people familiar with the project. The face
of the figure was painted with a heat-dissolving material, designed to peel off
and reveal a red-faced bin Laden who looked like a demon, with piercing green
eyes and black facial markings.

The goal of the short-lived project was simple: spook children and their
parents, causing them to turn away from the actual bin Laden.

The code-name for the bin Laden figures was "Devil Eyes," and to create them the
CIA turned to one of the best minds in the toy business, said those familiar
with the project, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they weren't
authorized to discuss the project publicly.

The toymaker was Donald Levine, the former Hasbro executive who was instrumental
in the creation of the wildly popular G.I. Joe toys that have generated more
than $5 billion in sales since hitting the shelves in 1964.

The CIA's interest in Levine was twofold: He had an eye for toys and a vast
network of contacts in China, where the bin Laden action figures were ultimately
manufactured. Levine had done business there for nearly 60 years and had the
means to have the action figures discreetly developed and manufactured.

Levine died last month at age 86, after a lengthy battle with cancer. In
response to questions about his work on the bin Laden toys, his family said in a
statement: "Don Levine was a dedicated Patriot, and proud Korean War veteran.
When called on, he was honored to assist our country."

There's a dispute over how many of the figurines, if any, were ultimately
delivered. A person with direct knowledge of the project in China said hundreds
of the toys - one of which was seen by a reporter for The Washington Post - were
made as part of a preproduction run and sent on a freighter to the Pakistani
city of Karachi in 2006.

The CIA, while not disputing that it had commissioned the bin Laden figures,
said the project was discontinued shortly after the prototypes were developed.

"To our knowledge, there were only three individual action figures ever created,
and these were merely to show what a final product might look like," CIA
spokesman Ryan Trapani said. "After being presented with these examples, the CIA
declined to pursue this idea and did not produce or distribute any of these
action figures. Furthermore, CIA has no knowledge of these action figures being
produced or distributed by others."

Regardless of how far the "Devil Eyes" project proceeded, it appears to have
borne all the hallmarks of what are known in intelligence parlance as "influence
operations." As part of its covert action programs, the agency has for decades
tried to win the hearts and minds of local populations or turn them against a
particular ideology.

During the Cold War, for instance, the CIA secretly published both Western and
Russian literature for distribution behind the Iron Curtain, created Radio Free
Europe and Radio Liberty, subsidized intellectual magazines, underwrote concert
tours and art exhibitions, and bankrolled academic seminars.

The agency also used young provocateurs to disrupt communist youth festivals and
dropped propaganda leaflets from balloons.

All of it - from the high brow to the high jinks - was designed to either
undermine the Soviet Union and its satellites or bolster support for the United
States in key countries around the world.

Those efforts continued after the end of the Cold War. Before the U.S. invasion
of Haiti in 1994, for instance, the CIA distributed soccer balls to demonstrate
the generosity of the United States.

"It made them feel good about Americans," a former CIA official said. "We were
there trying to prepare the way for the military."

Little is known about the kind of influence operations the CIA has run since the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks as part of the broader fight against al-Qaeda and
Islamist extremism.

In Afghanistan, the CIA had locals broadcast propaganda from a forward operating
base known as Camp Chapman in Khost province, the same base where seven CIA
officers were later killed in a 2009 suicide bombing.

"Some of these [operations] have been considered successful and some have not
been successful," said Arturo Munoz, a former CIA officer who teaches a course
at Georgetown University on covert action. Munoz stressed that he was referring
only to decades-old declassified operations.

The bin Laden venture began in 2005 as a plan to give U.S. allies in the
Afghanistan region material that could be handed out to children to build
goodwill. The handouts included toys, school supplies such as pencils, and
notebooks. Levine was initially asked to help with the toys for boys.

"It appealed to [Levine] because it had nothing to do with actually hurting
someone," said a person familiar with his decision to get involved. "It was the
softer side of the CIA."

The agency approved the production of the gift items, which were put in
backpacks for distribution - blue for boys and pink for girls.

CIA officials later approached Levine about the possibility of producing the bin
Laden figures and having them sent to Pakistan or Afghanistan. Levine was
initially ambivalent about the project but later threw himself into the work,
according to the people familiar with the project.

Levine developed prototypes before settling on a standard 12-inch figure with
the facial features of bin Laden. The head was superimposed on a figurine that
was already in production in the Chinese city of Dongguan.

A Chinese artist took publicly available photographs of bin Laden and created an
image that was strikingly close in appearance to the al-Qaeda leader. The final
prototype was dressed in traditional garb and packaged in a cheap box covered
with plastic and presented to the CIA for approval. Levine was said to have been
pleased with the final product.

Although the CIA said it decided not to move forward with the operation, at
least one of the figures remains at the agency's headquarters.

adam.goldman@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


