                             286 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday

Americans Predict a Future Like Science Fiction

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 698 words



HIGHLIGHT: Who wouldn&#8217;t want to travel through time? According to a recent
survey, Americans are hopeful that they will be able to do that, and enjoy many
other technological advances.


Given the fast-paced changes that happen in technology, predicting the future
has become more fun than guessing who will win the Super Bowl or "Dancing With
the Stars."

Earlier this year Frogdesign, an industrial design company that has worked with
Apple and Sony, offered a vision for the future with its annual Tech Trends 2014
report. Frog said that people will adopt anonymity apps this year, that China
will become a contender in start-ups, and that we'll all turn off our gadgets a
little more, rather than be constantly connected. The first two predictions seem
to be happening; the latter - well, let's just say it's too early to tell.

The World Economic Forum had its own report, "Top 10 Emerging Technologies
2014," which looked at everything from tiny thumbnail-size hard drives and
nano-size technologies to the explosion of big data.

Accenture, Deloitte and Gartner have all published similar future prediction
reports for the year ahead.

The latest group to weigh in is the Pew Research Center, which last week offered
the American public's predictions for even further in the future, looking as far
out as 50 years from now, and envisioning teleportation, robot servants,
delivery drones and wearable gadgetry.

The center, in partnership with Smithsonian Magazine, asked 1,001 adults on
landlines and cellphones what they imagined the next five decades would look
like. The nationwide survey was conducted between Feb. 13 and 18.

According to the results, people are pretty certain we are about to start living
inside a futuristic Hollywood movie. But they are not sure whether this is a
good or bad thing.

"The American public anticipates that the coming half-century will be a period
of profound scientific change, as inventions that were once confined to the
realm of science fiction come into common usage," Pew wrote in a release
outlining the report.

The report found that people believe that in the nearish future, robot helpers
will look after the aged, commercial drones will deliver packages to our
doorsteps, we will have the ability to grow new human organs in a lab and
computers will be able to create art that is indistinguishable from that
produced by humans.

Those surveyed seemed pretty evenly split about whether wearable or implanted
computers would affect society for better or worse.

"Americans may have good reason to be wary," the report said, noting that more
than 50 percent of those surveyed said "they have been involved in a
technology-induced distracted walking encounter."

Those surveyed also seemed split over whether it was good to be able to nap or
watch a movie in a car while it drives itself. And those attitudes varied by the
level of education or where someone lived.

For example, 59 percent of college graduates were more than willing to go for a
ride in a driverless car. Yet 62 percent of people who had only a high school
diploma, or less, were against the idea.

Those who lived in cities also seemed more open to a driverless vehicle,
compared with people who lived in rural areas, who were not as interested.

The report found three common themes in answers to a question asking those
surveyed to describe in their own words a futuristic invention they would like
to own or use.

First, people want to have improved travel experiences, including the ability to
use a flying car, flying bike or some sort of personalized spacecraft. Second,
people wanted the ability to live longer and wanted to have technologies that
could cure major diseases. And finally, of course - because who wouldn't want
this? - people want the ability to travel through time.

"When asked to envision a future of their own, many jump immediately to big,
paradigm-shifting notions straight from the world of science fiction," the
report said.

Who knows? When Pew Research does a survey 50 years from now, people could be
reading it in a driverless flying car that has traveled through time to get
there.


     ·    A Swarm of Ant-Sized Robots, at Your Service
     ·    How to Take the Ultimate Drone Selfie
     ·    With Purchase of Drone Maker, Google Sees a Fleet of Satellites
     ·    Google Glass Available to Anyone in U.S. - for One Day Only
     ·    Daily Report: Facebook Aims to Use Drones to Deliver Internet Access


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


