                             2830 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 17, 2014 Thursday 2:32 AM EST

'The Program Assistant' leavens the pain of job-seeking with humor

BYLINE: Stephanie Merry

SECTION: Style; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 519 words


Life after college can feel like a desperate and depressing limbo where recent
grads mourn the loss of carefree times, when they aren't scouring Craigslist for
employment. Suddenly there are bills to pay, and the only way to do that is by
taking a job - any job. Writer-director John Krizel incisively presents that
reality in "The Program Assistant" and injects it with a lot of humor.

Charlie (Abigail Casey) and Laura (Katie Ryan) are George Washington University
alums and best friends who just moved into their first "big-kid apartment," and
both women are searching for work. Charlie is coming up on a deadline, though,
because her parents are cutting her off in three weeks. So when she gets an
e-mail about interviewing for a program assistant position at the State
Department, she's thrilled. The only hitch is that Laura got the same e-mail.
And even though Charlie is slightly more qualified, Laura gets the job.

What unfolds is two paths in parallel as Laura does the 9-to-5 thing and comes
to terms with being an underemployed office drone, and Charlie takes a job
waitressing. Both women are miserable at work, and they're also sad at home.
Although they vowed the program assistant job wouldn't come between them, it
does.

The story is a bit overlong, but it's smartly told. That being said, the best
moments of "The Program Assistant" take place outside the Laura-Charlie
relationship. The secondary characters are both hilarious and insightful, and
the actors portraying them give some of the strongest performances. Paul Lysek
appears to be channeling Chris Pratt as the lovable bro Will, Laura's intern,
and Amanda Spellman gets big laughs as a volatile college friend who spends most
of her time seething over other people's joyous tweets, Instagram photos and
Facebook status updates. (Social media updates sporadically appear on a
projector onstage.) Steve Isaac stands out as Mike, a gruff bartender and Occupy
activist who has a lot to say about Charlie's hopes and dreams.

The play has some kinks, not the least of which is the tendency for performers
to swallow their lines. The dialogue is great, but a couple of the actors have
trouble projecting even in the small black-box space. More distracting still are
the countless scene changes, all of which require set alterations. A 30-second
scene followed by 30 seconds in the dark for a set change feels at first
disruptive and, after a while, irksome.

But "The Program Assistant" hits on some truths about the Catch-22 of getting a
job in certain fields. Charlie needs work to pay her bills, but the only way she
can get a job that interests her is by taking an unpaid internship. And even
then, it's all about who you know. As Mike tells her in his sardonic way, the
system is broken. He may be a bit of a loose cannon, but he's not wrong.

stephanie.merry@washpost.com

The Program Assistant

10:45 p.m. Saturday, 3:30 p.m. Sunday, 8 p.m. July 25 and 2:15 p.m. July 27 at
Redrum at Fort Fringe, 612 L St. NW. 866-811-4111. www.capitalfringe.org. $17
plus the one-time purchase of a $7 button. About 80 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


