                             2844 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 26, 2014 Saturday 3:55 AM EST

Ukraine and Russia trade charges of border shelling

BYLINE: Carol Morello

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1192 words


KIEV, Ukraine - Russia and Ukraine on Friday traded accusations of cross-border
shelling amid rising tensions that threaten to escalate the conflict even
further just as Ukrainian forces are making significant advances and forcing
separatists to retreat.

The situation at the border is growing increasingly volatile , with what U.S.
officials say are about 15,000 troops massed on the Russian side and indications
that the heavily militarized border is about to get more so.

The Pentagon warned of an "imminent" delivery from Russia of sophisticated and
powerful rocket launchers to pro-Russian separatists fighting government forces
in eastern Ukraine. If true, it means Russia will be even more deeply involved
in the conflict following Ukrainian military gains since the downing of a
Malaysia Airlines passenger plane a week ago - despite the squeeze of growing
international sanctions against Russian officials and companies.

"In the eight days since the plane was shot down, rather than take the
opportunity to follow the political and diplomatic track to a resolution, what
some in the Kremlin are doing is pouring gasoline on a fire," Geoffrey Pyatt,
the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, told reporters in Kiev on Friday.

The Russian Foreign Ministry accused the United States of conducting a "smear
campaign" against Russia with "unsubstantiated public insinuations." It said the
United States had supported "a coup d'etat in Kiev, and then in fact urged the
regime toward the brutal massacre of the Russian-speaking population."
Washington, it added, shares full responsibility for the bloodshed in eastern
Ukraine.

In the flurry of accusations, Russian authorities said Ukraine had purposely
tried to kill investigators checking reports of cross-border shooting by firing
up to 40 mortar rounds into the Russian province of Rostov.

"It was only the poor preparation of the Ukrainian military and the timely
evacuation of law enforcement officers under the cover of armored transport
vehicles that did not allow the shooters to realize their intention," said
Russia's Investigative Committee in a statement that suggested Moscow could be
trying to establish a pretext for greater involvement with the separatists - or
an invasion.

In Kiev, Defense and Security Council spokesman Andriy Lysenko said Russian
forces massed along the border had increasingly been firing at Ukrainian troops.
He displayed a July 23 photograph showing the rubble of stone houses destroyed
by what he said were shells lobbed from Russian territory.

Lysenko said that in the past two days alone, Ukraine shot down three Russian
drones. One had been conducting surveillance on a Ukrainian base near the town
of Amvrosiivka, which was subjected to rocket attacks, he said.

The Ukrainian Security Service released a video Friday, also dated July 23, that
purported to show a volley of shells from the Russian side of the border aimed
at Ukrainian troops stationed near Grigorivka.

What appears to be Russia's expanding support of the rebels, including units led
by Russian citizens, makes it increasingly clear that Ukraine already is engaged
in a war not just with its own insurgents but with its mammoth neighbor.

In the week since Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down by a missile fired
from separatist territory, the Ukrainian military has made significant strides,
retaking 10 towns held by separatists. They have squeezed the rebels in an
ever-tightening vise and are close to gaining control of some major roads
between Donetsk and Luhansk, the two epicenters of insurgency.

Lysenko said the Ukrainian military had, after several days of fierce fighting,
on Thursday night retaken the city of Lysychansk, northwest of the separatist
stronghold Luhansk.

By some accounts, the Ukrainian military, which was undermanned and undertrained
when rebels rose up this spring but has since improved with experience in the
field, could overwhelm the rebels within two or three weeks if Russia keeps its
distance and does not reinforce the separatists with more weapons and equipment.

"I assure you our operations will continue, and very soon we will liberate
Luhansk and Donetsk," Zoryan Shkiryak, an adviser to the Internal Affairs
Ministry, said in announcing a probe into two Russian politicians suspected of
encouraging and financing separatist activities.

Moscow has repeatedly denied playing any role in supporting the separatists
battling government troops. Government forces have suffered 325 deaths and 1,232
wounded; the number of rebel casualties is unknown. The fighting has displaced
tens of thousands of people and resulted in extensive damage to water and
electrical supplies in the east.

Daniel Baer, the American ambassador to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, expressed disappointment Friday that Russia has agreed to
international observers at only two small checkpoints at the Ukrainian border.
He said that covers just one kilometer of a border that spans 2,300 kilometers -
or more than 1,400 miles. That means, he said, that there will be no one to
monitor the flow of Russian arms, people and money to the rebels in eastern
Ukraine.

The continued fighting is posing a growing dilemma for the investigation of the
Malaysia Airlines crash. The site remains unsecured, and investigators who
fanned out Friday found more wreckage, human remains and even a boarding pass in
wooded areas and towns that had been unexplored before.

Michael Bociurkiw, a spokesman for the OSCE, said passports and credit cards
mysteriously appeared near the wreckage where they had not been the previous
day.

In an interview with CNN, he said patience appears to be wearing thin among
insurgents, who told investigators they have another week to complete their
work. They advised him to pass the word up the chain of command that the vast
amounts of wreckage must be taken away, he said.

Many of the human remains still must be found. Deputy Prime Minister Volodymyr
Groysman said Friday that four refrigerated railroad cars filled with body bags
that were taken by train to the eastern city of Kharkiv on Tuesday have been
emptied. The remains were placed in 227 caskets he said. That leaves 71
passengers and crew members unaccounted for, and their remains are presumably
strewn around a large area where wreckage and bodies plummeted to earth.

The escalation on the battlefield also is occurring during an awkward period for
the Ukrainian government. Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk announced his
resignation Thursday, and Groysman is fulfilling his duties until parliament
meets to decide whether to accept Yatsenyuk's departure.

Parliament adjourned Thursday for a two-week break without voting on Yatsenyuk's
resignation. But parliamentary leaders said they will recall the lawmakers for
an extraordinary session July 31.

In a sign of growing European outrage over Russia's support for the rebels, the
European Union on Friday banned visas and froze the assets of 15 more people and
18 more companies and organizations.

carol.morello@washpost.com

Karoun Demirjian in Moscow, Alex Ryabchyn in Kiev and Karen DeYoung in
Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


