                             2807 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 11:39 PM EST

Crimes against democracy

BYLINE: Michael Gerson

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 816 words


Noted management expert and Internal Revenue Service Commissioner John Koskinen
was apparently called out of retirement - like the Ted Williams of evasive,
unapologetic bureaucrats - to destroy what is left of his agency's credibility.

At immediate issue is two years of subpoenaed e-mails from former IRS official
Lois Lerner to outside agencies, lost in a convenient computer crash. The
possible involvement of other agencies is one focus of a congressional
investigation into the heightened IRS scrutiny of conservative nonprofit groups
before the 2012 election.

In recent congressional testimony, Koskinen admitted that the e-mails were
irretrievably gone; that the "backup tapes" had been erased; and that Lerner's
hard drive was apparently destroyed in an aggressive act of recycling. With that
settled, Koskinen expressed his "hope that the investigations  can be concluded
in the very near future."

It is a mix of arrogance and delusion that seems designed to incense
Republicans. Koskinen had delayed informing Congress of the lost e-mails for
months, even while assuring members they would be provided. "It was my decision
that we complete the investigation," he said, "so we could fully advise you as
to what the situation was." Translation from management-speak: We wanted to get
our story straight before we advised you of anything. Koskinen complained about
the breadth of subpoenas and the "piecemealing out" of information. Translation:
We will provide you what we want when we want. "Every e-mail," Koskinen assured
the House Ways and Means Committee, "has been preserved that we have." Except
the ones they don't have - and somehow snuffed out, tied to an anvil and thrown
into the ocean.

Democrats were left to complain about a Republican "witch hunt" - while Koskinen
set up a caldron, added some eye of newt and toe of frog and hailed the Thane of
Cawdor.

To review: After President Obama blamed "two Dilberts in Cincinnati," an
inspector general's report found that high-level IRS officials in Washington
were involved in directing additional scrutiny toward tea party groups seeking
tax exemptions. Lerner admitted as much, before taking the Fifth Amendment to
avoid testifying before the House oversight committee. The House of
Representatives held her in contempt. And now the evidence of possible
communications between Lerner and other agencies (including the White House) has
gone missing under suspicious circumstances. It could be a regrettable series of
rogue operations, IRS management failures and technical glitches. Or they could
be taking us for fools.

If there was any political motivation for this abuse of power, it is a form of
corruption - the kind of thing Americans like to criticize in countries they
regard as less developed. And the circumstantial evidence is strong. This wave
of heightened IRS scrutiny came after Democratic senators, warning of possible
abuses spawned by the Supreme Court's              Citizens United decision,
demanded additional IRS scrutiny of nonprofit political groups. Because evidence
of political influence is both plausible and circumstantial, a special counsel
is needed to sort out the truth.

Why does this matter deserve heightened scrutiny from the rest of us? Because
crimes against democracy are particularly insidious. Representative government
involves a type of trade. As citizens, we cede power to public officials for
important purposes that require centralized power: defending the country,
imposing order, collecting taxes to promote the common good. In exchange, we
expect public institutions to be evenhanded and disinterested. When the stewards
of power - biased judges or corrupt policemen or politically motivated IRS
officials - act unfairly, it undermines trust in the whole system.

Trust in the federal government has declined dramatically since the 1960s. Some
Americans now are predisposed to believe that their government - the product of
their own choices, channeled by durable, admirable institutions - can't be
trusted with the collection of metadata  or with the use of drones (which might
be employed by the president, according to Sen. Rand Paul, to kill citizens at
cafes).

I've often criticized such attitudes as conspiratorial and destructive. A
democracy needs respected, capable public institutions. No traditional
conservative, in this sense, can be anti-government. We need government to do
its job, to play its role and to justify the power and resources we properly
cede to it. "Respect for its authority," said George Washington, "compliance
with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by the
fundamental maxims of true liberty."

But the IRS has managed to feed anti-government sentiments by inhabiting
anti-government stereotypes. It has undermined respect for authority. And it
doesn't seem even to understand the damage it has done.

michaelgerson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


