                             2849 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      July 30, 2014 Wednesday 3:58 AM EST

Israel bombs Hamas leader's home; Gaza power plant disabled

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan;William Booth;Ruth Eglash

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1047 words


GAZA CITY - Israel targeted the home of the top Hamas leader in the Gaza Strip
on Tuesday in some of the heaviest bombardment of the ongoing conflict after
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu warned his country to be prepared for a
prolonged campaign.

Palestinian officials said Israel also hit a fuel tank at Gaza's only
electricity plant early Tuesday, forcing it to shut down. The attack left the
Palestinian territory's 1.8 million residents with no electricity or running
water and opened the possibility of an even graver humanitarian crisis.

"The missile which targeted the power plant actually targeted 1.8 million
Palestinians," said Jamal Dardasawi, a spokesman for Gaza's electricity
distribution department. "It is the most awful missile attack of the whole war.
They have caused a catastrophic humanitarian situation."

Capt. Eytan Buchman, an Israeli army spokesman, said the military could not yet
confirm whether its forces had struck the power plant.

Gaza Health Ministry officials said the Israeli attacks from early Tuesday to
early Wednesday killed 128 Palestinians, pushing the death toll on the
Palestinian side to 1,229. The United Nations said about 70 percent of those
killed were civilians.

Expanding its list of targets, Israel destroyed the family home of Ismail
Haniyeh, the top leader of the Islamist militant group that controls Gaza. Other
airstrikes hit Hamas's al-Aqsa television broadcast center, a finance building
and the homes of local mayors. Haniyeh is in hiding and his whereabouts are
unknown, but he has delivered prerecorded televised addresses.

Along the coast of the tiny seaside enclave, Israel also hit a fishing harbor,
causing hotels where scores of international journalists are staying to shake.
Airstrikes also hit the Rafah area, along Gaza's border with Egypt, according to
local news reports.

In the sprawling Jebaliya refugee camp in northern Gaza, at least 24 people - 10
of them from the same family - were killed and dozens wounded in a barrage of
tank fire early Wednesday, the Associated Press reported, citing Hamas health
officials.

Israel said Tuesday afternoon that its forces had come under attack from
militants in Gaza emerging from a concealed tunnel. A gun battle followed,
although no details were immediately available. The Israeli military reported a
similar infiltration Monday evening, saying five soldiers were killed in a
battle with militants from Gaza who entered southern Israel via a tunnel. At
least one militant died.

The deaths of the five soldiers brought the number of Israeli troops killed in
the three-week-old conflict to 53, the largest toll since Israel's 2006 war with
Lebanon. Mortar and rocket attacks from Gaza have also killed two Israeli
civilians and a Thai worker.

Rocket barrages from Gaza sent people in Tel Aviv, Israel's commercial capital,
scurrying to shelters early Tuesday.

In the center of Gaza City, an airstrike obliterated al-Amin Mohammed Mosque
opposite the Gaza home of Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. In
2007, when it seized control of Gaza, Hamas took over the home and used it to
house senior leaders. The militants handed it back to Abbas earlier this year
after Hamas and the Palestinian Authority reached an agreement on forming a
unity government.

Neighbors said that the mosque was not Hamas-run and that anyone could pray
there.

"This is a mosque for the public, and I am one of the public," said Muhammed
Abdu, a 45-year-old engineer, as he looked at a cavernous hole filed with debris
where the mosque had stood. "This is all part of a strategy to burn Gaza down."

He said the attack underscored the need for a cease-fire. But like many Gazans
interviewed over the past two days, Abdu said the core Palestinian demand of
lifting an economic blockade by Israel and Egypt should be met.

"To bring milk in for your child, is that a crime?" Abdu asked. "To have an open
crossing so that you can leave for medical care, is that a crime? To travel
outside for your business, is that a crime?"

Near the Nusairat refugee camp, in the middle of the Gaza Strip, the shattered
fuel tank of the territory's primary power plant continued to emit flames and
thick plumes of smoke hours after being hit.

The plant is Gaza's primary source of electricity, powering sewage treatment
systems, water pumps and hospitals, said Dardasawi, the Palestinian official. It
is especially important, he added, because six of eight electricity supply lines
that run from Israel were damaged. Egypt also supplies some electricity, he
added, but hardly enough to power the border town of Rafah.

"This is like a time bomb," said Dardasawi, referring to the potential
humanitarian crisis.

Outside Haniyeh's wrecked house in the Beach Camp neighborhood of Gaza City,
neighbors gathered Tuesday to express anger. Not far away, 10 people, including
seven children, were killed in an attack Monday that Hamas and Israel blamed on
each other.

Neighbors said Haniyeh and his family had not lived in the house since the
conflict erupted. The dwelling, they said, was hit around 2 a.m., and no one was
killed or injured. Israel's military, they said, phoned a neighbor around 1:45
a.m. with instructions to tell other residents on the street to evacuate.

But most fled when they heard two small missiles from an Israeli drone strike
the house, presumably as a warning, residents said. Minutes later, a powerful
airstrike, possibly by an Israeli F-16, brought down the house in a pinpoint
attack that did little serious damage to the surrounding homes in this densely
packed enclave.

Some neighbors said Tuesday that the attack made them support Hamas even more
and that they would never accept a cease-fire until Palestinian demands were
met.

"Israel said it wouldn't target him because he is a politician," said Wasifiyah
Hassonehm, 53, who lives two houses down. "Now, they are targeting everyone -
the politicians, the civilians, everyone."

In an e-mailed statement to journalists, Haniyeh said the attack would not deter
Hamas. "Destroying our homes will not change our attitude, but it will
strengthen it," he said.

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

Booth and Eglash reported from Jerusalem. Daniela Deane in Rome contributed to
this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


