                             2899 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                    September 3, 2014 Wednesday 11:28 PM EST

Don't cede Ukraine

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 573 words


AS RUSSIAN soldiers and tanks advance across southeastern Ukraine, the Obama
administration and the NATO alliance are making a show of defending several
nations that lie far away and that are not presently under attack. President
Obama is due Wednesday in the Baltic republic of Estonia, and a NATO summit on
Thursday and Friday is expected to approve several measures, including a new
rapid-reaction force, to bolster the defenses of Estonia and other Eastern
European nations that have joined NATO in the past 15 years.

The defensive measures are justified and, if anything, inadequate: NATO still
shrinks from scrapping a 17-year-old agreement with Russia not to establish
permanent bases in Central and Eastern Europe even though Moscow is flagrantly
violating its own European commitments. But the new force will do nothing to
stop what Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko rightly calls the "direct,
unconcealed aggression" by Russia against Ukraine or the mounting ambitions of
Russian President Vladimir Putin, who is calling the area under attack by the
19th-century  tsarist name "Novorossiya" and suggesting that its "statehood"
should be under negotiation.

Intentionally or not, the White House and NATO are sending Mr. Putin the message
that Ukraine can be sacrificed. "Ukraine is not a member of NATO," Mr. Obama
gratuitously stated last week while downplaying the Russian invasion as nothing
new. A White House official told reporters that the president's message to
Moscow is, "Don't even think about messing around in Estonia or in any of the
Baltic areas in the same way that you've been messing around in Ukraine."

But what about the "messing around" in Ukraine? Mr. Poroshenko has been invited
to the NATO summit, and there is discussion of providing some funding for
Ukraine's defense or help with intelligence and logistics. That won't be nearly
enough to stop the Russian forces from overrunning more territory. Ukraine will
soon be confronted with the terrible choice of fighting alone against the
Russian invasion or capitulating to Mr. Putin's demands.

Mr. Obama has publicly ruled out - again, with gratuitous clarity - using force
to defend Ukraine, and some European members of NATO balk at supplying lethal
aid. But Russia's invasion could still be checked, or at least slowed, by
concerted action this week. Individual NATO members, including the United
States, should immediately begin supplying the Ukrainian army with lethal
weapons, as congressional leaders from both parties have been urging. Ukraine
needs anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons, drones, spare parts and fuel, among
other things, and these are readily available in NATO members' arsenals.

As importantly, sanctions against the Russian economy can be significantly
escalated. The good news is that U.S. and European officials have worked out a
relatively strong package of measures, and the European Union has committed
itself to act by the end of the week. But it's not clear that the stringent
steps that might give Mr. Putin pause will ultimately win the necessary support
of all 28 E.U. members. If they do not, the Obama administration should prepared
to quickly adopt those that can be effective without European backup.

Russia's aggression in Ukraine poses a critical test to the Western alliance,
and the war there is at a tipping point. The response cannot be to cede Ukraine
while trying to dissuade Mr. Putin from further conquests.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


