                             2882 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 17, 2014 Sunday 11:40 PM EST

Yes, Israel should meet a higher standard

BYLINE: Natan Sharansky

SECTION: A section; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 884 words


The pictures of destruction and mourning in Gaza that have filled media around
the world for the past several weeks have been very painful and sad to view. One
would be hard-pressed to find an Israeli who does not sympathize with the
suffering of Gaza's victims.

Yet there are also few Israelis who feel we are responsible for this suffering.
For us, the tragedy of Gaza is inseparable from the tragedy of the entire Middle
East. Over the past three years, in countries around our tiny state, more than a
quarter of a million people have been killed in the most horrific ways. This
wave of terror recognizes no official borders. The only border at which the
savagery stops is Israel's.

Hamas and Hezbollah are doing their best to change this. So what protects us?
The  United Nations or human rights groups? No. Only the military power of the
Israel Defense Forces. In response to our enemies' relentless campaigns, the
army is constantly developing new ways to defend us. One new weapon, Iron Dome,
has in the past few weeks protected civilians from almost 3,000 missiles.

But while Israelis have developed missile shields to protect children, Hamas has
been using children as shields to protect missiles. This perverse strategy is
the brainchild of a society that hails death. For Hamas, using living shields
serves the double function of increasing the number of martyrs and galvanizing a
free world that values life to pressure Israel to stop fighting.

The sad irony, then, is that while the world can do so little to stop the terror
in Syria or Sudan, it can do a lot to press Israel to stop defending itself. We
ask ourselves, is this hypocrisy? Is this a betrayal by the free world whose
values we are defending? And in response, Israel hears from the international
community, "Of course you are judged differently. You insist that you are part
of the free world, so we hold you to a higher standard than neighboring
countries, where wanton destruction of human life is the norm."

I strongly agree with this argument.

Israel, like any other free country, should be held to a higher moral standard
than its unfree neighbors. As the war against terror becomes increasingly
global, it is imperative that all free countries develop and uphold common norms
in our military conduct against armies of terror. Israel, with its decades-long
experience, can contribute much to this effort.

For example, 12 years ago, during the Second Intifada, I was a member of the
Israeli security cabinet when the army first decided to use aviation to target
terrorist leaders. In nearly every cabinet meeting, Israel's attorney general
insisted that our targets must be chosen not on the basis of crimes already
committed, but solely in light of proof that they were planning new terrorist
acts. In other words, no matter how much death and destruction someone had
caused, a targeted killing could be justified only by documented intentions to
carry out another attack. A serious case had to be prepared for each
assassination attempt, and therefore the number of such operations could be
counted on one hand. Now that targeted killings are practically the norm - when
the United States uses drones for this purpose all over the world - I would hope
others are as scrupulous as Israel has been.

Around the same time, we in the cabinet also discussed the importance of using
weapons that minimize civilian deaths, even if this meant decreasing an
operation's chance of success. Many operations were modified or canceled because
of this. Today, Israel goes even further. Before the IDF bombs an area in Gaza,
residents are alerted by radio, e-mail, phone and text message telling them to
leave. The Israeli army also uses small warning missiles to let civilians know
that a real missile will soon be fired. Do other free countries go to similar
lengths?

In 1999, when NATO launched its offensive against the criminal Milosevic regime
in Yugoslavia, hundreds of civilians were killed in the bombings. Many more
civilians were killed when U.S. warplanes hunted down Saddam Hussein's family
and supporters, and later al-Qaeda terrorists. They were killed in cafes,
cinemas and even a wedding procession.

Let me be clear. I believe that it was the free world's obligation to fight
against the Milosevic regime, which carried out ethnic cleansing in the heart of
Europe. I believe it is the obligation of the United States and free countries
to lead an uncompromising struggle against terrorist organizations such as
al-Qaeda and the Islamic State. But the obligation of the IDF to protect Israeli
citizens from thousands of missiles and from underground terrorist infiltrations
is just as sacred. In view of the developing global war between the free world
and terror, it is time that leading military experts from Israel, the United
States, Britain and other countries, along with international lawyers and
politicians, compare their experiences and agree about the standards according
to which the free world can defend itself.

But once these standards are accepted, they should be applied to every free
country. Otherwise, stop calling it a higher standard and call it by its real
name: a double standard.

The writer is chairman of the executive of the Jewish Agency for Israel and was
deputy prime minister of Israel from 2001 to 2003.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


