                             2813 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 27, 2014 Friday 11:46 PM EST

The U.S. military's racial slur

BYLINE: Simon Waxman

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 747 words


Resistance to the Washington Redskins team name has ebbed and flowed over the
years, but thanks in part to letters from 50 senators to the team's owner, Dan
Snyder, and last week's decision by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to
rescind the team's trademark registration, the campaign to get rid of it has
renewed urgency.

Snyder has shrugged off complaints about the name, even claiming that "redskins"
is a "badge of honor." Team president Bruce Allen, protesting too much, says the
name "has always been respectful of and shown reverence toward the proud legacy
and traditions of Native Americans."

But momentum appears to have turned against the preservationists. The trademark
decision sounds like an infringement of free-speech rights, but it asserts a
degree of pressure in any case. An advertisement opposing the name aired during
the National Basketball Association Finals to great fanfare. Current and former
National Football League players have              criticized              the
name. And not surprisingly, many Indian tribes and organizations don't share
Allen's interpretation. This is all to the good.

But even if the NFL and Redskins brass come to their senses and rename the team,
a greater symbolic injustice would continue to afflict Indians - an injustice
perpetuated not by a football club but by our federal government.

In the United States today, the names Apache, Comanche, Chinook, Lakota,
Cheyenne and Kiowa apply not only to Indian tribes but also to military
helicopters. Add in the Black Hawk, named for a leader of the Sauk tribe. Then
there is the Tomahawk, a low-altitude missile, and a drone named for an Indian
chief, Gray Eagle. Operation Geronimo was the end of Osama bin Laden.

Why do we name our battles and weapons after people we have vanquished? For the
same reason the Washington team is the Redskins and my hometown Red Sox go to
Cleveland to play the Indians and to Atlanta to play the Braves: because the
myth of the worthy native adversary is more palatable than the reality - the
conquered tribes of this land were not rivals but victims, cheated and
impossibly outgunned.

The destruction of the Indians was asymmetric war, compounded by deviousness in
the name of imperialist manifest destiny. White America shot, imprisoned, lied,
swindled, preached, bought, built and voted its way to domination. Identifying
our powerful weapons  and victorious campaigns with those we subjugated serves
to lighten the burden of our guilt. It confuses violation with a fair fight.

It is worse than denial; it is propaganda. The message carried by the word
Apache emblazoned on one of history's great fighting machines is that the
Americans overcame an opponent so powerful and true that we are proud to adopt
its name. They tested our mettle, and we proved stronger, so don't mess with us.
In whatever measure it is tribute to the dead, it is in greater measure a boost
to our national sense of superiority. And this message of superiority is shared
not just with U.S. citizens but with those of the 14 nations whose governments
buy the Apache helicopters we sell. It is shared, too, with those who hear the
whir of an Apache overhead or find its guns trained on them. Noam Chomsky has
clarified the moral stakes in provocative, instructive terms: "We might react
differently if the Luftwaffe were to call its fighter planes 'Jew' and 'Gypsy.'
"

If the native tribes did not stand a chance, this does not imply lack of
resistance or of courage; regardless, it doesn't much matter in this context.
Whatever courage they had, the U.S. military is not heir to it. If honor matters
to the members of our armed forces, they will agree.

Perhaps the senators outraged by the Redskins name could turn their
letter-writing pens on the Defense Department next. And when that's done, there
is the more important step, when these senators, and their constituents, choose
not only to be offended on behalf of Indians but also to be partners in
improving their lives. War and forced removal have been replaced by high rates
of unemployment, poverty, substance abuse, illness and disability; by inadequate
housing and education; by hate crimes, police harassment, disenfranchisement and
effective segregation. Being a Native American means living, on average, more
than four years less than other Americans. The violence is ongoing, even if the
guns are silent.

So, sure, rename the football team. But don't stop there.

The writer is managing editor of Boston Review.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


