                             2808 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      June 25, 2014 Wednesday 5:04 AM EST

Syria bombs Sunnis inside Iraq

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Anne Gearan;Ben Van Heuvelen

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1205 words


Syrian government aircraft bombed Sunni militant targets inside Iraq on Tuesday,
further broadening the Middle Eastern crisis a day after Israeli warplanes and
rockets struck targets inside Syria.

Iraqi state media initially reported that the attacks near Iraq's western border
with Syria were carried out by U.S. drones, a claim that was quickly and
forcefully denied by the Pentagon.

Separately, the Pentagon said that 90 additional U.S. troops arrived in Iraq,
part of a group of up to 300 military advisers that President Obama said last
week he would deploy there to assess the situation before taking any further
U.S. military action. A statement said that U.S. aircraft are now flying 30 to
35 manned and unmanned daily surveillance flights over Iraq.

The main U.S. effort Tuesday was on the diplomatic front, as Secretary of State
John F. Kerry traveled to Irbil, the Kurdish regional capital, to urge leaders
there to remain part of Iraq. As they met, fighters from local Sunni tribes,
apparently working with militant fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), wrested control of at least part of Iraq's largest oil refinery
from government troops.

"We are facing a new reality and a new Iraq," Massoud Barzani, president of the
semiautonomous Kurdish government, told Kerry at the start of their meeting.

An independent country is a long-held goal for many in Iraq's Kurdish minority,
numbering about 6.5 million. Some Kurdish leaders see an opportunity in the
rapid advance of the insurgents and the slow, disorganized response by the Arab,
Shiite-dominated government of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.

Throughout his visit to Iraq, including in talks with Maliki and Sunni leaders
Monday in Baghdad, Kerry has argued that Iraq risks collapsing unless a new
governing coalition representing all sects and ethnicities is quickly formed.

That argument is harder to make in the Kurdish region, which has several vast
oil fields and a long history of at least partial self-rule. The Kurds also have
their own defense force, the pesh merga, separate from the Iraqi military that
largely melted away in the face of advancing ISIS forces.

This month, as the ISIS militants overran the northwestern city of Mosul and
headed south, pesh merga forces quickly secured the oil capital of Kirkuk, which
lies just outside the official regional borders but which Kurds have long
demanded be included in their territory.

Possible Kurdish secession

U.S. officials traveling with Kerry, who arrived late Tuesday in Brussels for a
NATO meeting, said he had raised the question of possible Kurdish secession
during his hour-long session with Barzani, but that most of their discussion
focused on strategy to form a new Iraqi government.

In an interview, Kerry was asked about Barzani's "new reality" remark.

"A united Iraq is a stronger Iraq, and our policy is to respect the territorial
integrity of Iraq as a whole," Kerry told NBC. "President Barzani understands
that" and will participate in the government formation process, he said. Iraq
has until Monday to form a new parliament following elections in April;
parliament will then choose a new government.

The United States has long feared that formation of an independent Kurdistan in
present-day Iraq would not only weaken Iraq but also set off secession attempts
or civil war in neighboring nations with Kurdish minorities.

Meanwhile, Iraqi news media reported that at least 20 people were killed and 93
injured in the strike by Syrian jets in an Iraqi border town controlled by ISIS.
Western officials who confirmed the attack said they had no casualty details on
the strike, which targeted a market in the town of Qaim, according to the
nongovernment National Iraqi News Agency.

On Monday, Israeli warplanes and rockets struck nine targets, including what the
Israel Defense Forces said was a Syrian military command headquarters, in
retaliation for a missile attack from Syria on Sunday that killed one Israeli
and wounded another in the Golan Heights.

ISIS militants are fighting the governments on both sides of the Iraq-Syria
border, and an apparent decision by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to
intervene to help Maliki further tangles the already complex knot of actors in
the overlapping crises.

In Syria, the United States opposes both Assad and ISIS, which it condemns as a
terrorist, al-Qaeda-inspired organization.

Iran supports both Assad and Maliki and is sending aid to both, although Iraq's
ambassador to Tehran on Tuesday denied reports that the leader of Iran's
Revolutionary Guard Corps was in Baghdad helping the government there, Iran's
Fars News Agency reported.

Meeting in Paris

Shiite leaders in Iran and Iraq, as well as Assad, have accused Sunni
governments in the Persian Gulf of aiding the militants. On Thursday, Kerry will
meet in Paris with his counterparts from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Jordan to ask them to intervene more forcefully with Sunni tribes in western
Iraq to sever all ties with ISIS and join efforts to preserve a unified Iraq.

Armed tribal factions apparently worked together with ISIS forces to seize the
oil refinery in Baiji, about 140 miles northwest of Baghdad, after days of
battles with government troops over the key facility.

There were conflicting accounts late Tuesday of who was in charge at the
facility. Iraqi soldiers who arrived in Irbil after fleeing the refinery Monday
night said ISIS fighters spearheaded the assault, along with the al-Kaisi tribe
that dominates in the region. A tribal council official said Tuesday that "we
now control 90 percent of the refinery."

The Baghdad government insisted it was still in control, but refinery workers
said the tribes had negotiated a cease-fire and the surrender of about 450 Iraqi
army officers. Some took off their uniforms and put on blue refinery coveralls
before leaving, according to the workers' account, and the tribes arranged for
buses to take them away.

According to an official of the Baiji branch of the Military Council of the
Revolutionary Tribes, a Sunni self-defense organization that includes the
al-Kaisi tribe and other clans in the area, about 50 government troops remain
holed up in one part of the refinery.

The official, who gave his name as Khalid al-Iraqi, said tribal fighters were
joined by a smaller number of ISIS insurgents in the attack. He said the
Military Council controls the refinery and described ISIS as not strong enough
in the area to give orders.

But two Iraqi soldiers who took part in the defense, interviewed on the
outskirts of Irbil after having fled Baiji, said that ISIS fighters had done
most of the attacking.

"This really is a crisis," said a Western diplomat in Iraq, speaking on the
condition of anonymity under ground rules set for a news briefing. "It poses
questions as to Iraq's continued existence as a state. What we've got is Sunnis
controlling Sunni territory, Shias controlling Shia territory, Kurds controlling
Kurdish territory."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

anne.gearan@washpost.com

Gearan reported from Irbil and Brussels, Van Heuvelen from Irbil. Abigail
Hauslohner in Kirkuk, Iraq, and Loveday Morris and Liz Sly in Baghdad
contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


