                             2811 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 27, 2014 Friday 3:05 AM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 307 words


Drinking's heavy tollExcessive use of alcohol causes 1 in 10 deaths of
working-age adults every year, health officials reported. A3

the nation

The Obama administration proposed new enrollment rules for the second year of
the health-care law. A6

Republicans and Democrats said immigration reform is unlikely to pass until
after President Obama leaves office. A2

Drone strikes represent a "slippery slope" toward a state of never-ending war, a
panel of former intelligence and defense officials said. A2

the world

Moldova braced for a Russian backlashover closer ties with the European Union.
A11

Pakistan's offensive against militants is complicated by tensions with
neighboring Afghanistan. A13

the economy

The Obama administration announcedplans to beef up a program aimed at ensuring
access to affordable rental housing. A18

Investors sent shares of GoPro up more than 30 percent in the action-camera
maker's stock market debut. A18

Google began to remove user data and search results under Europe's new "right to
be forgotten." A17

the region

A 3-year-old boy found deadin Southeast Washington was beaten, police said. B5

A judge dismissed a recall-petition case against Loudoun Supervisor Eugene A.
Delgaudio, who was accused of misusing his office. B4

The D.C. ABC board orderedthe Web-based Ultra liquor-delivery service to stop
operating in the city. B8

Robert Sarvis, the Libertarian candidate for Virginia governor last fall, has
qualified for the ballot for the U.S. Senate. B8

obituaries

Diana McLellan, 76, wrote the Washington gossip column the Ear, which chronicled
social news and intrigue. C1

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


