                             285 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                           January 22, 2014 Wednesday

On Drones, Keeping the Public in the Dark

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 469 words



HIGHLIGHT: The 2014 spending bill contained a secret deal on drones.


We don't get to say this very often on The Times editorial page, but Senator
John McCain was absolutely right last week to decry a secret deal in the 2014
spending bill. He pointed out that the bill contained a classified section that
prohibited the Pentagon from taking over the C.I.A.'s role in carrying out drone
strikes, as President Obama has proposed.

Only a few lawmakers - apparently, not including Mr. McCain - knew about the
secret ban until The Washington Post revealed it. As Mr. McCain pointed out, it
shouldn't have been secret, and it shouldn't have been in an appropriations
bill.

"The Appropriations Committee is supposed to appropriate," he said. "The
Appropriations Committee has no business making this decision. How many of my
colleagues knew that this provision was in this mammoth appropriations bill? I
bet a handful."

There were no hearings on the matter, neither in Appropriations nor in any of
the committees that are actually supposed to debate these things, like Armed
Services or Intelligence.

Whether lawmakers back the Pentagon or the C.I.A. reflects, to some degree,
their proprietary interest in protecting their fiefdoms. The Intelligence
Committee oversees the undisclosed drone strikes conducted by the C.I.A. in
Pakistan and Yemen, while Armed Services does the same for the Pentagon's
strikes in the official war zones of Afghanistan and Iraq. (Mr. McCain is on
Armed Services, and has made a career of criticizing the work of Congressional
appropriators.) Senator Dianne Feinstein, chairwoman of the Intelligence
Committee, has been openly skeptical about whether the Pentagon can effectively
conduct the drone strikes as well as the C.I.A.

But what's really at issue in this dispute isn't military competence; it's the
competing goals of secrecy and accountability. The Obama administration wanted
to shift control of the strikes to the Pentagon as part of a plan for greater
transparency. At the moment, it officially acknowledges the Pentagon program,
but won't discuss or even admit the fact that the C.I.A. fires bombs at terror
targets in Pakistan.

Many people in Congress like it that way. As long as the drone strikes are never
discussed outside the sealed hearing room of the Intelligence Committee, the
country doesn't have to be accountable for the success or failure of the
program, and neither do the lawmakers who authorize it. If the Pentagon takes
over, the legal scrutiny of the strikes will grow, and that could limit the
scope of the program. There's a strong faction on Capitol Hill that prefers
keeping the public in the dark about the country's endless secret war against
terrorists, and this time it won.


     ·    Why Are the Intelligence Budgets a State Secret?
     ·    John McCain Versus Ted Cruz
     ·    John McCain and the 'Wacko Birds'
     ·    In the Navy: Rape
     ·    The 'Signature Strikes' Program


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


