                             2903 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 9, 2014 Tuesday 3:07 AM EST

Iraq approves new cabinet, giving U.S. way to expand help

BYLINE: Loveday Morris;Greg Jaffe

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 953 words


BAGHDAD -  Under huge international and domestic pressure, Iraq swore in a new
government on Monday, opening the way for an expansion of U.S. military support
to fight Islamist extremists in the country.

The vote to approve a new cabinet came during a fiery late-night parliamentary
session. Key positions, including those of the defense and security chiefs, were
left open amid controversy over who would fill them. Now confirmed as prime
minister, Haider al-Abadi said he would name candidates for those positions
within a week.

The new lineup meets U.S. demands for an inclusive government involving
disenfranchised Sunni and Kurdish minorities, which the Obama administration has
linked to further military assistance. President Obama is expected to address
the nation Wednesday to outline a broader strategy to combat militants from the
brutal al-Qaeda breakaway group Islamic State.

Late Monday, he called Abadi and emphasized "the need for the United States and
Iraq to continue working closely with the international community to build on
recent actions to counter the threat posed by the Islamic State," according to a
White House statement.

Abadi pledged to "work with all communities in Iraq," the statement said, and
move quickly "to address the aspirations and legitimate grievances of the Iraqi
people." American officials hope that the new government will be able to bridge
divides and peel away support for the al-Qaeda splinter group, which is tearing
apart Iraq's borders.

Uncertainty over whether the vote would take place continued until the last
minute after Kurdish politicians withdrew from talks and flew to Sulaymaniyah in
the semiautonomous north, threatening to boycott the session if their demands
over budget payments and oil sales were not met.

With a 30-day deadline for Abadi to appoint a government set to expire
Wednesday, the U.S. deputy assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern
affairs, Brett McGurk, and the United Nations' Iraq envoy, Nickolay Mladenov,
traveled to Sulaymaniyah to meet with senior Kurdish leaders and persuade them
to participate in the government, Iraqi officials said.

But Kurdish grievances were not the only ones that boiled over.

Frictions began as soon as Monday's session got underway as Shiite
parliamentarian Mohammed Naji took to the floor to lambaste the withdrawal of
Hadi al-Amiri's name to head the Interior Ministry. Amiri, who was formerly
transport minister, is the head of the Badr Brigade, a Shiite militia that has
been fighting the Islamic State north of Baghdad. Sunni politicians had strongly
objected to his nomination.

Though Abadi was unable to fill the interior and defense positions in time for
the vote, the roles had remained vacant under the last government, with Prime
Minister Nouri al-Maliki retaining the key security portfolios himself.

Arguments continued during the opening religious recital, with the speaker,
Salim al-Jubouri, forced to interject to tell lawmakers to "respect the Koran."

The session began with just 179 of 328 lawmakers present - nonetheless, the
quorum needed to vote in a new government.

"There are a good number of parliament members here, but there are also a good
number in the cafeteria," the speaker said. "We ask you, is this why the people
elected you?"

After more than an hour of sitting in the cafeteria, Kurdish lawmakers
eventually joined the session. Ala Talabani,   one of the Kurdish members,
announced that the Kurds would join for only a three-month trial period.

The vote took place with 289 lawmakers present. Each candidate's name was read
out and voted on with a show of hands. The three Kurdish cabinet nominees were
not present after their last-hour withdrawal to Sulaymaniyah but were still
voted in.

Sunni politicians took the culture ministry, while Shiites filled the weightier
portfolio of oil.

A major sticking point for the Kurds is almost $8 billion in oil-sharing revenue
that they said has been owed to them since January, when Kurdish officials said
Baghdad stopped sending revenue checks.

Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional Government have been locked in a years-long
dispute over whether the Kurds should be able to make their own deals with oil
companies and then send the proceeds to Baghdad. Amid the financial squeeze, the
Kurdish government's pesh merga fighters, who have been battling extremists from
the Islamic State, have gone unpaid for months.

The Kurds were also upset that they were offered only three ministries in the
current power-sharing deal; they argued that based on their population and
influence, they should receive at least five. There are also outstanding
questions over how and whether the pesh merga fighters should be incorporated
into the Iraqi national security forces.

Maliki was voted in as vice president Monday. Abadi shook hands with him as he
entered parliament, but Maliki notably did not raise his hand to vote to support
the new prime minister's agenda - which included building institutions and
fighting corruption.

The formation of a new government came as U.S. jets and drones continued
airstrikes in the vicinity of the Haditha Dam. Iraqi officials said militants
had been driven out of the nearby town of Barwana.

The dam is under Iraqi government control but has been under frequent attack
since late June as the militants attempt to seize key infrastructure.

The U.S. Central Command has conducted 148 airstrikes across Iraq, but the
Haditha offensive has marked an expansion to the western province of Anbar - the
most deadly for U.S. troops during the Iraq war.

loveday.morris@washpost.com

greg.jaffe@washpost.com

Jaffe reported from Irbil province, Iraq. Mustafa Salim in Baghdad contributed
to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


