                             293 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 8, 2014 Friday 9:03 PM EST

Predator drone involved in latest U.S. airstrikes in Iraq

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 431 words


The U.S. military carried out two more rounds of airstrikes in northern Iraq on
Friday, as it continued its effort to beat back Islamic State militants near the
city of Irbil. And unlike the first strike, one of the most recent pair was
carried out by an aerial drone.

Navy Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said the latest strikes
occurred at 10 a.m. and 11:20 a.m. EST. In the 10 a.m. strike, an MQ-1 Predator
drone armed with Hellfire missiles struck a militant mortar position, a senior
U.S. defense official said Friday afternoon. When the militants returned to the
site a few minutes later, they were attacked again and killed, officials said.

The drone attack marks a departure for the U.S. military, which had said
previously that drones were flying missions over Iraq only to collect
intelligence. The Pentagon acknowledged in June that some of the drones were
armed to provide protection for U.S. troops it had added on the ground, but it
had not announced a drone strike before Friday.

The other two U.S. airstrikes the Pentagon has acknowledged in Iraq on Friday
were carried out by F/A-18 fighter jets flying off the USS George H.W. Bush, an
aircraft carrier operating in the Persian Gulf. The first strike, announced
Friday morning, was launched about 6:45 a.m. EST by two F/A-18F Super Hornets
with Carrier Air Wing 8, of Naval Air Station Oceana, Va.

The second Super Hornet strike occurred about 11:20 a.m., Kirby said Friday.
Four F/A-18 fighter jets successfully struck a stationary militant convoy of
seven vehicles and a mortar position near Irbil, he added.

"The aircraft executed two planned passes," he said. "On both runs, each
aircraft dropped one laser guided bomb making a total of eight bombs dropped on
target neutralizing the mortar and convoy."

A senior defense official said Friday afternoon that the Navy has used GBU-54
bombs in the airstrikes. The acronym stands for "guided bomb unit," while the
number identifies it in the military. They are 500-pound laser-guided Joint
Defense Attack Munitions, or JDAMs, officials said. As pointed out on Checkpoint
this morning, the pilots have the ability to set up laser guidance on their own,
or with the help of another fighter pilot nearby.

Related on Checkpoint U.S. airdrops in Iraq hit their target 63 of 72 times,
Pentagon says

USS George H.W. Bush and its Super Hornet fighters strike in Iraq

Here's how F-18s likely targeted Islamic State forces in Iraq

This is what could happen if the Islamic State destroys the Mosul Dam

The U.S. military mission in Iraq: What we know now

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


