                             2913 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 12, 2014 Friday 4:06 AM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 373 words


The hunt for SpinosaurusThe National Geographic Museum will unveil a replica of
the world's first semiaquatic dinosaur. B1

Ruling in Pistorius caseThe double-amputee Olympian was found not guilty of
murder but could be convicted of a negligent killing. A7

the region

A high-tech entrepreneur who dropped out of the University of Maryland pledged a
record $31 million gift. B1

The 200th anniversary of the song that became the national anthem is cause for
celebration at Fort McHenry, where the banner yet waves. B1

Alexandria detectives looked for any links between the killings of a D.C.
corrections official and a Falls Church cafe worker. B6

Officials blamed the weekend death of a Towson University student on head and
neck injuries incurred when she fell against a sliding glass door. B6

The estimated cost of building a light-rail Purple Line in the Maryland suburbs
has risen by $56 million, to $2.43 billion, a report said. B6

Montgomery County officials have purchased several drones for a year-long study
of their potential for monitoring fire scenes and other emergencies. B3

Federal prosecutors in the Districtsaid they will launch the first unit of its
kind in a U.S. attorney's office to identify potential wrongful convictions. B5

obituaries

Richard Kiel, 74, was the hulking 7-foot-2 actor best remembered as the James
Bond villain Jaws. B7

the economy

Lululemon, the retailer that helped put yoga pants on the fashion map, reported
flat quarterly sales. A17

Data soon will disappearfrom the Recovery.gov Web site because the government
board that oversees the site is not renewing its license with Dun & Bradstreet.
A20

RadioShack said it could haveto file for bankruptcy. A16

Military academies and technology schools get high marks for salaries of recent
graduates, beating the Ivies. A15

A bill that would turn over the assets of employee pension plans to insurance
companies gained support. A16

the world

The United States and the European Unionannounced stricter sanctions against
Russia. A6

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


