                             2923 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 21, 2014 Sunday 11:25 PM EST

Empty words for Ukraine

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 578 words


FOR THE sake of the cameras, President Obama assured Ukrainian President Petro
Poroshenko at a White House meeting Thursday that "not only do we support
Ukraine's sovereignty and independence in words, but we've also been supporting
it in deeds." If only that were true. The reality is that the beleaguered
Ukrainian leader left Washington backed by considerable rhetoric from the Obama
administration but little with which he can turn back the continuing Russian
aggression against his country.

In an emotional address to Congress, Mr. Poroshenko described Ukraine as
fighting for Western democratic values as well as its own survival, and he all
but begged for U.S. military aid beyond the token "non-lethal" supplies the
Obama administration has provided. "One cannot win the war with blankets," he
said. "Even more, we cannot keep the peace with a blanket."

Mr. Obama's answer was to offer another batch of blankets: non-lethal equipment
amounting to $46 million, a rounding error in the Pentagon's budget. Instead of
the antitank weapons and drones the Ukrainian army desperately needs, it was
promised more body armor, engineering equipment and patrol boats. That will be
worthless against the thousands of regular Russian troops, backed by tanks,
artillery and sophisticated antiaircraft systems, that moved into eastern
Ukraine last month.

Administration officials say Mr. Obama holds back weapons for Ukraine because of
his oft-stated belief that there is "no military solution" to the conflict with
Russia and because he wishes to avoid an escalation. But weak U.S. and European
support has allowed Russian President Vladimir Putin to impose his own military
solution as he has repeatedly escalated his aggression. Thanks to advances by
Russian troops, Mr. Poroshenko was forced to accept a cease-fire that locked in
Russian control over a large slice of eastern Ukraine.

In the last week, Ukraine's parliament has approved far-reaching concessions to
appease Mr. Putin, including a formal grant of autonomy to the
Russian-controlled regions and a one-year delay in the implementation of a
free-trade agreement with the European Union. In return, Ukraine is hoping to
claw back a few attributes of sovereignty: the withdrawal of Russian troops from
its territory, the sealing of the border and the release of Ukrainians taken
prisoner by the Russians or their proxies.

It's unlikely that Mr. Putin will meet those terms. While some Russian troops
have pulled back, Ukrainian and NATO officials say 1,000 or more remain. Russian
forces still control a significant stretch of the border, and both Moscow and
its Ukrainian proxies have rejected Mr. Poroshenko's concessions as inadequate.

Mr. Poroshenko appears resigned to a "frozen conflict" in eastern Ukraine. His
hope is to prevent renewed Russian aggression; that's why he wants U.S. aid.
"The weapons will help us to prevent the next war," he said in an appearance at
the Atlantic Council. Though Ukraine's army cannot defeat Russia's, the prospect
of significant losses might deter Mr. Putin from another offensive.

That's why legislation approved Thursday by the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee makes sense. It would strengthen sanctions against Russia and provide
Ukraine with $350 million in military aid in 2015, including the weapons it
needs to counter Russian armor. Mr. Poroshenko called the package "urgently
needed" and "the most effective way to suppport Ukraine." Congress should
swiftly approve it.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


