                             292 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 9:43 PM EST

Why pilots couldn't stop a Marine Corps drone helicopter from crashing;
The oscillation of the 2,000-pound load swinging beneath the helicopter in a
cargo net eventually brought it down in a heap.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 593 words


It was a routine evening in Afghanistan when Marines and contractors with
Lockheed Martin launched an unmanned K-Max drone helicopter from a major base in
Helmand province to carry food rations to a smaller outpost.  The aircraft had
made hundreds of similar trips for the Marines since first being deployed in
2011, and it looked like this would be like any other.

Something went seriously wrong the evening of June 5, 2013, though. As the
helicopter closed in on its destination, the Marine lieutenant commanding the
mission and Lockheed contractors operating the aircraft remotely expected 15 mph
headwinds. Instead, it got a tailwind, shaking up the drone.

The pilots employed a technique known as the "weathervane" effect in an attempt
to gain control, allowing the pilots to turn the aircraft into the wind and gain
control. But it didn't work. The oscillation of the 2,000-pound load swinging
beneath the helicopter in a cargo net grew increasingly worse, bringing the
52-foot-long helicopter, valued at $11.1 million, down in a heap on the landing
zone. No one was injured, but the laptop computer collecting information about
the flight was ejected out the left cockpit window, and the tail burst into
flames.

The crash report, released to The Washington Post through the Freedom of
Information Act, illustrates the dangers that can occur when a drone operator
does not realize the peril their aircraft is in.

Military investigators found that the mishap was preventable and occurred
because the pilots did not intervene quickly enough when the helicopter
experienced unexpected wind, according to documents released by the Marine
Corps. Accident investigators also determined that U.S. personnel on the ground
near the landing zone should have provided an updated weather report, and also
sent a warning back to the pilots at Camp Bastion to let them know it was out of
control.

"The aircraft could not recover on its OWN based on the diverging conditions and
its insufficient programming; it required human intervention," the investigation
report said.

The report's release comes as the Marine Corps brings home the other two K-Max
drones it used in Afghanistan. As noted on Checkpoint in July, the U.S. Army
will test it in coming months at Fort Benning, Ga., to see how well it operates
while carrying another drone vehicle to be used on land and built by Lockheed.
It is known as the Squad Mission Support System.

Investigators recommended several changes following the crash, including that
the detachment of personnel running the drone have better communication with
observers on the ground. Training also should be updated to respond to excessive
oscillating or swinging by the load suspended beneath the aircraft,
investigators recommended.

"At a minimum, the crew should be trained to point the aircraft into the wind in
an auto descent using all available indications and pitch and weight load should
be thoroughly monitored through the delivery of cargo and return to the cargo
waypoint," the report said.

A Lockheed spokesman for the K-Max program, Keith Little, referred comment to
the military on Thursday. The Marine Corps released a statement saying it has
addressed the concerns raised.

"Tactics, techniques and procedures were put in place to address all findings of
the report which have helped preclude incidents like this from happening," said
a Marine spokesman, Capt. Dustin Pratico. "The lessons learned have made the
K-MAX mission safer and more effective."

Staff writer Craig Whitlock contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


