                             2946 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                    October 22, 2014 Wednesday 12:51 AM EST

A fresh approach to terror

BYLINE: David Ignatius

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 823 words


ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates

Hedayah certainly doesn't look like a global counterterrorism center. It sits in
a quiet villa on Fatima bint Mubarak Street here. It has a staff of 14. Its
annual budget wouldn't begin to cover the cost of an Apache helicopter gunship.

This tiny international organization, whose Arabic name means "guidance," wants
to be the softer face of the battle against such terror groups as the Islamic
State. A brochure explains that if traditional counterterrorism efforts are
perceived as soldiers with automatic weapons, Hedayah instead wants an image of
kids sitting around a blackboard in a rural school.

Looking at the Middle East today, you'd have to say that the former approach,
stressing soldiers with guns, hasn't been doing very well. Sectarian violence
has devoured Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen, and it's gnawing at surrounding
nations.

So perhaps it's time to try the alternative approach of low-visibility groups
such as Hedayah, whose 2014 budget was just $6 million.

Hedayah was created in 2012 by the 29 countries in the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, which is chaired by the United States and Turkey. Member nations include
many countries whose citizens have funded or exported radicalism, such as Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, Pakistan and Afghanistan. The motivation was to share ideas,
outside of existing intelligence and security partnerships, for "redirection of
terrorist support and potential recruits through non-coercive preventive
measures."

The organization doesn't even describe its mission as counterterrorism. Instead
of "CT," its business is "CVE," which stands for "countering violent extremism."
The nonsectarian approach extends to describing the office prayer room as the
"all religion room."

Hedayah's non-coercive approach has unfortunately gotten more lip service than
major support from participating nations. It holds meetings and seminars, but
with so little money, its activities are limited. Maqsoud Kruse, the U.A.E.
official who runs the group, says it has accomplished 15 percent of what it
could do with more money and attention.

The Hedayah agenda stresses ways to avoid the radicalization process that leads
people to embrace terrorism. The idea is prevention, rather than reaction. In
the group's summary of last year's activities, the first item is "preventing
education systems from becoming breeding grounds for violent extremism." In
practical terms, this means stopping the use of madrassas and other religious
schools as a training ground for jihadists.

Personally, I think there's a simple way to check the abuse of Islamic
education. Saudi Arabia, whose funding for madrassas in such places as
Afghanistan and Pakistan helped create a generation of potential religious
warriors, must stop the practice. "No more foreign funding for madrassas" should
be a demand of the nations that have joined the coalition against the Islamic
State. Hedayah doesn't propose anything so radical, but it should.

A second priority for Hedayah is de-radicalization and rehabilitation of
prisoners. "Prisons are potential terrorist networks," notes the group, because
they have become places where radicals can recruit, indoctrinate and strategize.

Prisons have been especially important for the Islamic State, which freed
thousands of well-indoctrinated inmates as it swept through Anbar and Mosul in
Iraq. Here, Saudi Arabia provides a positive model: The kingdom has worked over
the past decade to turn its al-Qaeda prisoners away from violence.

Two other preventive approaches are also noteworthy. Hedayah tries to encourage
victims of terrorism to tell their stories, so that young people will hear a
counternarrative to the heroic self-promotion of the jihadists. And it
encourages community policing efforts around the world, so that local cops in
New York City or Amsterdam or Riyadh will get tips from parents, friends or
imams when young people become radicalized.

Hedayah's final goal involves using social media to combat extremism. This may
be the most important mission, given the mastery that the Islamic State has
shown in using the Internet to promote violent confrontation. Over the past
decade, this virtual battle against extremism has typically been waged by secret
intelligence and military agencies, or has been ignored. Neither approach makes
sense. One European nation is pioneering a program in which visits to jihadist
sites prompt automated anti-radicalization messages. That sends a dual message:
We're watching, and do the right thing.

Let's be honest: It's too late to stop the radicalization of Islamic State
fighters. The battle to "degrade and ultimately destroy" those recruits,
unfortunately, will now be waged with Apache gunships and drones. But maybe
their younger brothers and cousins can be deterred from violent extremism by
programs like the ones that Hedayah is promoting.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


