                             298 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                      October 14, 2014 Tuesday 9:26 PM EST

Drone toting Albanian national flag causes riots that end Albania vs. Serbia
Euro 2016 qualifier early

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 437 words


The Albanian national soccer team traveled to Belgrade for the first time since
1967 to play Serbia in a European Championship qualifying match on Tuesday. It
ended early when riots broke out after visiting fans who were banned from
entering Belgrade's Partizan Stadium decided to fly a drone over the pitch.

Dangling from the drone was the Albanian national flag, adorned with a map of
Kosovo and the word "autochthonous" ("indigenous"). The autonomous region, which
the Serbian government refuses to recognize as independent, is home to many
Albanian players. Things got really bad when Serbia's Aleksander Mitrovic tore
the flag down and attempted to down the drone. Here's the video.

The ensuing riots caused English referee Martin Atkinson to abandon the match.
UEFA confirms, noting the abandonment came "due to a disturbance on the pitch."
"Disturbance," however, is putting it lightly. Besides the players, fans soon
rushed the pitch and began fighting each other and players. Eventually both
sides had to be ushered off the field after spectators began pelting the teams
with debris.

Even before the drone incident, the atmosphere was heated. Fans of Serbia burned
NATO flags. Riot police were already clashing with fans. Nationalistic chants
rumbled in the stadium. It was a mess, made worse by the drone.

Serbia and Albania have had a long and tumultuous history involving war, unrest
and ethnic cleansing, a crime for which several Serbian war leaders would face
international trial. While the situation has improved in recent years, it's
still far from great. Clearly.

Soccer reporter Nick Ames, who writes for the Guardian and ESPN was at the
match. He tweeted everything he saw.

Play stopped as a drone flies right above the pitch, dangling an Albanian flag
right above it! This is incredible. Crowd going mad.

Mitrovic, jumps, grabs the flag as it falls - and all hell has now broken lose
here. Players and officials on both sides fighting. - Nick Ames (@NickAmes82)
October 14, 2014

This is disgraceful. Albanians have now fled the pitch, pelted by objects.
Serbians following. Never seen anything like this.

I guess we'd say that this match has been "suspended". No idea when/if we'll
restart. That was five minutes of complete insanity. - Nick Ames (@NickAmes82)
October 14, 2014

Think it was Mavraj who ran over to Mitrovic when he grabbed the flag and barged
him over. After that: chaos.

The pitch is now surrounded by more police when I have ever seen. There's
relative calm. But the damage is long since done. Now we wait.

Here are some more photographs.

This post will be updated as more information comes in.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


