                             291 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 31, 2014 Thursday 8:50 PM EST

Delivery drone carrying marijuana, cellphones and tobacco crashed outside a S.C.
prison

BYLINE: Abby Phillip

LENGTH: 281 words


Police are seeking one man and have arrested another who they believe tried to
smuggle contraband into a South Carolina prison by way of drone.

On the morning of April 21, officers discovered a small drone that had crashed
in the bushes outside the Lee Correctional Institution in Bishopville, S.C.,
according to the Associated Press. The drone never made it over the 12-foot
fence, though the AP noted that "officials aren't sure exactly where the drone
would have gone if it made it over the wall."

The drone was carrying marijuana, cellphones and tobacco, according to Stephanie
Givens, a spokeswoman for the S.C. Department of Corrections.

One person, 28-year-old Brenton Lee Doyle, has been arrested in connection with
the incident and appeared in court Wednesday. He has been charged with
attempting to smuggle contraband into a prison and possession of the drug
flunitrazepam, also known as "roofies," according to Reuters.

Police have issued a plea for information about a second suspect who may be
connected to the incident. They released a series of surveillance photos of the
man taken in a convenience store near the prison.

As smuggling attempts go, this is slightly more sophisticated than the old
cellphone-over-the-wall trick - which somehow still manages to be effective.

It isn't new, however.

In November, four people were arrested for allegedly trying to smuggle a few
pounds of tobacco into a Georgia correctional facility using a remote-controlled
helicopter. According to WALB, they were caught after prison officers noticed
the helicopter trying to get over the prison walls.

To their credit, the helicopter smugglers made sure to keep an eye on the
aircraft with binoculars.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


