                             2951 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      October 24, 2014 Friday 1:30 AM EST

A reintroduction for Snowden

BYLINE: Ann Hornaday

SECTION: ; Pg. T36

LENGTH: 689 words


Whether you think Edward Snowden is a hero or a traitor, you should see the
riveting documentary "Citizenfour," at the very least to get to know better the
young man who just a little over a year ago became one of the most pivotal - and
shadowy - figures on the geopolitical stage.

In early 2013, Snowden, working as a private security contractor for the
National Security Agency, contacted journalist and filmmaker Laura Poitras under
the alias "Citizenfour" with information about the reach and extent of NSA's
surveillance of private communications.

A few months later, Poitras and her colleague, investigative reporter Glenn
Greenwald, met Snowden in Hong Kong - their initial encounter choreographed with
intrigue worthy of John le Carré, complete with code questions and the
modern-day equivalent of a red carnation in the lapel. After retiring to
Snowden's hotel room, he proceeded over eight days to share what he knew.
Poitras persuaded Snowden to let her film the encounter, and the resulting
footage forms the bulk of "Citizenfour," which unfolds like a real-life
thriller, at once mesmerizing and banal, as just another faceless bureaucrat in
the national security state transforms, quite literally, into an international
man of mystery.

Poitras, whose previous films include "My Country, My Country" and "The Oath" -
both of which addressed post-9/11 foreign policy - was prescient in asking
Snowden for permission to film: "Citizenfour" isn't just a useful primer in the
civil liberties and consent issues his disclosures raised. It humanizes a man
who almost immediately became controversialized as a naive, self-important desk
jockey or, worse, a handmaiden to terrorists everywhere.

There's no doubt that Poitras is firmly on Snowden's side, but her perspective
is still a useful one. What emerges in "Citizenfour" is a serious, thoughtful,
deeply idealistic person who - it bears noting - purposefully went to Poitras
and Greenwald so that his information would be disseminated according to
journalistic standards and practices, not his own bias. As Snowden himself says,
it all comes down to a balance of power between the state and its citizens that
has become a dynamic of "the rulers and the ruled."

Not surprisingly, paranoia runs deep in "Citizenfour," which chronicles how
Poitras and Greenwald come under their own forms of government watching (even
harassment); the effect is heightened by the claustrophobic room in which
they're trapped for several days, while the story they're helping create blows
up outside.

"Citizenfour" makes a persuasive case that Snowden's suspicions are justified:
Poitras includes damning images of administration officials seeming to lie under
oath before Congress, as well as the testimony of mathematician William Binney,
who left a 30-year career with the NSA after raising concerns about
mismanagement and domestic privacy breaches. As an encryption activist says at
one point in "Citizenfour," invading privacy "is supposed to be hard."

As sobering as these sequences are, the film is at its most compelling inside
that hotel room with Snowden, as he nervously decides when to make his identity
known, silently tapping out e-mails to his girlfriend back in Hawaii as an
international media storm he started ensues outside. In one of the film's most
evocative passages, Snowden nervously fixes his hair before introducing himself
to the world he's just rocked, puttering around the disheveled room as if
tiptoeing through the silent eye of a raging hurricane just outside the walls.

Poitras sets up the last 20 minutes of the film as a series of bombshells that
aren't necessarily as incendiary (or surprising) as she may have hoped. Still,
one scene in particular lands with all the drama and intrigue the filmmaker
clearly intended: It's a shot of Snowden, now in Moscow, moving contentedly
around his kitchen, an image all the more eerily effective for being taken
outside his window, like a spy or maybe a silent, all-observing drone.

ann.hornaday@washpost.com

½

R. At Landmark's E Street Cinema. Contains profanity. 114 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


