                             2928 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 28, 2014 Sunday 10:09 PM EST

Why 'no boots on the ground' isn't so comforting

BYLINE: Rosa Brooks

SECTION: Outlook; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1516 words


Each time I hear President Obama assure us that there will be "no boots on the
ground" in Iraq or Syria, I think of my husband's Army boots, lying in a heap in
the corner of the downstairs study. They're covered in fine dust from his latest
Middle East deployment, one that came nail-bitingly close to being extended by
an unplanned stint in Iraq.

In the end, he wasn't sent back to Iraq. He came home in July, though a
last-minute change in assignments left most of his civilian clothes stranded in
some Army transport netherworld. Deprived of his sneakers and sandals, he wore
his Army boots pretty much everywhere this summer, even on playground outings
with the kids. Watching grass stains from the local park gradually displace nine
months of Kuwaiti dust gave me more happiness than I can say.

Even so, I can't help feeling queasy every time I hear the president pledge that
there will be "no boots on the ground" in America's newest war. I wonder what
that pledge really means - and just why we're supposed to find it reassuring.
It's a pledge that seems to have everything to do with politics and little to do
with the imperatives of strategy or security.

Here's what "no boots on the ground" apparently doesn't mean: It doesn't mean
that no U.S. troops will be sent to Iraq or Syria. Reportedly there are already
1,600 U.S. military personnel in Iraq. True, they're present in an "advisory"
role, not in a combat role - but surely one lesson of Iraq and Afghanistan is
that combat has a habit of finding its way to noncombat personnel. Enemy snipers
and IEDs don't much care about a soldier's mission or occupational specialty,
and you can bet that fighters of the self-proclaimed Islamic State would be
content with the heads of a few American advisers.

It's also hard to know what publicly reported troop numbers really mean. When
the Pentagon issues a Boots on the Ground report (known colloquially as a "BOG
report"), it often excludes military personnel on "temporary duty" in combat
areas, even though temporary duty may mean an assignment spanning five or six
months. Similarly, Special Operations personnel assigned to work under CIA
auspices are often left out of the BOG numbers. This makes it hard to know just
who's being counted when officials say there are 1,600 military personnel in
Iraq.

"No boots on the ground" also ignores the many nonmilitary American boots (and
shoes and sandals) present in Iraq and Syria. Our Baghdad embassy personnel
presumably wear some kind of footwear, as do thousands more civilians working as
U.S. government contractors in Iraq. In both Iraq and Syria, scores of American
civilians also work for nongovernmental organizations and humanitarian aid
groups.

The Pentagon keeps careful count of dead and wounded U.S. troops, but the
government doesn't systematically track dead or injured civilians or contractors
(many of whom, of course, are U.S. military veterans). Though few Americans know
it, there were often more contractors working for the U.S. government on the
ground than there were U.S. troops at the height of the Iraq and Afghanistan
wars, and some estimates suggest that there were as many U.S.-employed
contractors who died in those conflicts as there were U.S. troops
killed.///CAN'T FIND THIS EXACTLY; I SEE STORIES LIKE THIS
http://www.propublica.org/article/this-year-contractor-deaths-exceed-military-on
es-in-iraq-and-afgh-100923ABOUT HOW CONTRACTOR DEATHS *AT TIMES* WERE GREATER
THAN MILITARY ONES; THESE STORIES ALSO NOTE THAT MOST CONTRACTORS WERE NOT
AMERICAN; THIS REPORT
http://costsofwar.org/sites/default/files/articles/10/attachments/USandCoalition
.pdfSHOWS THAT THE TOTAL NUMBERS OF CONTRACTOR/MILITARY DEATHS WERE SIMILAR

Cynics might even suspect that this heavy reliance on contractors was part of an
effort to keep those BOG numbers down while outsourcing military risk. After
all, no one likes high BOG numbers - the very acronym is suggestive of that most
dreaded military outcome, the "quagmire."

If "no boots on the ground" means playing games with numbers and offloading
military risk onto U.S. government civilians and contractors, we should take
little solace in presidential reassurances.

And we should feel even less comfort if "no boots on the ground" ends up putting
vulnerable local civilians at risk. Remember Kosovo? President Bill Clinton's
refusal in 1999 to put U.S. troops on the ground forced us to rely solely on
airstrikes to prevent Serbian ethnic cleansing. To further minimize any risk to
U.S. military personnel, we mainly flew sorties at a safe 15,000 feet above the
ground. This worked out well for us: Aside from two Americans killed in a
helicopter accident in Albania, there were no U.S. fatalities in the 78-day air
campaign. It worked out less well for some of the civilians we were trying to
protect; in several cases, for instance, NATO pilots mistook convoys of refugees
for troop transports, causing scores of civilian deaths.

The primary goal of the current U.S. airstrikes in Syria and Iraq isn't civilian
protection, but Obama has suggested that this is at least a secondary
motivation. In his speech this past week to the U.N. General Assembly, for
instance, he asserted that the Islamic State "has terrorized all who they come
across in Iraq and Syria. Mothers, sisters and daughters have been subjected to
rape as a weapon of war. Innocent children have been gunned down. . . .
Religious minorities have been starved to death. In the most horrific crimes
imaginable, innocent human beings have been beheaded. . . . The only language
understood by killers like this is the language of force. So the United States
of America will work with a broad coalition to dismantle this network of death."

It's hard to argue with the importance of dismantling a "network of death," but
no matter how careful we are, U.S. airstrikes in Syria and Iraq will also end up
killing some innocent civilians. Without eyes and ears on the ground, we're more
likely to make tragic targeting mistakes. We have to hope we'll do more good
than harm, but it's hard to feel confident of that.

Numerous respected military and defense leaders - from Army Gen. Martin Dempsey
, current chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to retired defense secretary
Robert Gates - have argued in recent weeks that ground troops will probably be
required if our strategy is to be effective. So far, events seem to be proving
them right: In Iraq, seven weeks of airstrikes have done little to push Islamic
State fighters out of the territories they control, despite close U.S.
coordination with Iraqi army units. In Syria, we have no similar local force
with which to coordinate, creating a risk that U.S. airstrikes will increase the
chaos without fundamentally reducing the threat to local civilians - or, in the
longer term, to the United States.

And that's most worrisome of all - the possibility that our insistence on "no
boots on the ground" also offloads present risks onto the future. Relying on
airstrikes alone may merely prolong a bloody and inconclusive conflict, or
strengthen other actors who are just as brutal as Islamic State fighters, from
the regime of Bashar al-Assad to the al-Qaeda-linked rebels of Jabhat al-Nusra.

Insisting that we'll never commit U.S. troops to this fight plays right into
every jihadist narrative, reinforcing America's image as an arrogant but
cowardly nation - happy to drop bombs from a distance but unwilling to risk the
lives of our troops. Each time we reinforce that narrative, we give jihadist
recruiting another big boost.

For a decade, we've relied on drone strikes as a top counterterrorism tool in
Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia, but a few thousand dead terrorism suspects later,
it's far from clear that we've made ourselves safer. If anything, the global
jihadist movement appears to have gained strength. As a former Defense
Intelligence Agency director, Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, recently noted: "In 2004,
there were 21 total Islamic terrorist groups spread out in 18 countries. Today,
there are 41 Islamic terrorist groups spread out in 24 countries." Ultimately,
our efforts to destroy the Islamic State from afar may similarly spark the
creation of even more jihadist groups.

"I will not commit you . . . to fighting another ground war in Iraq," Obama told
troops at Central Command headquarters this month. I appreciate his desire to do
right by America's military personnel: My husband's boots, like those of so many
other members of the armed forces, have already gathered too much dust in too
many dangerous places, over too many years. Right now, I want those boots to
stay exactly where they are: here, at home.

But I don't want to trade the safety of U.S. troops today for the safety of our
children tomorrow. If Obama's promise of "no boots on the ground" means we'll be
fighting a war of half-measures - a war that won't achieve our objectives and
that may increase the long-term threat - I'm not sure, in the end, that it's a
promise I want him to keep.

Twitter: @brooks_rosa

Read more from Outlook and follow our updates on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


