                             2938 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      October 10, 2014 Friday 3:03 AM EST

Amazon said to plan a bricks-and-mortar store in Manhattan

BYLINE: Sarah Halzack

SECTION: A section; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 480 words


www.Amazon.com is reportedly planning to open its first physical store, a move
that could mark a key strategic shift for a retailer that has been a pioneer of
e-commerce.

The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that Amazon will open a
bricks-and-mortar shop in Midtown Manhattan in time for the holiday shopping
season and that it will be a place for customers to return products, make
exchanges or pick up their online orders.  The Journal's report says it is
possible that the outpost will also act as a showroom for flagship Amazon
products such as the Kindle or the Fire smartphone.

If Amazon opens the store, it would be one of the most vivid examples yet of
retailers' intense focus on implementing what's known an "omnichannel" strategy,
one that relies on both physical and digital presences that are seamlessly
integrated.

E-commerce-only retailers have plenty of cost advantages over bricks-and-mortar
ones, namely that they are able to maintain lower overhead and a smaller labor
force. And yet in the past two years, e-commerce darlings such as Bonobos, Rent
the Runway, Birchbox and BaubleBar have pushed to hawk their goods and promote
their brands in physical shops. These moves, the retailers have said, are an
acknowledgement that for all of e-commerce's convenience and power, the physical
store may still offer customers a unique and important value.  For some items,
it seems, consumers still want to touch them or try them out before committing
to a purchase.

When asked by The Washington Post about the report of a forthcoming store in New
York, an Amazon spokeswoman said in an e-mail, "We have made no announcements
about a location in Manhattan."

Sean Whitehouse, an analyst with retail consultancy Kurt Salmon, said a physical
site could allow Amazon to build a more personal connection with its shoppers.

"It's the customer experience they can offer, like an Apple Store," Whitehouse
said.

Whitehouse also said such an outpost could have logistical benefits, serving as
a convenient place for Amazon to store its inventory for same-day delivery
items.

Amazon has experimented with various physical formats before. It had a pop-up
Kindle shop last year in San Francisco; it has also tested Kindle vending
machines in shopping malls and other locations.

Amazon is also working on a host of new ways to bring its goods to consumers.
In several large cities, it is testing a grocery delivery service known as
Amazon Fresh.  Last holiday season, chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos revealed in
a "60 Minutes" segment that the company is trying out drone technology for
deliveries. (Bezos owns The Washington Post.)

It is not clear whether Amazon may seek to open multiple stores, or how long the
planned New York site that was the subject of the Journal report could be open.

Amazon shares fell 2.3 percent Thursday on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

sarah.halzack@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


