                             294 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     August 27, 2014 Wednesday 3:51 PM EST

Disney filed a patent for 'blimp-sized' puppets controlled by drones. But that
doesn't mean they'll be in parks soon.;
One drone-related patent application is a giant marionette that steps right out
of a nightmare -- before Christmas.

BYLINE: Andrea Peterson

LENGTH: 288 words


Disney's "imagineers" are no strangers to using complex machinery to create
spectacles. And patents filings from last week show the company is interested
exploring drones as a way to spice up events at the company's chain of theme
parks -- including flying screens and "blimp-sized" puppets suspended and
animated by drones.

The puppet patent, titled "Aerial display system with marionettes articulated
and supported by airborne devices" describes huge, potentially modular, figures
that could be manipulated by unmanned aerial systems. It includes the above
example of a giant Jack Skellington marionette that looks like it could have
stepped straight out of a nightmare, before Christmas or otherwise.

Two other patents deal with flying visual displays. One, titled "Aerial display
system with floating projection screens" is pretty self-explanatory. Another is
for an "aerial display system with floating pixels," of "flixels" which would
turn the sky or some other airspace into a display "screen."

But just because Disney patented these drone-driven devices doesn't mean they'll
be used in Disney parks or other venues anytime soon. Companies patent
technologies that never come to fruition all the time, either because they
simply want to lay claim to an idea rather than deploy it or because the
technology turns out to be too complicated or costly to execute at the time.

The Federal Aviation Administration is working on rules for commercial drone
use. While all the patent filings mention the need for safety features, the
manipulation of giant marionettes and droves of flying screens or "flixels" in
close proximity to huge crowds of families seems like exactly the kind of use
that might raise concerns from regulators.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


