                             2927 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 26, 2014 Friday 11:30 PM EST

The enemy of our enemy

BYLINE: Fareed Zakaria

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 800 words


If President Obama truly wants to degrade and destroy the Islamic State, he must
find a way to collaborate with Iran - the one great power in the Middle East
with which the United States is still at odds. Engagement with Iran - while hard
and complicated - would be a strategic game-changer, with benefits spreading
from Iraq to Syria to Afghanistan.

We are now in the air-power phase of the campaign against the Islamic State.
This part usually goes well - think of the air wars against Afghanistan, Iraq
and Libya. The United States has the world's most advanced planes, rockets and
drones, and an extraordinarily capable military. But what follows is usually
messy - think of Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya. Ground forces have to fight locals
and guerrillas in irregular combat. The most important questions turn out to be
political. Are the local groups, tribes and sects fighting with the Americans or
against them? What kind of power-sharing deals need to be in place to get them
to support American efforts?

In Iraq, the central problem remains that the Sunnis do not feel represented in
the Baghdad government. Obama keeps saying that there is a new government in
Iraq, but the implication that it is inclusive is false. Sunnis continue to have
ceremonial posts with little power. The army continues to be dominated by
Shiites at the upper echelons. The result is visible on the ground. A recent
article in  the New York Times pointed out that "after six weeks of American
airstrikes, the Iraqi government's forces have scarcely budged the Sunni
extremists of the Islamic State from their hold on more than a quarter of the
country, in part because many critical Sunni tribes remain on the sidelines."

The United States has some influence with the Iraqi government, but Iran has far
more. The Shiite religious parties that today run the country have been funded
by Iran for decades. Their leaders lived in Tehran and Damascus during their
long exiles from Saddam Hussein's regime. When Washington sought to remove the
previous prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, Iran provided the push that made it
happen. If the goal is to get the Iraqi government to share more power with the
Sunnis, Iran's help would be invaluable, perhaps vital.

In Syria, Washington's strategy is incoherent. It seeks to destroy the Islamic
State there and attack Jabhat al-Nusra and the Khorasan group but somehow not
strengthen these groups' principal rival, the Bashar al-Assad regime. This is
impossible. As these terrorist groups lose ground, the army that will most
easily take advantage will be that of the Syrian regime, not the disorganized
and weak Free Syrian Army. If there is some way to make this strategy less
contradictory, it would be to work toward some power-sharing deal in Syria that
includes elements of the Assad government - such as generals and intelligence
heads. But Washington has no contact or credibility with anyone in the Assad
regime. The government that does is in Tehran.

In Afghanistan, Washington's and Tehran's interests have always coincided. Iran
opposed the Taliban, helped oust it and cooperated with the United States at the
Bonn Conference, held after the fall of the Taliban, to install the new Afghan
government of Hamid Karzai. As Afghanistan faces an uncertain future with a
shaky power-sharing deal, Iran's assistance would be a major stabilizing force.

Engagement with Iran would have to be carefully coordinated with Saudi Arabia
and other Arab states. But now those nations also share a common enemy with Iran
in the Islamic State and groups like it. And engagement will not be a
rapprochement; Iran and the United States have too many issues that divide them,
unless things really change in Tehran.

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani told me this week that, in their phone
conversation last year, he and Obama had agreed "that there were many areas
where Iran and the United States could cooperate" but that "first we must get
past the nuclear issue." I asked him to describe the contours of such
cooperation - assuming that the nuclear deal happened - and he quoted an Iranian
proverb that says roughly, "First take care of the child you have before you
start thinking about the next one."

When Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger decided in the 1970s that Iran would be
one of their "regional policemen," they did so out of recognition of Iran's
geostrategic importance, not simply because they supported the shah. Vali Nasr,
a leading scholar of Iran, told me that if the United States "wants to limit its
micromanagement of the Middle East, it will have to find countries that are
stable, influential and effective with which it can work. And potentially, Iran
is one of those countries." But, as Rouhani made clear, all of this waits on the
nuclear deal.

comments@fareedzakaria.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


