                             2953 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      October 27, 2014 Monday 10:35 PM EST

Robotics company needs advice in branching out beyond Defense Department work

SECTION: ; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 760 words


The entrepreneur

Ben Solomon was pursuing his MBA when he met aerospace engineering PhD student
Mac MacFarlaneat the University of Maryland and teamed with him to start a
business. After many pivots, they found a market to sell computer science and
electrical engineering services to manufacturers that make robotics systems,
including drones and unmanned land and water vehicles. They found a sweet spot
where a lot of mid-size manufacturers don't always have the internal programming
and electrical engineering capacity needed to fulfill contracts. That opened the
door for Solomon and MacFarlane's Hyperion Technologies.

The pitch

Solomon, CEO

"We've been doing this work since May 2013, and we've grown to four people.
We're set to add another two or three full-time employees as we win additional
contracts.

"We try to bring more of a commercial perspective to an industry that doesn't
always think outside the box. We use a lot of open-source tools and
differentiate ourselves by trying to get projects done as quickly as possible,
charging clients by deliverable goals rather than man-hours.

"Because many of the robotics systems we work with are so new, we do have a bit
of a rare expertise in having high-level computer science people who can program
these systems. The skill we bring to the table of being able to insert a brain
in a robot and making it autonomous is still pretty uncommon.

"An example of one of our recent projects is a computer and communications
systems for a company that builds unmanned boats. Hyperion's system takes the
unmanned boats from giant remote-controlled watercraft to vessels that can be
operated and tracked via computer from anywhere in the world.

"Right now, most of our contracts are services for Defense Department robotics
systems. How do we refine our sales process to really cut across markets? Some
of the software and electrical systems used in Defense Department robots are
also used in medical robots and in industrial automation (factory robots). How
do we start to form a plan to expand the segments that we are able to go after?

The advice

Elana Fine, managing director of the Dingman Center for Entrepreneurship at the
University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith School of Business

"It makes a lot of sense to figure out some private-sector opportunities. It
could make you more attractive to some of your Defense Department clients and
help you manage cash flow and increase the stability of your business.

"Pick one or two sectors - perhaps something specific in the medical field or a
specific area of industrial automation, as you said. Pick an area where there is
the easiest application of something you've already done, or a customer that
could be a great reference that would help drive additional customers in those
segments.

"With any new market entry, you have to figure out if it's going to be
worthwhile for you. You're already in a pretty bureaucratic environment, dealing
with Defense Department contracts, so evaluate your strategy based on that.
Consider balancing your portfolio with clients in a market that is not as
regulatory and bureaucratic. For that reason, the health-care industry may not
be the place to start. You could look at expanding to just one player in an
industry, or an industry that is tangential to what you're already doing. For
example, because you're working in the world of Defense Department contracts, is
there anything you can be doing for a company such as Boeing that also does a
lot for Defense Department, but has a large commercial arm as well?

"For a services company looking to morph to a product company, the best time to
invest in product development is when you find a product that resonates with
several customers and can satisfy most customer requirements with little
customization. Use your relationships with multiple customers to figure out
common problems. Keep close tabs on the market to gauge when the demand is
ramping up enough to justify spending the R&D time to develop a product over the
next few years. You never want to be too early or too late to a market. With you
current business, you'll get information to help you time the market."

Reaction

Solomon

"We understand that nobody really wants to be the first customer for a brand new
company, so we have to get the beachhead opportunity and then it will be easier
to build off of that.  It's going to be a learning process for us.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


