                             2954 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      October 27, 2014 Monday 10:47 PM EST

When technology is your temptress, you become the king of the obsolete

BYLINE: Dan Beyers

SECTION: ; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 403 words


I've been doing a little house cleaning lately, marveling at how much stuff I've
accumulated over the years. I'm in one of those transitory phases, where the
kids start to move out and you realize all those boxes of toys and piles of
clothes really just need to go to a good home somewhere.

In the process, though, I've come across drawers and bags and boxes full of
electronic whatnot. A flip phone here, a Palm Pilot there. Wires hopelessly
tangled like a pile of spaghetti. Chargers, computer speakers, coaxial cable,
you name it. This after I've already made a couple trips to the dump recycling
old desktop computers, printers, TiVos and telephone handsets - lots of
handsets.

So much money spent chasing so much stuff that carries almost no value to me
now.

Technology can be a temptress. Everyone seems to want to be digital first these
days. In today's cover story, banks talk about wanting to become technology
companies.

All I can say, be careful what you wish for.

Not everything is doomed to obsolescence. Our commentary this week is about the
transformative power of the LED light. I recognize to make progress, there has
to be a bridge from here to there. At my house, every so often a need arises to
join a forgotten wire with a certain connector. Like a magician, I can reach
into my bag of tricks and produce just what's required to, say, watch a soccer
game being streamed over the Internet on my flat-screen TV.

A month or so ago, one of my boys, in a fit of nostalgia, asked if we still had
any Game Boys lying around, and could we send them to him at college. Not only
did we have some, we had the whole arc: Game Boy,  Game Boy Color, Game Boy
Advance, Nintendo DS and so on. I quickly boxed them up, along with every game
cartridge I could find, and took them to the Post Office, happy they could be
put to use again.

I wish I could say I chased each new iteration out of some noble desire to
contribute to the economic good. But I blame my upbringing. We were the last
house on the block to get  a color TV; we bought our cars used. I resolved to be
an early adopter.

I see the folly, of course, but it's hard to break such hard-wired dispositions.

At a Verizon store recently, I found myself tempted by a small, camera-toting
drone and a gizmo you attach to a golf club that reports on the quality of your
swing.

Show some restraint, I lectured myself.

Wait for the Apple Watch.

daniel.beyers@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


