                             290 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 15, 2014 Tuesday 11:49 AM EST

Israel accepts truce plan; Hamas balks;
The apparent Hamas rejection came just minutes after Israel's security cabinet
decided to embrace terms set forward late Monday night by Egypt's
military-backed government.

BYLINE: William Booth;Griff Witte

LENGTH: 1237 words


GAZA CITY - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday threatened to
escalate Israel's operations in Gaza after Hamas balked at an Egyptian proposal
for a cease-fire, saying it had not been consulted on its terms.

The threat came after Israel's security cabinet voted to accept an initiative
from Egypt's military-backed government that had been announced Monday evening.
Israel suspended its operations in Gaza at 9 a.m. local time, but rocket fire
from militants there continued.

A senior Hamas official, Sami Abu Zuhri, accused Egypt of collaborating with
Israel to spring the proposal on the militant Palestinian Islamist group without
prior warning. He called the proposal "unacceptable" and said Egypt is not a
fair mediator because its government is deeply hostile toward Hamas.

"We are holding in our hands a proposal we got off social media," Zuhri said.
"We refuse to be dealt with in such a way."

The group's armed wing, the Qassam Brigades, wrote on its Web site that the
initiative was "not worth the ink it was written with" and vowed that "the
resistance will continue until all the demands of our people are met."

But Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman Ahmed Badr said Hamas's response was
"unclear," suggesting that the group might still be considering the proposal or
that there were divisions within the organization.

Israel reported at least 35 rockets launched over southern Israel after 9 a.m.
Tuesday, when Israel unilaterally began holding its fire. The attacks prompted
sirens across several towns and cities, but there were no immediate reports of
major damage or injuries.

Netanyahu indicated Tuesday that a Hamas rejection of the Egyptian proposal
would lead to an escalation of a conflict that has already left at least 185
Gazans dead.

"If Hamas rejects the Egyptian proposal and the rocket fire continues, which it
looks like it does at the moment, then we are prepared to continue and intensify
the operation against Hamas, and we will get the support from the members of the
international community," Netanyahu said Tuesday at a news conference at the
Defense Ministry in Tel Aviv.

Israel has called up 40,000 reservists and massed three brigades on the border
with Gaza in anticipation of a possible ground offensive that it has repeatedly
threatened. Former Israeli ambassador to Washington Michael Oren suggested that
a ground invasion could go forward if Hamas does not agree to the Egyptian deal.

"Now Israel has accepted the cease-fire and is willing to go into negotiations,"
Oren said. "If Hamas rejects the public and diplomatic offer there and the
fighting continues, Israel will have the legitimacy to go into Gaza and to
pursue its goal with more force."

But continued defiance was on full display in Gaza, where a salvo of five
rockets was seen streaking toward Israel from the center of the city at 11:15
a.m. local time.

At the Shifa Hospital in Gaza City, the Palestinian Authority's health minister,
who  represents the crumbling "unity government" in the West Bank city of
Ramallah, was turned away Tuesday by an angry crowd ready to throw eggs and
shoes at him. From a loudspeaker at a mosque across the street, a protester
called the minister and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas "traitors"
and "collaborators" for allegedly supporting the cease-fire proposal.

The Hamas government on Tuesday closed its side of the Erez crossing, the only
point for people in Gaza to travel to Israel.

With the Erez passage shut down, and the Gaza crossing into Egypt at Rafah
closed, Gaza is now sealed, with no one able to come or go, including patients
who rely on the Erez crossing to go to Israel for medical treatments. Because of
the Israeli military, Gaza has no airport or seaport.

The Israeli military hit a site earlier this week at Erez because rockets were
being fired at Israel from a nearby launch pad. The sand dunes and agricultural
fields have been a dangerous no-man's land for the past week.

A draft of the Egyptian initiative did not include a detailed plan but called
for a de-escalation by 9 a.m. Tuesday followed by a full truce within 12 hours
of the proposal's "unconditional acceptance" by both sides.

The White House, in response to questions about its role in cease-fire
proposals, said the United States "has been deeply engaged in conversations with
our partners throughout this difficult period, and we will continue doing
everything we can to facilitate a return to the 2012 cease-fire."

National Security Council spokesman Bernadette Meehan said: "We welcome Egypt's
call for a cease-fire and hope this will lead to the restoration of calm as soon
as possible."

As rumors of a cease-fire spread, people in Gaza remained wary. The beach villas
were empty, the farms abandoned and the teeming street life in the northern tier
of the Gaza Strip vanished as fleeing residents left ghost towns behind them.

The tens of thousands of panicked people who fled their homes in the northern
Gaza Strip stayed far away, in shelters or with relatives in the south, after
the Israeli military dropped leaflets Sunday warning that a new, more intense
military operation was imminent.

Over the past seven days, Israel has hit more than 1,470 targets in Gaza. Its
airstrikes have killed 185 people , including 38 children and 27 women,
according to the Gaza health ministry. Another 1,390 were injured.

Hamas and other Islamist militant factions in Gaza have fired more than 1,000
rockets at Israel. Air raid sirens rang over Israel's major cities, including
Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, but the salvos caused only moderate damage and no
fatalities .

The top Hamas leader in Gaza, Ismail Haniyeh, appeared to be preparing
Palestinians for an end to the latest round of violence. In a televised address
Monday night, he thanked the people of Gaza for their suffering and said, "The
problem is not the cease-fire, the problem is the situation in Gaza."

Haniyeh complained that Gaza was living under a state of siege, that the border
crossing into Egypt has been closed, that salaries have not been paid and that
Israel arrested hundreds of Hamas members in a military sweep in the West Bank
last month that followed the abduction and murder of three Israeli teenagers.

Hamas has been promising "a surprise," and on Monday it sent an unmanned aerial
vehicle into Israeli airspace - a first. Israel shot down the drone as it passed
over the southern Israeli city of Ashdod.

Hamas posted on the Internet images and video of another drone flying in the
air, with the sea on its left wing and ground below. This drone had four small
rockets or missiles under its wings.

Hamas said that its engineers have manufactured three types of unmanned
aircraft, including ones that could be used to conduct surveillance, to fire
weapons or to serve as a guided missile - a kind of "suicide" drone.

The claims of armed drones or overflights of Israeli military installations
could not be independently confirmed.

But the first penetration of Israeli airspace by a Hamas drone may signal a new
threat. Tal Inbar, a research leader at Israel's Fisher Institute for Air and
Space Strategic Studies, said that the drone showed in the Hamas video was an
Iranian system with a wingspan of nearly 10 feet.

"You could smuggle it in a couple of crates," Inbar said.

william.booth@washpost.com

griff.witte@washpost.com

Witte reported from Jerusalem. Ruth Eglash contributed to this report from
Jerusalem.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


