                             2934 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       October 5, 2014 Sunday 4:08 AM EST

Qatar's take on foreign policy: Let's be friends

BYLINE: Rajiv Chandrasekaran

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2938 words


DOHA, Qatar - The U.S. military orchestrates the air war over Iraq and Syria
from a hulking command center on the vast al-Udeid Air Base, a Qatari-owned
encampment that is home to 8,000 American military personnel and dozens of Air
Force jets. Giant video screens inside the windowless, two-story structure allow
troops to track every plane and observe live footage from every drone involved
in operations against the Islamic State.

Twenty miles to the northeast, in the heart of this opulent and fast-growing
capital city, the even more gargantuan Grand Mosque has served as a key outpost
for al-Qaeda-linked rebels fighting the Syrian regime. From a pulpit under
ringed chandeliers, several clerics have exhorted the faithful to open their
wallets in support of Syrian resistance groups. Some of the clerics have boasted
of directing money toward Jabhat al-Nusra, which the U.S. government has
classified as a terrorist organization linked to al-Qaeda.

Although Qatari authorities have moved over the past year to crack down on
private donations to Syrian rebels allied with al-Qaeda and the Islamic State,
the government here shows no signs of diminishing its support for Islamist
groups across the Arab world that others in the region have branded as outlaws
and terrorists.

Qatar's strategy of backing Islamists - from Hamas in the Gaza Strip, to the
Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, to hard-line Syrian opposition fighters - while
also offering itself as a key U.S. ally in the volatile Middle East is rooted in
pragmatism: This gas-rich, finger-shaped peninsula that borders Saudi Arabia and
juts into the Persian Gulf wants to protect itself by being friends with
everybody.

"We don't do enemies," Qatar's foreign minister, Khalid bin Mohammed al-Attiyah,
said in a rare interview. "We talk to everyone. We cannot change geography -
this is for sure -  so whoever is in the vicinity of our geography has to be our
close friend."

Attiyah said his nation, which is participating in the U.S.-led coalition to
battle Islamic State militants who have seized large swaths of Iraq and Syria,
is "an ally to counterterrorism." But he also made clear that his government
possesses different criteria for aiding political and resistance movements than
some of its neighbors and its Western friends: "We cannot say everyone who is an
Islamist is a terrorist. No."

The same conciliatory spirit extends to rebels in Libya seeking to topple that
country's democratically elected government, and to Iran, with which Qatar
shares natural-gas fields under the gulf. Instead of joining the strident
rhetoric of its Arab brethren over Tehran's nuclear program, the Qataris have
sought to pursue a more harmonious relationship, even through Iran backs the
government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, which has been battling
militants financed by Doha.

That approach has vexed other nations in the area, including Saudi Arabia,
Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates - which withdrew their ambassadors from
Doha earlier this year - and it has prompted some in Washington to doubt Qatar's
reliability as an ally.

"They're playing a double game," huffed a senior official of a nearby Arab
nation who spoke on the condition of anonymity to avoid exacerbating the
diplomatic feud. "The Qataris are the consummate opportunists."

To the Qatari government, however, it is all about survival. Fearful that the
Muslim Brotherhood, the principal movement of political Islamists, might seek to
establish a foothold in this tiny sheikdom, leaders here cut a deal of sorts two
decades ago: They offered safe haven to Brotherhood members from other
countries, and even doled out financial assistance, in exchange for an implicit
commitment not to interfere in Qatar.

That policy also allowed the Qataris, who wanted to use their wealth to become
more significant players in the Middle East, to step out of Saudi Arabia's
shadow. Instead of relying on their large neighbor to protect them, the Qataris
figured they would forge their own alliances.

"Their model has been to be independent from everyone but also a place for
everyone," said Ibrahim Sharqieh, foreign-policy fellow at the Brookings
Institution's Doha research center.

Although Qatar has a modest contingent of fundamentalist Muslims - they hold
sway over the Islamic-affairs ministry, which invited the radical clerics to
speak at the Grand Mosque - the government's arrangement with the Muslim
Brotherhood does not appear to be rooted in ideology. "It's a political
alliance," said a well-connected Qatari analyst who did not want to be
identified, to avoid jeopardizing his relationships with the ruling family.
"They didn't want to be caught on the wrong side."

The Qatari approach has been grounded in the belief that Arabs in other nations
would eventually seek to displace the autocrats and royal families who have held
sway in the region for decades. And, the Qataris figured, the populations of
those countries would opt to be governed by new leaders who placed Islam at the
forefront of politics.

"In the end of the day, the will of the people will prevail," Attiyah said.
"This we have no doubt about."

The Qataris, however, do not share the same prediction for political
transformation at home. The country is the world's largest exporter of liquefied
natural gas, and those profits have turned this nation into the world's
wealthiest, per capita. Porsches, BMWs and Ferraris ply the newly built
expressways. The corniche is lined with gleaming skyscrapers. Manual labor, from
cleaning to construction, is performed by legions of foreign workers from India,
Bangladesh, Nepal and the Philippines.

Even though the government here is far from democratic - the first general
elections for a "consultative assembly" to advise the emir were planned for last
year but then indefinitely postponed - there appears to be little groundswell
for upending the system. "Everyone is too rich to care," the analyst said.
"Change is something they want to see elsewhere, not at home."

Backing winners

As the Arab Spring dawned in 2011, with popular revolutions toppling strongmen
in Tunisia and Egypt, it looked as if the Qataris had made the right bet back in
1995, when the emir at the time, Sheik Hamad Bin Khalifa al-Thani, set the
nation on its friends-with-everyone approach.

He allowed members of the Muslim Brotherhood and Hamas to set up shop in Doha,
but he also rolled out the welcome mat for the Americans. In 2002, when the U.S.
military decided to begin pulling forces out of Saudi Arabia, he offered his
country as a home for the U.S. Central Command's forward headquarters.

For years, Qatar's neighbors regarded its activities as idiosyncratic but
generally harmless. Egypt, for instance, appeared firmly in the grip of Hosni
Mubarak, despite Qatar's aid to Brotherhood exiles.

Then came the Arab Spring. Mubarak fell, as did the leaders of Tunisia and
Libya.

When the Brotherhood won elections in Tunisia and Egypt, assisted by even more
Qatari largesse, Doha reveled in a smug satisfaction. "Qatar backs winners,"
became a commonly uttered phrase here.

"They saw themselves on the right side of history," said Gerd Nonneman, the dean
of the Doha campus of the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service.

As fellow Sunni Muslims in Syria began to rise up against Assad, Qatar saw
another opportunity to foment change, particularly when it became clear the
United States was not going to intervene. The Doha government began sending tens
of millions of dollars to Syrian rebels through intermediaries in Turkey who
used some of the funds to purchase weapons and other supplies, according to
Western officials familiar with Qatar's activities  who spoke on the condition
of anonymity.

The support had a dramatic impact. Opposition fighters, who also received money
and arms from Saudi Arabia, forced Assad to cede control of substantial parts of
the country.

Qatari officials knew the Syrian resistance was a motley lot, from
secular-leaning exiles to extremists allied with al-Qaeda. The Qataris opted to
fund groups that it believed leaned slightly to the religiously hard-line side,
reasoning that they would have the best chance of rallying popular support.

But some of the clerics allowed to preach in the Grand Mosque wanted to go even
further. They urged Qatari citizens to throw their money behind Jabhat al-Nusra,
also known as the al-Nusra Front.

Among them was a Kuwaiti named Hamid Hamad Hamid al-Ali, who has referred to
himself as an "al-Qaeda commando," according to the U.S. Treasury Department,
and had boasted of collecting money for al-Qaeda and Jabhat al-Nusra. Ali
traveled to Qatar in June 2013 to endorse a fundraising drive for jihadist
militias in Syria.

"This is a renowned and well-known campaign," he said in a speech that was
recorded and uploaded to YouTube. "Its activities are also clear, and the
mujahideen internally as well speak of their work in terms of what they provide
in support."

At the end of his speech, viewers were provided with an account number at the
Qatar Islamic Bank to which they were urged to contribute. A Qatari who ran the
fund drive, Saad bin Saad al-Kaabi, subsequently posted a tweet to encourage his
friends to contribute. "Your brothers are in dire need of weapons and ammunition
more than food," he wrote.

Two months later, Kaabi's campaign posted a video of fighters next to a piece of
antiaircraft artillery. They thanked their Qatari patrons "who have gratefully
supported us in purchasing this artillery."

Mixing in the gray areas

Then, just as quickly as Qatar piled up the wins, it saw its victories slip
away. The Brotherhood figure elected president of Egypt, Mohamed Morsi,
struggled to become an effective leader and eventually was deposed by the
military. Libya descended into factional fighting among rival militias. And the
Syrian rebels began to turn on one another.

Some of the resistance units that had received official Qatari aid started to
ally themselves with Jabhat al-Nusra. The principal beneficiary of the tumult
was the hyper-extremist Islamic State, whose ranks swelled with new recruits,
allowing the group to outmuscle others in Syria and then surge into Iraq.

Attiyah, the Qatari foreign minister, said the government has not supported the
Islamic State. Senior U.S. officials said they possess no information to suggest
otherwise.

But U.S. officials and independent analysts who track the conflict in Syria say
Qatar's approach to funding the resistance has been sloppy and unsophisticated.
The reliance on Turkish middlemen and Syrian facilitators almost certainly has
resulted in money and arms getting into the hands of Jabhat al-Nusra fighters or
those allied with them. The Qataris "have very limited experience and capacity
to effectively manage an endeavor of this scope," said a U.S. official involved
in Syria policy.

The groups the Qataris chose to support have prompted further concern in
Washington and allied capitals. Among them has been a band of fighters called
Ahrar al-Sham, which has fought in alliance with Jabhat al-Nusra.

"They're always one step away from guys we don't like," said Michael Stephens,
the deputy director of the Doha office of the Royal United Services Institute, a
British research organization. "That's the problem with the Qataris in Syria:
They mix in the gray areas."

The Qataris also moved slowly to crack down on private donations to Jabhat
al-Nusra  and other extremist resistance groups, according to Western officials
who follow terrorism financing. The government here began to restrict funding
last year after repeated entreaties from the United States and European nations.

Attiyah acknowledged that his government does not always agree with the United
States and its European allies about which Syrian opposition groups should be
deemed moderate, but he also blamed the radicalization of the resistance on
Western inattention to the crisis.

"We wasted maybe 21 / 2 years classifying people," Attiyah said. At the start of
the conflict, he said, his nation had categorized groups as green, amber and
red, based on their connection to extremist organizations. Now, however, "when
we went back to the green ones, they are already red. They didn't have means to
defend themselves. They didn't have salaries. They didn't have anything. And
they have been attracted by the terrorists."

Proxy war

For Qatar's neighbors, its activities in Syria do not elicit the same concern as
in Washington or European capitals. In Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE, the
anger is focused on Qatar's role in Egypt and Libya.

Instead of acknowledging defeat after Morsi's ouster in Egypt, Arab officials
contend Qatar has continued to assist Egyptian members of the Brotherhood, which
the country's new government has designated as a terrorist organization, as have
Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Attiyah said his country seeks to help "the people of
Egypt," but he insisted that Qatar does not meddle in Egyptian politics.

In Libya, Qatar is backing Islamist militiamen who have seized large sections of
the capital, Tripoli, and are battling an anti-Islamist faction backed by Egypt
and the UAE.

In recent weeks, the fighting has spiraled into a proxy war. In late August, the
UAE sent fighter jets to assist the Egyptians in bombing the Qatari-supported
militia. A few weeks later, Libyan officials accused Qatar of flying multiple
planeloads of supplies to its militiamen.

Attiyah said his nation is not interfering in the internal politics of Libya.
Asked specifically about the resupply flights, he responded, "Did we bomb with
our planes?"

For Qatar, the dispute with its neighbors over Egypt and Libya involves a
fundamental difference over the role of political Islam in the Arab world. Saudi
Arabia and the UAE oppose any Qatari efforts to promote the Muslim Brotherhood
or other groups of political Islamists, viewing all of them as a threat to
regional stability. To the Qataris, however, Islamists cannot be crammed back
into the genie's bottle by authoritarian regimes. It is better, the Qataris
believe, to work with them.

In part to appease its neighbors, however, the government here recently
requested that seven Brotherhood leaders leave the country. Attiyah said the
move does not indicate a change of policy. If members want to engage in politics
in another nation, he said, they need to do it from elsewhere. But if they do
not, he said, "we provide safe haven."

A closer relationship

These days, al-Udeid Air Base is a frenzy of activity, and not just on the
flight line, where rows of KC-135 tankers prepare to take off for 12-hour loops
over the Persian Gulf to refuel fighters streaking toward Iraq and Syria. The
rest of the sprawling, sand-swept base is just as busy - with construction.

Since it set up shop on Udeid, the U.S. military has housed personnel in tents
and trailers. Flight squadrons have worked out of hastily assembled metal
buildings. The encampment had a transient feel, as if it could be packed up and
shut down as fast as a demobilized base in Afghanistan.

To the Qataris, that sent the wrong message, so they asked the Americans to
build - and helped to pay for - rows of new concrete-walled buildings, including
comfortable living quarters and recreation facilities.

"It's an expression of commitment," said Col. Steven DeSordi, the staff director
of the 379th Air Expeditionary Wing, the principal U.S. Air Force unit on the
base.

The construction is the most visible indication of a military relationship that
is drawing closer. In December, the United States and Qatar agreed on a new
defense cooperation agreement. Although the terms are confidential, people
familiar with it say the deal gives the United States latitude to use the
facility for a wide range of operations without seeking prior approval from the
Qataris. "It's like being in the States," an Arab official familiar with the
terms said.

This July, the Qataris agreed to purchase $11 billion worth of U.S. arms,
including two dozen AH-64 Apache attack helicopters and 34 Patriot missile
launchers. For Qatar, which used to buy most of its weapons from other nations,
the sale represented a new desire to collaborate with the U.S. military beyond
the use of two bases. The acquisition of those weapons systems will lead to
joint training and more integrated military exercises.

"This opens the door to an even closer strategic relationship with them," said a
senior U.S. defense official.

But the Qataris have made it clear that they want equal say in defining the
terms of the friendship. When the Obama administration asked them to join with
the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Jordan in the coalition to counter the Islamic State,
Doha consented. It launched French-made Mirage fighters, but the Qataris did not
join the other three Arab countries in dropping bombs. Instead, the Qataris flew
air defense patrols in support of the initial rounds of airstrikes.

"They want to participate, but they want to do it own their own terms," a senior
U.S. military officer said.

When the U.S. military needed an intermediary to take temporary custody of five
Taliban leaders released from the Guantanamo Bay detention facility in Cuba in
exchange for U.S. Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl this year, Qatar was the one nation on
which the Taliban and the Americans could agree.

"Washington may not like everything we do, but we have been there to help again
and again," the well-connected Qatari analyst said. "You need a friend who is
friends with people you don't want to be friends with."

rajiv.chandrasekaran@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


