                             297 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 2, 2014 Thursday 12:23 PM EST

Man arrested for shooting down a neighbor's drone;
If it were over the shooter's own land, would this be legitimate defense against
trespass? Even if it weren't on the shooter's land, but it was apparently
photographing into the shooter's home or fenced-off property, would it be
legitimate defense against the tort of "intrusion upon seclusion"?

BYLINE: Eugene Volokh

LENGTH: 570 words


CBS Philadelphia reports that, "[a] New Jersey man was arrested" - for
"Possession of a Weapon for an Unlawful Purpose and Criminal Mischief" - "after
police say he shot down a neighbor's remote control drone." The drone was
apparently over his neighbor's land, but what if it had been over the shooter's
land? Would it be illegal property damage - or lawful defense against trespass?

Even nondeadly force against people is allowed to prevent trespass, if it's
"reasonable"; as the Restatement (Second) of Torts puts it:

An actor is privileged to use reasonable [nondeadly] force, ... to prevent or
terminate another's intrusion upon the actor's land ..., if the actor reasonably
believes that the intrusion can be prevented or terminated only by the force
used, and ... the actor reasonably believes that a request [to desist] will be
useless or that substantial harm will be done before it can be made.

It seems then that force exerted only on objects would likewise be allowed in
such situations if it's "reasonable." Indeed, a separate provision specifically
says that reasonable force that may damage property is sometimes allowed to
protect one's land:

[O]ne is privileged to commit an act which would otherwise be a trespass to a
chattel ... if the act ... is reasonably believed to be ... necessary to protect
the actor's land or chattels or his possession of them, and the harm inflicted
is not unreasonable as compared with the harm threatened.

And an overflight may be a trespass to land - and thus a potential justification
for the use of nondeadly force - if the aircraft "enters into the immediate
reaches of the air space next to the land, and ... interferes substantially with
the other's use and enjoyment of his land." And criminal law rules are generally
similar; indeed, the relevant New Jersey statute provides, in relevant part,
that "Conduct involving the appropriation, seizure or destruction of, damage to,
intrusion on, or interference with, property is justifiable under circumstances
which would establish a defense of privilege in a civil action."

Yet is force that damages a potentially quite valuable piece of machinery
reasonable? Is the interference of an overflying drone with one's use and
enjoyment of land "substantial," and should shooting down the drone be seen as
"necessary to protect the actor's land ... or his possession of [the land]"? The
chief threat wouldn't be of physical damage to land, but of interference with
privacy - should that count for defense-of-property purposes? What if the drone
weren't over the shooter's land, but was instead over a public street, but
apparently photographing into the shooter's home (if one can tell such a thing)
or into the shooter's fenced-off swimming pool deck? Would the shooter still
have a defense for using force purely to protect privacy (e.g., to prevent the
tort of intrusion upon seclusion), even in the absence of a trespass)?

Very interesting questions, which I thought I'd just flag here now. (Note that
the Restatement is a distillation of the common-law rules, not a statute; the
case law is thus free to evolve by analogy, as incidents involving drones
arise.) I'm delighted to say, though, that Prof. Michael Froomkin (Miami) will
be guest-blogging about these very issues today or Friday; he is the co-author
of a new article that is all about Self-Defense Against Robots.

Thanks to my colleague Richard Re for the pointer.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


