                             2915 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                    September 13, 2014 Saturday 2:36 AM EST

U.S.: Turkey to help in Islamic State [#xfb01]ght

BYLINE: Anne Gearan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 959 words


ANKARA, TURKEY - Turkey will be an important part of the international military
and diplomatic coalition fighting Islamic State militants, whether or not the
Muslim nation on Syria's border makes public declarations of support or allows
American warplanes to use its bases, U.S. officials said Friday.

Secretary of State John F. Kerry courted Turkish leaders one day after Turkey
abstained from a declaration of support for the campaign signed by Arab
diplomats in Saudi Arabia. An unidentified Turkish official was widely quoted
this week as saying Turkey would not allow military bases on its territory to be
used for airstrikes in Syria or Iraq.

Kerry said it is "premature" to discuss Turkey's role or the precise commitments
of any nation as an international coalition forms to confront the militants.

"Within the coalition, there are many ways Turkey can help," Kerry told
reporters after a day of discussions in the Turkish capital. "We will continue
our conversations with our military and other experts to define the specific
role that Turkey will play."

Turkey does not publicly acknowledge that unarmed U.S. surveillance drones are
flown over Iraq from Incirlik Air Base, where a U.S. Air Force wing is based.
Turkey refused a U.S. request to use its territory as a base for operations
during the Iraq war.

Kerry announced that retired Marine Gen. John R. Allen will become President
Obama's special envoy for the global coalition launched this week with Obama's
pledge to defeat the Islamic State. Allen is a longtime Middle East expert and
troubleshooter whose last military assignment was command of international
forces in Afghanistan. Reporting to Kerry, he will match requirements of the
campaign against the militants with potential contributors, the State Department
said.

The military portion of the campaign against the Islamic State would be hobbled
without help from Turkey. The NATO member borders Syria and Iraq to their north,
and it is a transit route for foreigners seeking to join the fight and for oil
commandeered by militants to come out to market. Turkey's strategic importance
is clear from the fact that Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel visited three days
before Kerry , carrying the same message.

However, nearly 50 Turkish diplomats and staffers have been held hostage since
Islamic State militants overran the Turkish Consulate in Mosul, Iraq, in June,
complicating Turkey's response to the crisis and potentially delaying any
statement of support for U.S. and other efforts. Turkish President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan has warned against jeopardizing any effort to win the release of his
country's diplomats.

Still, the militant network is a growing threat to Turkey, and leaders of the
Muslim-majority nation support the international effort, U.S. officials said
ahead of Kerry's visit.

U.S. airstrikes already underway in Iraq are expected to be expanded to Syria, a
haven for the militants, but thus far, no other nation has publicly pledged to
send its own planes. Britain, whose participation in the Iraq war was hugely
unpopular at home, gave conflicting statements this week about its willingness
to take part in airstrikes in Syria. U.S. officials have said they need more
help in the region with refueling of aircraft, airlifting of equipment and
supplies, and providing help to moderate Syrian rebel groups.

U.S. officials have complained that Turkey does too little to police its porous
border with Syria, allowing untold thousands of fighters from Europe and North
Africa to cross over, along with supplies. "There's been improvement, but
additional improvement needs to be made," one senior State Department official
said Friday.

That official and others traveling with Kerry spoke on the condition of
anonymity to discuss sensitive diplomacy. They highlighted newly released
Turkish statistics saying that some 6,000 people were denied entry into Turkey
because of suspicions that they were traveling to join the fight. Turkey says an
additional 1,000 were recently deported. Turkey also detained a Frenchman
suspected of being a top recruiter of foreign fighters and turned him over to
French authorities this week.

"Obviously, there are some sensitivities that Turkey has, and we are cognizant
of that and respect that," one State Department official said. "But they are an
important counterterrorism partner, and that's why we have certainly had an
uptick in our meetings and engagements with them."

Turkey and the United States had given each other the diplomatic cold shoulder
for more than a year over differences including U.S. concerns about Erdogan's
increasingly antidemocratic shift while he was prime minister and his hostile
language about Israel. The United States has said little about Erdogan's recent
remark that Israel behaved "like Hitler" in the Gaza Strip during its seven-week
war with Hamas this summer but snubbed the Turkish president by sending no
Washington officials to his inauguration in August.

Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu shook hands with Kerry for news
cameras and warmly welcomed him to Ankara, but he made no promises of Turkish
support and took no questions. Reporters were kept away from Kerry's other
meetings, including with Erdogan.

Also Friday, the United States pledged nearly $500 million in additional
humanitarian aid for refugees and other victims of the Syrian civil war, marking
a significant boost in U.S. relief funding in the region. The United Nations
estimates that nearly 3 million people have fled Syria during more than three
years of fighting. Millions more have been displaced inside Syria.

The commitment brings total U.S. humanitarian spending to roughly $3 billion
since the start of the conflict in March 2011.

anne.gearan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


