                             2920 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 19, 2014 Friday 12:25 AM EST

Terry Gilliam's low-flying circus

BYLINE: Ann Hornaday

SECTION: ; Pg. T38

LENGTH: 548 words


From its first fantastical moments, "The Zero Theorem" makes clear that it's a
Terry Gilliam invention.

This speculative parable stars Christoph Waltz as a drone working for a vast
corporation called Mancon, at a time in the not-too-distant future when culture
and civilization have devolved into machinations for amusing ourselves to death.
Waltz's character, Qohen Leth, spends all day in front of a computer, nervously
waiting for a phone call he's convinced will finally tell him the purpose of
life.

Mancon's chief poohbah, a silver-haired chameleon named Management (Matt Damon,
occasionally disappearing into his role) has other ideas, and transfers the
unhappy Qohen to a high-end side project whose aim is to prove that, finally,
all of life adds up to nothing. In between visits with his online therapist
(Tilda Swinton, channeling her hilarious "Snowpiercer" persona) and a sunny sex
worker named Bainsley (Mélanie Thierry), Qohen frets in the abandoned church he
inhabits, agonizing over his fate and a cold, indifferent universe.

Gilliam fans will most likely consider "The Zero Theorem" a minor work compared
with the filmmaker's similarly themed magnum opus, "Brazil." But this production
has its modest charms, most obviously in Gilliam's singular, still wildly
liberated, visual imagination: His Skittles-colored future is a place that whips
horror and fancy into a diabolical confection of futuristic Victoriana. Waltz,
his head and eyebrows shaved for maximum monkish asceticism, skillfully embodies
Gilliam's twin animating moods of whimsy and unease, and Thierry is positively
incandescent as Bainsley, who changes personae at the lascivious drop of a latex
nurse's hat.

Still, "The Zero Theorem" doesn't fully earn the elaborately conceived
scaffolding on which its relatively tame ideas are hoisted. Cosmic existential
despair feels too well-plumbed a cinematic subject to seem new or genuinely
daring. Its most rewarding moments are to be found in fleeting bits of observant
humor, like a party hosted by Qohen's boss (the antically funny David Thewlis)
where everyone's dancing with their own iPhones, or this Woody Allen-worthy
exchange: "How can you live with that much nothingness?" "One day at a time."

To his credit, Gilliam infuses even the most grim fatalism of "The Zero Theorem"
with a heartening dose of humanistic grace. If the film has a Greek chorus, it's
the collection of cardboard boxes that appears over the course of several
scenes; look closely, and you'll see that they've been stamped "Be Gentle."
Words to live by, and maybe even survive what one character aptly calls the
Zip-T heebie-jeebies.

ann.hornaday@washpost.com

½

R. At AFI Silver. Contains some nudity, sexuality and profanity. 106 minutes.

BioPage
http://www.www.washingtonpost.com/people/ann-hornaday
Description                                               Movie Name
The Zero Theorem                                 Movie Website
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2333804/?ref_=nv_sr_1
Stars for this movie             1.5

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


