                             2931 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     October 1, 2014 Wednesday 12:23 AM EST

U.S., Afghanistan sign security agreement

BYLINE: Sudarsan Raghavan;Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1109 words


KABUL - The United States and Afghanistan on Tuesday signed a vital,
long-delayed security deal that will allow nearly 10,000 American troops to
remain in Afghanistan beyond the final withdrawal of U.S. and international
combat forces this year.

The Bilateral Security Agreement (BSA), and a separate pact signed with NATO,
permit the continued training and advising of Afghan security forces, as well as
counterterrorism operations against remnants of al-Qaeda. The signing of the
documents comes as Taliban insurgents are increasing their attacks in an effort
to regain control in anticipation of the combat troops' departure.

The accord was signed a day after Ashraf Ghani was sworn in as Afghanistan's new
president in a power-sharing government, marking the first democratic handover
of power in the nation's history. Ghani's predecessor, Hamid Karzai, who had
presided over the country since shortly after the Taliban was driven from power
in 2001, had refused to sign the agreement, souring relations with Washington.

President Obama called it a "historic day" and said in a statement that the
signing came after "nearly two years of hard work by negotiating teams on both
sides." Critics, particularly Republican lawmakers, have charged that the
failure to negotiate a similar agreement in Iraq that would have allowed U.S.
troops to stay in that country contributed to the rise of the threat from
Islamic State militants there.

Although Obama had considered a complete withdrawal from Afghanistan, he
announced in May that up to 9,800 U.S. troops would remain, provided that the
agreement was signed, until the end of 2015. The accord allows U.S. basing at
nine separate locations across Afghanistan.

The troop number is to be cut in half by 2016, with American forces thereafter
based only in Kabul and at Bagram air base. By the end of 2017, the U.S. force
is to be further reduced in size to what U.S. officials have called a "normal"
military advisory component at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, most likely numbering
several hundred.

The agreement also prevents U.S. military personnel from being prosecuted under
Afghan laws for any crimes they may commit; instead, the United States has
jurisdiction over any criminal proceedings or disciplinary action involving its
troops inside the country. The provision does not apply to civilian contractors.

The NATO agreement, closely coordinated with the U.S. document, ensures that
troops from countries including Germany and Italy will also stay, although in
much smaller numbers.

State Department officials in Washington did not specify the scope and nature of
the ongoing counterterrorism operations, which are to be conducted in
partnership with Afghan forces. A number of al-Qaeda operatives have been
ensconced for some time in the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan near the
Pakistani border.

The officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity under conditions imposed
by the administration, declined to comment on the future of separate U.S. drone
strikes, conducted by the CIA from bases in Afghanistan, that continue to target
al-Qaeda fighters and other militants in western Pakistan.

U.S. funding for Afghanistan - up to $8 billion annually for military and other
assistance for at least the next three years - was heavily dependent on approval
of the BSA.

U.S. and international combat forces, now numbering about 40,000, have been
gradually withdrawing as the December deadline approaches; international forces
turned over complete security responsibility to Afghanistan in June 2013. The
State Department officials said that the extent to which the United States will
contribute "enablers," including logistical support, to the Afghan military was
still under discussion but that any agreement would come under Obama's 9,800
cap.

Tuesday's signing took place at the presidential palace compound in central
Kabul. The BSA was signed by U.S. Ambassador James B. Cunningham and Afghan
national security adviser Mohammad Hanif Atmar inside a hall with a glittering
chandelier and portraits of Afghanistan's leaders over several centuries.

In the audience were Ghani and his former political rival Abdullah Abdullah, who
is now the chief executive of the unity government. After months of political
tensions over a disputed vote, both men agreed to share power after a compromise
deal was brokered by the United States, staving off the threat of ethnic rifts
and violence.

In remarks after the signing, Ghani assured dignitaries, as well as Afghans
watching the nationally televised ceremony, that the BSA would not violate the
country's sovereignty and laws. He also assured Afghanistan's neighbors that the
extended presence of U.S. troops would pose no threat to them.

"I assure the nation that these agreements are in our national interest," Ghani
said. "If needed, these agreements can change with the consideration of the
interests of both sides."

A Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, declared the security pact an attempt by
the United States to assert its authority over Afghanistan and its people.

But tribal leaders in areas targeted by the Taliban said Tuesday that they
welcomed the accord and that they hoped it would deliver a blow to the resurgent
militants, as well as to what they described as meddling by neighboring Pakistan
and Iran.

"If the United States is honest with the security agreement with Afghanistan,
the security agreement means prosperity for the Afghans and a heavy slap on the
faces of Taliban, Pakistan and Iran," said Haji Matu Khan, a tribal elder of the
Marja district in volatile Helmand province.

On the streets of Kabul, Afghans expressed mixed feelings about a continuing
U.S. troop presence.

"Signing the BSA is in the interest of Afghanistan. It will prevent civil war,"
said Abdul Wahid Frogh, 28, a government employee. "From an economic
perspective, the BSA will help Afghanistan attract aid and financial
cooperation. As well, the BSA assures Afghan people that the international
community will not let us go forward on our own, and this assurance will lead to
an economic boom."

But others were concerned about an ongoing presence and said Afghanistan had no
choice but to sign the pact.

"If we don't sign the BSA, our forces won't be paid. If our forces are not paid,
they don't fight the Taliban. If they don't fight, the Taliban will be back,"
said Mohammad Sediq, 41, a schoolteacher. "But the presence of foreign troops
under the BSA shouldn't be for a long time, because Afghans can't tolerate
foreign forces here for a long time."

sudarsan.raghavan@washpost.com

DeYoung reported from Washington. Sharif Hassan contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


