                             300 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 12, 2014 Thursday 4:00 AM EST

Reported drones kill 16 in Pakistan

BYLINE: Haq Nawaz Khan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 357 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan - Local officials said two suspected U.S. drone strikes in a
troubled northwest tribal district of Pakistan  killed 16 people Wednesday and
early Thursday. If confirmed, these would be the first U.S. drone strikes in the
country in six months.

The missile attacks came three days after a bloody raid by the Pakistani Taliban
on Karachi's international airport that left 36 dead, including the 10 gunmen.
That brazen assault has increased pressure on the Pakistani government to launch
a full-fledged offensive against militants in North Waziristan, a lawless area
said to be a haven for local and foreign militants linked to al-Qaeda.

Pakistani officials had asked for a suspension of the U.S. drone campaign last
fall when it began peace talks with the Pakistani Taliban. The last known
American drone strike was Dec. 25.

Security officials from Miran Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, said six
suspected militants were killed by missiles fired by an unmanned spy plane in
the Darga Mandi area Wednesday evening.

"The missiles struck a house and a nearby vehicle that were believed to be of
suspected militants," an intelligence official from the region said by phone,
speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to
journalists.

Early Thursday, eight missiles were fired on a compound in Dande Darpa Khel near
Miran Shah, killing 10 suspected militants and wounding four others, according
to an intelligence official and state-run Pakistani radio.

A CIA spokesman in Washington declined to comment on the reports.

It was not clear whether the U.S. strikes might have been requested by the
Pakistani government. Pakistani authorities have been quick to condemn past
drone attacks, saying they violated the country's sovereignty. But on Wednesday,
there was no immediate comment by the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.

The pause in the CIA's drone campaign had been the longest since a six-week lull
in 2011, after a U.S. air assault that mistakenly killed 24 Pakistani soldiers
at a border post.

foreign@washpost.com

Greg Miller in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


