                             305 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Asia Air Show, Plenty of Competition for Sales of Drones

BYLINE: By JOE COCHRANE

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 965 words


SINGAPORE -- While the supersonic jets, attack helicopters and surface-to-air
missiles longer than a stretch limousine wowed an estimated 80,000 people who
attended the final days of the Singapore Airshow over the weekend, it was a
small, silent and unarmed weapon that took center stage as major players in the
Southeast Asia weapons market hawked their wares.

Military contractors from Austria, Australia, Israel, the United States and
other countries showcased unmanned aerial vehicles, or U.A.V.s, throughout the
week here at Asia's largest air show, hoping to make deals with militaries
across the Asia-Pacific region. The drones themselves can cost several hundred
thousand dollars, and high-end systems can cost as much as $20 million.

Although the United States has used the American-made Predator to launch missile
strikes in Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan and Yemen, unarmed versions of the craft
are looking increasingly attractive for both military and civilian uses, experts
say.

This is especially true in Southeast Asia, given issues like territorial
disputes in the South China Sea, maritime piracy and terrorism.

''With all that's happening with the Chinese, pirates, Islamic extremists, it
brings new capabilities for different kinds of problems,'' said Dan Ze'evi, a
retired military officer who is director of marketing communications and
information for Israel Military Industries. Although the company did not have
any drones for sale at the air show, two other Israeli manufacturers, Israel
Aerospace Industries and Elbit Systems, had systems on display.

Military contractors say the U.A.V.s can be used watching naval movements around
disputed areas, monitoring land and maritime borders, and guarding natural
resources and vital infrastructure like oil and natural gas fields and
pipelines, as well as for civilian tasks like detecting forest fires and damage
from natural disasters.

''Given the disputes in the Spratly Islands, piracy, counterterrorism, illegal
logging and fishing, there is a market,'' said Douglas Dawson, director of
international business development for the Aero Services Division of General
Atomics, which produces the multimillion-dollar MQ-1 Predator. Nations including
China, Vietnam and the Philippines stake claims to the Spratly Islands, which
lie in the South China Sea.

''We think there is a requirement in this region,'' Mr. Dawson added, noting
that he had met during the air show with military delegations from around Asia,
as well as the Middle East. He said he planned to meet this week with officials
of Indonesia's Ministries of Defense and State-Owned Enterprises and with
private energy companies in Jakarta, Indonesia's capital.

All told, $32 billion worth of commercial deals were announced during the
six-day trade portion of the show, the event's organizers said on Friday. But
that did not include sales of weaponry, whose deals were not publicly announced.
Experts said Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand were seen as
the biggest potential customers for military hardware and systems upgrades at
the show.

Industry players said there was no shortage of interest among Asian military
delegations looking for advanced weapon systems or to upgrade existing ones.

BAE Systems Inc., the American subsidiary of the British arms company BAE
Systems P.L.C., is now the only company qualified to upgrade the F-16 fighter
jet, aside from its manufacturer, Lockheed Martin, said Brian W. Krauss, the
director of business development for aerospace solutions for the American unit
of BAE.

The British company recently announced an agreement to upgrade more than 130
South Korean F-16s, a deal that news media reports said could be worth more than
$1 billion.

''It's a wide market, especially countries in the region'' like Indonesia,
Singapore and South Korea, whose militaries rely heavily on the F-16, Mr. Krauss
said, adding that most countries did not have the ability to do upgrades
themselves.

In addition, most countries lack the expertise and infrastructure within their
domestic arms industries to produce many of the weapons systems they need,
analysts say, which makes looking abroad a necessity.

Previously limited by export control restrictions under the Missile Technology
Control Regime -- an international agreement intended to prevent the global
spread of missile-based weapons delivery systems -- General Atomics received
permission from the United States to sell an unarmed version of the Predator
abroad, the Predator XP, Mr. Dawson said. Last year, it announced its first sale
of an undisclosed number of the aircraft to the United Arab Emirates for $197
million.

For its part, China promoted its homegrown drone, the Wing Loong, with a small
display model and showed off models of its JF-17 Thunder single-engine fighter
jet and an attack helicopter, all of which it is trying to export. No actual
Chinese aircraft or full-scale mock-ups were on display.

Despite China's trying to establish itself as a competitor in the global weapons
market, the development of its advanced fighter aircraft remains shrouded in
secrecy. There were only about 20 Chinese companies at the air show, compared
with 173 American companies, many from the military industry, and actual United
States military and commercial aircraft on display included the V-22 Osprey
tilt-rotor craft, C-17 Globemaster transport plane, numerous U.A.V.s and the
Boeing 787 Dreamliner.

Asked whether China was having success in making sales, given the size of its
delegation and its model-only displays, one member of the American delegation
said, half-jokingly, ''Well, they're trying.''

The delegate, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity
of the issue, added: ''Everyone is trying to sell. Us, the French and everyone
else.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/17/business/international/competition-fierce-for-
sales-of-unarmed-drones.html

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An IAI Heron 1 drone, developed by an Israeli firm and operated
by the Singapore Air Force, on display at the Singapore Airshow. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
JOSEPH NAIR/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


