                             307 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 6, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judicial Nominee's Memos on Drones Stirring Bipartisan Concern in the Senate

BYLINE: By JEREMY W. PETERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 698 words


WASHINGTON -- President Obama's choice for a powerful appeals court appointment
is in peril from both the left and the right, highlighting how the fraught
politics of an election year are threatening the president's agenda even among
his allies on Capitol Hill.

The nomination of David Barron, who was a Justice Department lawyer at the start
of the administration and is now a Harvard Law School professor, is mired in a
maw of contentious issues. Republicans object to what they say are his radically
liberal views on the Constitution. Democrats in conservative-leaning states,
especially those who are up for re-election, are wary that a vote for him might
backfire with voters at home. And members of both parties say they are disturbed
by Mr. Barron's authorship of legal memos that justified the United States'
killing of an American citizen overseas with a drone.

The American Civil Liberties Union wrote to all 100 senators on Monday urging
them to put off a vote on Mr. Barron's confirmation until the White House
allowed them to read all of his writings on the drone program.

A senior White House official said that it was trying to resolve any issues in
the Senate so that Mr. Barron could be confirmed -- a step that will delay the
final vote -- and that the administration would not push the nomination any
further until it had come to a decision about how it could make some of Mr.
Barron's work available to the senators who wish to review it.

Mr. Barron, chosen by the president last year for a vacancy on the United States
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, needs 51 votes, meaning only a handful
of Democrats, who control 55 seats, could defect. The majority leader, Harry
Reid, has not decided whether he will proceed with a vote given the uncertainty,
a spokesman said Monday.

The A.C.L.U.'s objections, along with the announcement by Senator Rand Paul,
Republican of Kentucky, that he would use his power to slow down the
confirmation unless the administration released one of the legal memos written
by Mr. Barron, raised fresh questions on Capitol Hill on Monday about whether
the nomination would survive.

Last year, Mr. Paul delivered a 13-hour speech on the floor of the Senate
demanding that the White House disclose more information about its legal
justification for drone attacks.

Mr. Barron's nomination never sat particularly well with conservatives. During
his confirmation hearing, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas summed up the difficulty
many on the right had supporting him, saying he doubted whether someone with
such ''a progressive view of the Constitution'' could serve on the federal
bench. But Democrats, initially at least, voiced little objection, and he
received the support of his home state senator, Elizabeth Warren of
Massachusetts.

The wariness of Democrats, and the willingness of some to buck their president,
began to surface publicly on Monday.

Two Democrats who are up for re-election in states where Republicans have a
political edge -- Mark Begich of Alaska and Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana -- are
said to be unsure if they will vote yes on Mr. Barron.

A court has ordered the administration to release some of Mr. Barron's legal
work as part of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit. But White House lawyers
have not done so while they weigh whether to appeal. Senator Mark Udall, a
Colorado Democrat who is in a tight race, said Monday that he would vote no
unless the White House released what the court ordered.

''Unless the White House complies, I cannot support David Barron's nomination,''
he said.

Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon and one of the senators who have voiced
deep concern over the secrecy of the administration's drone policy, said Monday
that he had agreed that the vote on Mr. Barron should not move forward until
senators could see more of the secret legal opinions that the nominee produced
at the Justice Department.

Mr. Wyden added that he was also not committed to voting yes.

''Certainly the opinion would not be something I would have written. The
question is: Is it disqualifying,'' he said, adding that the administration
should start the process of releasing the memos. ''It needs to be addressed
before a vote.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/06/us/politics/judicial-nominees-memos-on-
drones-stirring-bipartisan-concern-in-the-senate.html

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above, Senator Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, is up for
reelection and said to be wavering on David Barron's nomination as a judge.
Left, Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, wants the administration to
release one of Mr. Barron's memos. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GABRIELLA DEMCZUK/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)
 David Barron  in 2007.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


