                             306 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senate Drops Bid to Report on Drone Use

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 438 words


WASHINGTON -- The Senate has quietly stripped a provision from an intelligence
bill that would have required President Obama to make public each year the
number of people killed or injured in targeted killing operations in Pakistan
and other countries where the United States uses lethal force.

The move highlights the continued resistance inside the government about making
these operations, primarily carried out using armed drones, more accountable to
public scrutiny. In a letter to the Senate earlier this month, James R. Clapper,
the director of national intelligence, expressed concern that a public report
would undermine the effectiveness of the operations.

The provision, passed by the Senate Intelligence Committee last year as part of
its authorization bill, required Mr. Obama to make public an annual report on
''the total number of combatants killed or injured during the preceding year by
the use of targeted lethal force outside the United States by remotely piloted
aircraft.'' The provision was the same for civilians killed or injured. But
officials said that the provision encountered almost immediate resistance both
from intelligence officials and Republican lawmakers, some who have fought
against any changes to the way the targeted killing program has been managed.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, the California Democrat who leads the Intelligence
Committee and who originally offered the provision, agreed to take it out of the
authorization bill to enable it to be passed unanimously.

But some sharply criticized the move, saying that lawmakers were avoiding an
important debate about transparency in order to swiftly pass the bill.

''Congress is charged with oversight of the administration and this is a matter
of life and death,'' said Steven W. Hawkins, executive director of Amnesty
International USA. ''A basic report on the number of people killed shouldn't be
too much to ask.''

In a speech last May, Mr. Obama pledged to make drone operations more
transparent, and administration officials said that the White House would like
to gradually shift drone operations away from the C.I.A. -- partly to allow
targeted killing operations to be discussed more freely.

But nearly a year later, there has been little movement on the proposals. Some
powerful lawmakers, including Ms. Feinstein, have opposed moving drone strikes
out of the C.I.A. and managed to blunt any momentum to enact the White House
proposals.

Mr. Clapper said in a letter that the executive branch was exploring ways to
''provide the American people more information about the United States' use of
force outside areas of active hostilities.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/29/world/senate-drops-plan-to-require-disclosure-
on-drone-killings.html

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


