                             308 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Lawyer Behind the Drone Policy

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 473 words


When the White House nominated David Barron to be a judge on the United States
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, based in Boston, it expected the usual
Republican opposition. Mr. Barron, a Harvard law professor, is known as a
liberal who was pointedly critical of President George W. Bush's national
security policy. What it didn't expect -- but should have -- was that Democrats
would have some problems with the nominee, too.

Mr. Barron served as a top official in the Justice Department's Office of Legal
Counsel under President Obama, and he wrote several memos justifying the use of
drones to kill an American citizen affiliated with Al Qaeda. The citizen, Anwar
al-Awlaki, died in a C.I.A. drone strike in Yemen in 2011.

The administration has never explained in detail the legal justification for
this killing and has resisted all requests to make public Mr. Barron's memos.
That didn't sit well with several Senate Democrats who have been critical of the
drone policy and the excessive secrecy surrounding it, and they demanded that
the White House release the memos. Senators have a right to see the quality of a
nominee's legal analysis, particularly when he is trying to make a case for a
morally questionable activity, before they confirm him to a lifetime post.

On Tuesday, the administration agreed to allow any senator to see the classified
memos behind closed doors, an expansion of its need-to-know policy that
restricted the information to those on relevant committees. That will probably
be enough to ensure Mr. Barron's confirmation on a majority vote now that the
Senate has eliminated the three-fifths requirement for nominations.

But it is not enough for the public, which also has the right to evaluate one of
the Obama administration's most important national security decisions, and the
qualities of the people it is nominating to the bench. Last month, a federal
appeals court panel ordered the release of one of the drone memos, minus some
redactions, after The New York Times and the American Civil Liberties Union sued
to get it. Now that the killing of Mr. Awlaki has been publicly discussed by
administration officials, the court said, there is no basis for withholding the
underlying analysis.

The administration, which has the right to appeal the ruling, still hasn't
released the memo to the public, and Senator Mark Udall won't vote for Mr.
Barron until it does. He argues that the government has the right to secrets
about its operations, but not secrets about its legal reasoning, and he's right.
The government may have provided enough information to satisfy a majority in the
Senate, but it needs to drop its appeal and comply with the court order to
release the memo to everyone. The public, no less than the Senate, has the right
to know the basis for the killing that is being done in its name.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/08/opinion/the-lawyer-behind-the-drone
-policy.html

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


