                             314 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 7, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan: Deadly U.S. Drone Strike

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 733 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- An American drone strike against a compound in the North
Waziristan tribal district on Wednesday killed at least six people, Pakistani
officials and local residents said. It was the latest in a series of strikes by
C.I.A.-operated drone aircraft to coincide with a major offensive by the
Pakistani military in the area, which is notorious as a sanctuary for militants.

Four missiles slammed into the compound near Datta Khel, about 20 miles west of
Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, according to a security official
in Peshawar who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

Pakistani ground troops are pushing toward Datta Khel as part of a drive to
expel the Taliban and allied foreign militants from North Waziristan. The
operation, which started on June 15, has displaced at least 800,000 civilians
and resulted in at least 550 deaths.

The Pakistani military says it has complete control of Miram Shah and North
Waziristan's other principal town, Mir Ali. But there has been relatively little
direct ground fighting; rather, many of the deaths have been attributed to air
and artillery strikes on residential compounds where militants were believed to
be sheltering. Most militant fighters who were in North Waziristan's towns and
cities in June are believed to have fled to neighboring tribal districts, or to
more remote parts of North Waziristan like Datta Khel, which remains under
Taliban control.

The military said that airstrikes killed 30 suspected militants at six locations
on Tuesday, including Datta Khel, the area where the drone struck on Wednesday.
The military also said there was ground combat in the area.

''Our forces are now in Datta Khel, where we are facing some resistance,'' a
senior security official in Peshawar said. ''Two of our men got killed in an
encounter in Datta Khel bazaar a couple of days ago. Four Uzbeks were killed in
that shootout.''

Still, the official said, the operation was making progress. ''More than 80
percent of North Waziristan now stands cleared'' of militants, he said.

Pakistani officials give slightly different accounts of the casualties inflicted
by the latest American drone strike, the seventh this year. The official in
Peshawar said six people died, including four Uzbeks and two members of the
Taliban-allied Haqqani network. But a government official posted to North
Waziristan, but currently living in an adjacent district, said he had received
reports of seven deaths, all members of the Haqqani network. The discrepancy
highlighted the difficulty of obtaining reliable information from the tribal
districts.

The military operation began one week after a Taliban assault on the main
airport in Karachi, the country's most populous city. It followed the collapse
of government efforts to strike a peace deal with the Taliban.

Human rights groups and local residents challenge the military's claims that all
550 people reported killed in the operation so far were militants; they say some
civilians have been killed in airstrikes as well. The military has declared
North Waziristan off limits to journalists, and it is frequently impossible to
independently confirm events and casualty reports there.

The Taliban issued a thinly veiled threat against local journalists on Tuesday.
In a statement addressed to two advocacy groups, Reporters Without Borders and
the Committee to Protect Journalists, the Taliban accused the news media of
''playing the role of war propagandists'' and warned of possible attacks.

''If we get engaged in attacking them, then no crying and sobbing will be
heard,'' said the message, signed by the Taliban from the Mohmand tribal
district. The leader of that faction, Omar Khalid Khorasani, is seen as a rising
force in the movement, which has suffered two major splits in recent months.

Concerns about reprisals for the North Waziristan offensive prompted the
military last week to take over responsibility for security in Islamabad, the
capital. The offensive has also worsened political tensions between Pakistan and
Afghanistan, which accuse each other of clandestinely backing certain Taliban
factions.

The Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, also faces new challenges at home
from two political rivals, who said they would try to topple his government with
street protests over the next few weeks.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/07/world/asia/us-drone
-strike-kills-6-in-pakistani-tribal-area.html

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


