                              31 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          September 25, 2014 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

FAA poised to approve drones for filmmaking

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 863 words


In a major decision that is likely to set the stage for more commercial drone
flights, the Federal Aviation Administration is planning to announce Thursday
that it will permit Hollywood filmmakers to operate drones on movie sets,
according to current and former U.S. officials.

The FAA has long enforced a de facto ban on the use of drones for commercial
purposes. But under a 2012 law passed by Congress, the agency is developing
rules that will eventually legalize the practice and allow drones of all sizes
to operate in the national airspace.

Prior to this week, the FAA had granted permits to only two companies to fly
drones - both in remote parts of Alaska under highly restrictive conditions. The
decision to allow several movie-making companies to use drones is the first time
that businesses will be able to operate the aircraft in populated areas.

The FAA has been evaluating applications since May from seven video-production
firms that want to use camera-equipped drones on movie sets instead of regular
helicopters or airplanes, which are more costly to operate.

The applications have been endorsed by the Motion Picture Association of America
(MPAA) and have received strong backing from a plethora of industries that are
lobbying for permission to fly drones of their own, including real estate
agents, agribusiness interests and oil-production companies.

Among those submitting letters of support to the FAA is the News Media
Coalition, a group of publishers, broadcasters and wire services that includes
The Washington Post. The coalition advocates the use of drones for newsgathering
purposes, a practice currently prohibited by the FAA's restrictions on
commercial flights.

Pilot groups and aviation-safety advocates have opposed the filmmakers' bids in
formal comments to the FAA, saying that the Hollywood firms need to provide more
safeguards to ensure that drones do not crash in populated areas or endanger air
traffic.

John McGraw, an aerospace consultant for the MPAA and the seven filmmakers, said
the drones would fly under "very controlled environments" with "very little
exposure to risk at all."

The Hollywood companies had yet to receive official word from the FAA but were
expecting a formal decision Thursday, McGraw said. "They're optimistic that
they'll get it," he added.

An FAA spokesman declined to comment.

The cinematic firms have applied for permission to fly the drones not just in
Hollywood but anywhere in the country as long as they meet certain safety
conditions. Flights would "occur over private or controlled-access property,"
and drones would stay at least 100 feet away from people not part of the
production crews, according to the applications.

Paperwork filed with the FAA also states that the camera-bearing drones would
weigh less than 55 pounds. They would fly no faster than 57 mph and no higher
than 400 feet to ensure that they do not interfere with other aircraft.

The seven companies are Astraeus Aerial, Aerial Mob, Flying-Cam, Snaproll Media,
Vortex Aerial, Pictorvision and HeliVideo Productions.

Thanks to a boom in robotics technology and satellite-guided navigation, drones
have become relatively cheap and easy to fly, with some small hobbyist models
available for less than $500. Most come with miniature video cameras, a
combination that has revolutionized surveillance from the air.

According to the FAA, it is permissible to fly drones for noncommercial purposes
as long as operators keep them below 400 feet and at least five miles from an
airport. The FAA has also granted hundreds of special certificates to the
military and other government agencies to fly drones in civilian airspace.

As the use of drones proliferates, however, so do the number of accidents and
unsafe encounters with other aircraft.

A Washington Post investigation disclosed in June that rogue civilian drones had
flown dangerously close to airports or passenger aircraft in 15 cases in the
previous two years. In addition, more than 400 large military drones have
crashed in major accidents around the world since 2001.

The FAA has said it will issue proposed standards and rules to legalize the
widespread use of small commercial drones by the end of the year. Under the
federal government's regulatory process, however, those rules probably would not
take effect until 2016 or later. Legalizing the use of drones that weigh more
than 55 pounds is expected to take even longer.

The agency has faced pressure from drone manufacturers and other businesses to
move faster. In May, the FAA said it would allow companies to apply for
exemptions to the commercial drone ban on a case-by-case basis, and the agency
indicated that it would look favorably on bids to use drones to make movies,
inspect pipelines and monitor crops.

The applications from Hollywood were the first to receive scrutiny from the FAA.
Since then, other would-be drone operators have lined up to file bids. Those
include Amazon.com. The firm has asked the FAA for permission to test small
drones that it is developing to deliver lightweight packages to customers'
doorsteps. A decision is pending.

Amazon's chief executive, Jeffrey P. Bezos, owns The Post.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


