                             317 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          September 27, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Leggett grounds plan to test drones

BYLINE: Bill Turque

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 376 words


County Executive Isiah Leggett has grounded Montgomery's plans to experiment
with drones as a tool for firefighters and police, calling the idea "not ready
for prime time."

A group of officials, led by chief innovation officer Dan Hoffman, told a County
Council committee this month that it had purchased four commercially available
helicopter-style models of unmanned aircraft to assess their possible use at
fire scenes or during police emergencies.

Council members, expressing concerns about privacy and other issues, said they
wanted a firm set of policies and protocols covering drone use. On Tuesday,
several members, including Roger Berliner (D-Potomac-Bethesda) and Phil Andrews
(D-Rockville-Gaithersburg), codified their reservations by introducing a
resolution calling on Leggett to produce guidelines.

But Leggett (D) said Friday that he has set aside the project indefinitely. "At
this time, it's not something that we need," Leggett said. "I'm not sure there's
a demonstrated need." He said Hoffman and public safety officials were
"premature" in bringing the matter to the council.

Leggett said he had both policy-based and personal reservations about drones.

"It's a little bit of both," he said. "I do have philosophical questions about
their use without having a discussion with the public."

More than two dozen local governments either deploy drones or have applications
pending with the Federal Aviation Administration to use them, primarily for law
enforcement. Federal, state and local police agencies are increasingly borrowing
the craft from Customs and Border Protection for domestic surveillance
operations.

The council tentatively scheduled an Oct. 2 work session of the Public Safety
Committee to discuss the resolution. But Leggett's office has indicated that no
one from the executive staff plans to attend.

Berliner, one of the committee's three members, said Friday that the council
should continue to push Leggett on the issue. Describing drones as part of the
future, he cited a Washington Post story this week disclosing that the FAA will
permit Hollywood filmmakers to use them on sets.

"If it's okay for Hollywood to use them, then it's okay for the fire department
to use them to save lives," Berliner said.

bill.turque@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


