                             312 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 11, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Penalizes Firm It Calls a Front for Hezbollah

BYLINE: By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS and MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 571 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration leveled sanctions on Thursday against a
Lebanon-based company it called a front for the Shiite militant group Hezbollah.
It said the firm was used to buy equipment for surveillance drones flown over
Syria and Israel.

The Treasury Department froze the American assets of Stars Group Holding, a
Beirut-based consumer electronics business, along with those of five of its
employees and those of six subsidiaries in Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates and
China.

United States officials said Hezbollah used the company as a procurement network
to covertly obtain sophisticated technologies like engines, communications,
electronics and navigation equipment from suppliers in the United States,
Canada, Europe and Asia.

Hezbollah used the equipment to build drones that it flew over Syria -- where
its members are operating alongside the government of President Bashar al-Assad
-- and over Israel, where it conducted surveillance, the administration said.

''With disturbing reach far beyond Lebanon, Hezbollah's extensive procurement
networks exploit the international financial system to enhance its military
capabilities in Syria and its terrorist activities worldwide,'' David S. Cohen,
the under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, said in a
statement. ''This global terrorist activity and expanding criminal network belie
Hezbollah's claimed purpose as a national liberation movement.''

Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman, said in a statement that the
designation illustrated ''yet again the extent of Hezbollah's international
presence and reach.''

Israel has long sought to stop Hezbollah from acquiring sophisticated weapons
and has carried out repeated airstrikes in Syria to prevent Iranian and Russian
missiles from being transferred to the militant group.

But Hezbollah has already demonstrated its ability to operate drones. In 2012,
Hassan Nasrallah, the group's leader, asserted in a speech that Hezbollah had
assembled and piloted a drone that flew 35 miles into Israel before it was shot
down.

''It is our right to send other drones whenever we want,'' Mr. Nasrallah said at
the time, adding that the drone had been designed in Iran and assembled in
Lebanon by Hezbollah experts. ''It was not the first time, and it will not be
the last.''

The United States has sought to limit Hezbollah's military capabilities, with
mixed success. During the first year of the Obama administration, American
officials sought, unsuccessfully, to persuade Mr. Assad to curtail the flow of
surface-to-surface missiles to the group. The missiles were being sent to
Hezbollah by Iran through Damascus.

As armed opposition to Mr. Assad grew, Iran encouraged Hezbollah to send
fighters to Syria to support the Assad government. The Hezbollah militants have
played an important role in buttressing the Assad government, and Mr. Nasrallah
vowed last year to keep fighting ''wherever needed.''

The individuals targeted on Thursday, including the president and chairman of
Stars, used ''deceptive methods'' to avoid export restrictions and hide the fact
that Hezbollah was ultimately obtaining the equipment, the Treasury official
said.

The sanctions were applied under an executive order signed by President George
W. Bush less than two weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The
order allows the Treasury Department to block the assets of terrorists and
terrorist organizations.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/11/us/us-penalizes-lebanese-firm-it-calls-front-f
or-hezbollah.html

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


