                             315 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

Pakistan's Imran Khan propels defiant blockade against NATO

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 1128 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - For years, American officials have tried to persuade
Pakistan's military chiefs and prime ministers to cooperate with U.S.-led war
plans in neighboring Afghanistan.

But now it is a politician in a far-flung province who is standing in the way.

Angered by U.S. drone strikes, Imran Khan has effectively halted NATO convoys
through northwest Pakistan, a vital crossing point for trucks carrying supplies
to and from landlocked Afghanistan.

Khan, an Oxford-educated millionaire and former cricket star, has no real power
in the national government. But his party controls the local government in
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, which NATO convoys must pass through to reach the
northern border crossing.

After U.S. drone strikes in Pakistan this fall, the 61-year-old politician
called on his supporters to block the transit routes in protest. Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif's government has appeared powerless to stop him.

With Sharif and Pakistan's military vowing that the supply routes must remain
open, Khan's campaign is a remarkable show of defiance in a country that has
been under military rule for more than half of its 67-year history.

A self-described liberal pacifist who became more attuned to his Muslim faith
after his globe-trotting cricket career ended, Khan shows no sign of backing
down. He says that although U.S. drone strikes may be aimed at violent
militants, many wind up killing innocent civilians and fuel terrorism by
angering the local population.

"The reason we are taking this stand is to tell the U.S., 'Okay, it's fine to
protect American lives, but how can you sacrifice a whole country for it?' "
Khan said in a recent interview at his mountaintop estate on the outskirts of
Islamabad.

The attacks also violate Pakistan's sovereignty, Khan says, and he notes that
the Pakistani army is bearing the brunt of the retaliatory strikes from Islamist
militants.

But Khan is drawing fierce criticism from some Pakistanis who accuse him of
using the issue for political gain. Khan, a member of Parliament, unsuccessfully
sought the prime minister's job in elections last year.

Rifaat S. Hussain, a defense and political analyst in Islamabad, said Khan has
become a "one-man show" who "has yet to mature into a statesman."

"Many of us had hoped, now that elections are over, he would have focused on
local issues, corruption, law and order, terrorism, but instead he is trying to
play to the peanut gallery," Hussain said.

Honing his focus

Khan ended his two-decade-long cricket career in 1992, after leading Pakistan's
national team to its only World Cup victory. He then became a philanthropist and
founded his party, Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), or Movement for Justice.

Though it struggled for years to win seats in Parliament, Khan emerged as a
leading contender in Pakistan's national elections.

He became a media sensation because of his perceived appeal to progressive
younger voters and urbanites, tens of thousands of whom would show up at his
campaign rallies. His past reputation as a playboy - as well as his marriage to
and divorce from socialite Jemima Goldsmith, daughter of British billionaire
James Goldsmith - added to his mystique.

But Khan's party finished third in the elections.

Khan had been warning for months that he and his party would seek to cut off
NATO supply routes if the U.S. drone strikes didn't end. The U.S. military says
the land routes, used by civilian contractors, are a quick and cost-effective
way to remove its vast store of equipment and hardware from landlocked
Afghanistan ahead of the departure of most troops next year.

When the drone attacks continued this fall, including a November strike in Kyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Khan and thousands of others held a day-long protest on a highway
used by NATO convoys on the outskirts of the province's capital, Peshawar. The
following day, Nov. 24, his party's political and municipal workers erected
checkpoints to search and turn back trucks suspected of carrying NATO supplies.

When reports reached Kabul and Washington that some NATO truck drivers were
being roughed up by protesters, the coalition suspended its convoys through the
northern border crossing.

Coalition military commanders in Kabul and U.S. Embassy officials in Islamabad
have sought to play down the disruption, noting that NATO supplies are still
moving through Pakistan's southern province of Baluchistan.

But Khan's party says it also has plans to blockade the port in the southern
Pakistani city of Karachi, which would be a dramatic escalation. And there are
growing signs that U.S. and NATO officials consider Khan's stance to be far more
than just an annoyance.

When U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel visited Pakistan in early December, he
warned that the country could lose billions of dollars in U.S. military aid if
the blockade continued, according to U.S. and Pakistani media accounts. Two
weeks later, Marine Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., commander of coalition forces in
Afghanistan, traveled to Islamabad to meet with Pakistan's new military chief,
Lt. Gen. Raheel Sharif.

In a blunt signal of the coalition's unease, about 20 diplomats from NATO
countries, including the United States, summoned Khan for dinner in early
December at the German ambassador's residence in Islamabad. According to Khan
and others present, the encounter became tense.

"They kept saying, 'Look, we have nothing to do with it; it's all the CIA' "
carrying out the drone attacks, Khan recalled. "I said, 'Look, you are all
coalition partners.' "

At one point, Khan said, he asked the European diplomats how they would feel if
Pakistan started secretly killing people living in their countries who were
wanted on warrants in Pakistan.

Critics in government

Sharif's government is starting to increase its criticism of Khan, who is also
holding a series of demonstrations against Sharif's economic policies and rising
inflation.

Information Minister Pervez Rasheed accused Khan of being a demagogue "trying to
divert the attention of people from his failures" in his province.

"It is the right of every individual to protest, but the way PTI has blocked
NATO supplies, it will create problems for the country at an international
level," Rasheed said in an interview.

Even some conservative religious politicians question Khan's strategy.

"He is providing an excuse to the U.S. to remain on Afghanistan's soil," said
Abdul Jalil Jan, a leader of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Sami party in Kyber
Pakhtunkhwa.

But on a recent visit by a reporter to protest camps near Peshawar, party
workers chanted "Long live Imran Khan" as they waited to quiz the next round of
truck drivers on their cargo.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Haq Nawaz Khan in Peshawar, Shaiq Hussain in Islamabad and Craig Whitlock in
Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


