                             321 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                               SUN SCENE Edition

Mistaken drone strike scars captain

BYLINE: Washington Post Writers Group

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 494 words


At the start of Dan Fesperman's timely and disturbing novel, Air Force Capt.
Darwin Cole is inside a trailer in the Arizona desert, his eyes fixed on a
screen, his hands on a stick and rudder, waiting for a missile he's fired from a
Predator drone "to zap a roomful of bad guys on the other side of the world."

Seconds before the missile is to strike, there's sudden movement on the screen.
A girl steps out of the mud roofed house in Afghanistan, followed by two boys.
Cole cries out in horror, but it's too late to abort. The screen "erupts
silently in a boiling cloud of fire and dust." When the dust settles, Cole sees
the girl lying on the ground, one arm severed, apparently bleeding to death.
She's about the age of his daughter. Her image haunts him.

We next see Cole 14 months later. After the mission's unexpected "collateral
damage" 13 people in all were killed the one time star jet jockey had a
breakdown that led to violent behavior and a dishonorable discharge. He's living
in a battered trailer. His wife has taken the children and gone to her parents.
He keeps a loaded shotgun at hand, consumes a great deal of bourbon and ignores
the Air Force drones that fly over to check on him as a known troublemaker.

One day, his privacy is invaded by an attractive woman named Keira. She and two
other freelance journalists are trying to develop a story on drones and, in
particular, on a mysterious figure called Fort1. Cole wants to know about him,
too, because he was the unseen "attack controller" giving orders on the intercom
the night the missile hit the children. Cole doesn't know who Fort1 is or works
for possibly the Pentagon or the CIA or even a military contractor. The
journalists also want to find Fort1 whose name is later found to be Wade Castle
because one of them was in Afghanistan when another drone strike he commanded
killed several children before her eyes.

Cole decides to join forces with the journalists, even though he knows the Air
Force might call that treason. He agrees to go to Baltimore with them but
travels by bus because he knows his face would be spotted by airport cameras.
Fesperman often reminds us that it's almost impossible to travel anonymously in
today's America, because cameras are everywhere and the government has access to
them all as well as to everyone's computers.

Once Cole moves in with the three journalists, certain predictable but
interesting tensions arise, but mostly the novel centers on two chases: Cole and
the reporters trying to find Castle even as a vengeful Air Force investigator
searches for Cole.

Readers who view drones as a military asset may be angered by Fesperman's dark
view of their potential; others will be concerned by issues of safety and
privacy he raises. Either way, "Unmanned" is an exciting story, expertly told.
My only complaint is that novel's ending may be more optimistic than the
available facts justify. We'll see.

FICTION: MILITARY MYSTERY

Unmanned

by Dan Fesperman (Knopf)

LOAD-DATE: September 03, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


