                             324 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                      June 25, 2014 Wednesday 6:01 PM EST

The legal case for drones is solid

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 1082 words


Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), in opposing the nomination to the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the First Circuit of David Barron, the former Justice Department lawyer who
wrote the drone memo analyzing the president's power to kill Americans who have
taken up with al-Qaeda, declared last month: "I've read David Barron's memos
concerning the legal justification for killing an American citizen overseas
without a trial or legal representation, and I am not satisfied. While the
President forbids me from discussing what is in the memos, I can tell you what
is not in the memos. There is no valid legal precedent to justify the killing of
an American citizen not engaged in combat. In fact, one can surmise as much
because the legal question at hand has never been adjudicated. Therefore, I
shall not only oppose the nomination of David Barron, but will filibuster."

On Monday, Barron's 42-page memo was declassified and released, with some
redactions. There actually is a whole lot of justification for the president to,
for example, use a drone to kill Anwar al-Awlaki, the cleric who served as a
recruiter and inspiration for terrorists including the Fort Hood murderer. One
can disagree with his legal analysis - although I would be curious what
precisely in the 42 pages Paul finds to be in error - but to declare that there
isn't any justification or that there is no precedent is flat-out wrong.

The Post reported:

Awlaki's relationship with al-Qaeda "brings him within the scope" of the 2001
congressional authorization of the use of military force, according to the
document. Citing information provided by the CIA and Pentagon, the memo said
Awlaki has "operational and leadership roles" with al-Qaeda and "continues to
plot attacks intended to kill Americans."

Moreover, there is ample precedent going back to World War II to treat U.S.
collaborators with the enemy as enemy combatants.

Benjamin Wittes, an expert on the law of war (but by no means a cheerleader for
untrammeled executive authority), further explained that the constitutional
issues were covered in a separate Office of Legal Counsel memo, but then the
just-released memo "retreads this subject," albeit with some redactions:

[The] memo embraces a Mathews v. Elbridge balancing test for its Fifth Amendment
analysis. And it concludes that "a decision-maker could reasonably decide that
the threat posed by al-Aulaqi's activities to United States persons is
'continued' and 'imminent'. . . ." Both agencies had said they didn't regard his
capture as feasible, though they intended to capture him if it were so. The memo
concludes that there is no Fifth Amendment barrier to an operation "at least
where, as here, the target's activities pose a 'continued and imminent threat of
violence or death' to U.S. persons, 'the highest officers in the Intelligence
Community have reviewed the factual basis' for the lethal operation, and a
capture operation would be infeasible-and where the CIA and DoD 'continue to
monitor whether changed circumstances would permit such an alternative'. . . ."

In short, if we start with the broad powers in Article 2 of the Constitution
authorizing the president to wage war, add in the Authorization for Use of
Military Force (AUMF) and satisfy both due process and Fourth Amendment
concerns, you have a pretty compelling legal justification for using a drone to
kill an American jihadi plotting against the United States.

It is noteworthy that the American Civil Liberties Union did not attack the
memo's substance nor allege that there was a paucity of legal reasoning. To the
contrary, its spokesman was pleased that the argument could be laid out and then
be the topic of informed debate. On that I agree entirely, although a number of
conservatives have expressed concern about how narrowly Barron interpreted the
president's powers. Let a thousand constitutional debates bloom. (To a large
extent they already have, and white papers, legal panels and blog posts abound
on the topic.)

It would seem that those opposing use of drones in these situations have an
obligation to explain why. Do they, for example, not believe as a factual matter
that Awlaki and other Americans are directly engaged with terrorists conducting
a worldwide jihad against the United States? If so, that would be news. Do they
think the AUMF doesn't allow the president to kill enemies abroad who have taken
up with al-Qaeda affiliates, contrary to its language? Again, the theory would
be novel. But at bottom the "precedent," if you will, is the Constitution
itself, Article II, Section 2: "The President shall be commander in chief of the
Army and Navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several states,
when called into the actual service of the United States."

At any rate, the memo highlights the degree to which politicians who oppose
anti-terrorist measures - including the National Security Agency surveillance
program, use of drones and detention of enemy combatants at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, who cannot be tried in the United States (for evidentiary and other
reasons) - have failed to make the legal case against these programs in concrete
terms or have glossed over relevant case law (e.g. Supreme Court precedent
holding only the contents of calls not the data about them is covered by the
Fourth Amendment). Now, a politician is perfectly entitled to make a policy case
against these items and some have (e.g. it is better to capture than kill
American jihadists), but it is quite another to assert that these vital
anti-terror measures are beyond the scope of the president's power, even when
authorized by Congress. This represents a serious diminution of executive power
and would in the face of threats like a potential ISIS-controlled state severely
hamper our ability to defend the homeland.

Here's a proposal for anyone seeking a House or Senate seat or certainly the
presidency: They should lay out specifically what anti-terror procedures they
would discontinue and why, citing the concrete legal justification, if any, for
their objection. That is the least they can do when they are proposing to tie
the hands of the chief executive and Congress in an era when another 9/11 attack
launched from ISIS territory is entirely conceivable. They should also spell out
what sort of AUMF we will need after troops leave Afghanistan. None? One that
covers the plethora of al-Qaeda and Iran-backed threats? Then Americans can
judge for themselves who is responsible on national security and who is not.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


