                             322 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

Now Facebook Has a Drone Plan

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 286 words



HIGHLIGHT: Facebook is in discussions to acquire a manufacturer of high-altitude
drones for about $60 million. The purchase would allow the social network to
advance its ambitions of connecting everyone in the world to the Internet.


With all his talk of better data compression and more efficient phone chips,
Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook's chief executive, has had a bit of trouble getting
people excited about Internet.org, his ambitious plan to get everyone in the
world onto the Internet.

Not anymore. The web was abuzz on Tuesday after a report in TechCrunch that
Facebook was in negotiations to buy a manufacturer of drones, Titan Aerospace,
for about $60 million.

If a deal is completed, it will give Mr. Zuckerberg an intriguing new technology
to further the cause of Internet.org.

Titan's drones, which resemble solar-powered airplanes, are designed to fly as
high as 65,000 feet and stay aloft for as long as five years - essentially
functioning like cheap satellites. They could blanket large areas with wireless
Internet signals, although the signals would be slower and unable to handle as
much data as land-based Internet connections. For remote places like rural
Africa, they would be enough to provide at least rudimentary access to the
Internet through mobile phones.

Facebook would have to overcome lots of technical and legal problems before a
global Facenet would be a reality. But the idea would allow the social network
to one-up its rival, Google, which has its own far-fetched plan to extend the
Internet to far-flung places via a network of balloons.

And it is a lot closer to reality than Amazon's idea of drones that will deliver
packages.


     ·    Tech Companies Offer Update on Government Data Requests
     ·    As Facebook Turns 10, Zuckerberg Wants to Change How Tech Industry
          Works
     ·    Google Buys A.I. Company for Search, Not Robots
     ·    Daily Report: U.S. Eases Some Rules on Data Disclosure
     ·    Did Big Internet Companies Handicap Start-Ups in FISA Rule Changes?


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


