                             325 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 26, 2014 Tuesday 6:39 PM EST

Here's a drone's-eye view of the Napa Valley earthquake damage;
After Sunday's 6.0-magnitude earthquake shook Northern California, Evan Kilkus
fired up his drone. His mission: To document the temblor's extensive damage.

BYLINE: Thomas Johnson

LENGTH: 274 words


After a 6.0-magnitude earthquake shook Northern California on Sunday, Evan
Kilkus fired up his drone.

His mission: to document the powerful temblor's extensive damage.

Kilkus used his "quadcopter" to shoot close-up aerial footage of tall buildings
with crumbling exteriors, cracked glass, sunken roofs and fallen rubble. Some of
the footage would not be easily or safely accessible for photographers or camera
crews, given the unstable infrastructure of some of the buildings.

With the drone, Kilkus was also able to access views of buildings that were
taped off to the public, such as the U.S. Post Office.

He uploaded a nearly seven-minute video to YouTube on Sunday, and explained:
"This video is intended for educational purposes to show builders and building
owners across the world the results of this earthquake. ... This video is also
intended to show how a quadcopter / drone can be used to help identify hazards
and assess damage in this situation."

The video, which the Los Angeles Times reposted on Tuesday, was filmed with care
and caution, Kilkus wrote on YouTube.

"I was very cautious while flying this quadcopter," he wrote. "I did not fly
over any large crowds, and kept the device close to me at all times to maximize
my control. Often I first asked if it would be ok if I filmed."

He said he was denied once: "The only time I was asked not to film was at Target
(for some reason?), so I stopped."

Videos like this are becoming increasingly popular; YouTube offers more than
430,000 results for "drone footage." Part of the reason is the low cost. You can
find unmanned aerial vehicles equipped with cameras for less than $100 online.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


