                             327 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 1:49 AM EST

U.S. carries out counterterrorism strike in Somalia;
After reports of a drone attack, the Pentagon issued a rare acknowledgment of
the operation.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 502 words


The U.S. military carried out a counterterrorism strike Monday against leaders
of the militant group al-Shabab in Somalia, Pentagon officials said, although it
was unclear if the operation was successful.

Journalists in Somalia reported that suspected U.S. drones fired missiles near
the port city of Barawe, a stronghold for al-Shabab. In a rare acknowledgment of
its clandestine military activities in Somalia, the Pentagon said it had
conducted a counterterrorism operation there but gave no details.

"We are assessing the results of the operation and will provide additional
information as and when appropriate." Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press
secretary, said in a statement late Monday.

The Pentagon statement did not say whether the operation was limited to drone
strikes or if U.S. commandos had been present on the ground.

Nearly one year ago, on Oct. 5, Navy SEALs raided a seaside house in Barawe in
an attempt to capture Abdulkadir Mohamed Abdulkadir, a Kenyan native and senior
al-Shabab commander. That raid sparked a gunfight but was unsuccessful; U.S.
officials said the SEALs withdrew because the risk of harming bystanders had
become too great.

The Obama administration has since posted a $3 million reward for information
leading to Abdulkadir's arrest or capture. A State Department bounty notice
describes him as being about 35 years old, with a thick mustache and three
missing fingers on his left hand.

The U.S. government's Voice of America news service, which broadcasts programs
to Somalia, reported that a target of the attack may have been the alleged
mastermind of al-Shabab's attack on an upscale mall in Nairobi, Kenya, in
September 2013. That individual, Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr, also known as Godane, has
emerged in recent years as the primary leader of al-Shabab, which means "the
youth" in Arabic and has ties to al-Qaeda.

Voice of America, citing militants and Africa Union security sources in Somalia,
reported that Godane was in the vicinity of the attack but his fate was unknown.
The broadcaster's report could not be independently verified.

The U.S. military frequently conducts drone surveillance flights over Somalia
but airstrikes and ground raids are relatively uncommon. The Pentagon has a
large drone base at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti, which borders Somalia on the
Horn of Africa. The U.S. military also flies surveillance drones over Somalia
from a base in Ethi­o­pia.

The Pentagon quietly deployed a small team of advisers to Mogadishu, the capital
of Somalia, in October 2013 to coordinate operations with African troops
fighting to wrest control of the country from al-Shabab.

The deployment marked the first time regular U.S. troops have been stationed in
the war-ravaged country since 1993, when two helicopters were shot down and 18
Americans killed in the "Black Hawk Down" disaster. U.S. commandos have
intermittently conducted raids and operations in the country as well, but the
military has kept their activities cloaked in secrecy.

Craig.Whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


