                             328 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 27, 2014 Saturday 1:29 AM EST

Montgomery County plan for police, fire drones indefinitely grounded;
County Executive Isiah Leggett says he's not sure there is a "demonstrated need"
for the aircraft.

BYLINE: Bill Turque

LENGTH: 379 words


County Executive Isiah Leggett has grounded Montgomery's plans to experiment
with drones as a tool for firefighters and police, calling the idea "not ready
for prime time."

A group of officials, led by chief innovation officer Dan Hoffman, told a County
Council committee earlier this month that they had purchased four small,
commercially available helicopter-style models of the unmanned craft to assess
their possible use at fire scenes or during police emergencies.

Council members, expressing concerns about privacy and other issues, said they
wanted staff to return with a firm set of policies and protocols covering drone
use. On Tuesday, several members, including Roger Berliner (D-Potomac-Bethesda)
and Phil Andrews (D-Rockville-Gaithersburg), codified their reservations by
introducing a resolution calling on Leggett to produce guidelines.

But Leggett (D) said Friday that he has set aside the project indefinitely.

"At this time, it's not something that we need," Leggett said. "I'm not sure
there's a demonstrated need." He said Hoffman and public safety officials were
"premature" in bringing the matter to the council.

Leggett said he had both policy-based and personal reservations about drones.

"It's a little bit of both," he said. "I do have philosophical questions about
their use without having a discussion with the public."

More than two dozen local governments either deploy drones or have applications
pending with the Federal Aviation Administration to use them, primarily for law
enforcement. Federal, state and local police agencies are increasingly borrowing
the craft from Customs and Border Protection for domestic surveillance
operations.

The council tentatively scheduled an Oct. 2 public safety committee work session
to discuss the resolution. But Leggett's office has indicated that no one from
the executive staff plans to attend.

Berliner, one of the committee's three members, said Friday that the council
should continue to push Leggett on the issue. Describing drones as part of the
future, he cited a Post story this week disclosing that the FAA will permit
Hollywood filmmakers to use them on sets.

"If it's okay for Hollywood to use them, then it's okay for the fire department
to use them to save lives," Berliner said.

bill.turque@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


