                             330 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 11, 2014 Saturday 1:27 PM EST

Grow lights and drones: How California's drought is driving farmers into
high-tech;
An alarming problem that's been linked to climate change has farmers scrambling
for a technological solution.

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 894 words


California's grappling with one of its worst droughts in history. The water
shortage is so dire, it risks affecting the entire country's food supply. As
Mother Jones reported in February, California provides 99 percent of the United
States' almonds, 95 percent of its broccoli, 91 percent of its grapes and 90
percent of its tomatoes. Now those and other crops are in danger: Economists say
that already, the drought has taken half a million acres of farmland out of
action.

Growers have responded by - what else? - pumping more water out of the ground.
But that's just a temporary fix, not much better than borrowing against the
future. So some in the agricultural industry are beginning to explore technology
that may help them adapt to the new, arid reality. Increasingly, farmers are
interested in a type of technology that's typically more associated with
surreptitious marijuana growers than massive agricultural operations.

Yes, we're talking about grow lights.

Grow lights act as a supplement to sunshine in indoor environments. The basic
idea has been around for decades. But recent developments have made grow lights
far more energy-efficient, enabling them to be fielded on a much larger scale.
And just as scientists learned to optimize crop development using chemicals and
genetic modification in the last century, engineers today are discovering the
same thing about sunshine. Carefully calibrate your artificial sunlight to a
basil plant's precise needs and the leaves will produce different tastes. You
can boost the vitamin C content of a tomato by 50 percent. You can get flowers
to market more quickly by making them grow faster.

Grow lights are ideal for northern latitudes where water is abundant but
sunlight is not. What does this have to do with California? As the drought
continues and farmland goes fallow, some crops are going to shift north. There's
some evidence this is already happening to wine grapes, said Dave Runsten,
policy director for the California-based Community Alliance for Family Farmers.

"There's a lot of investment going into Washington, and areas up in that
direction," said Runsten. "Some of the predictions show places like northern
Idaho and Canada being good for wine production, but they're covered in forest.
... The models show that a lot of places in California won't be able to grow
high-value wine" for much longer.

Vineyards aren't the only ones shifting their gaze northward. So are corn and
soybean growers in other parts of the United States (USA Today has a handy
interactive that depicts the shift over just the last half-century).

In California, farmers are expected to lose $2.2 billion and more than 17,000
jobs to this year's water crisis alone, according to a study by the University
of California - Davis. Those numbers will only worsen if the drought continues,
as expected, into 2015 and perhaps 2016. Research has already linked the drought
to climate change; a Stanford University team said last month that high levels
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere would likely keep triggering the
high-pressure barriers that forced rainstorms away from California's farmland
this year.

Moving agriculture to higher latitudes may improve access to water. But the
further up you go, the less light you get. Hence the grow lights.

"That's how you get tomatoes grown in Canada in the wintertime, because there's
not enough light there," said Kevin Wells, chief executive of the grow light
manufacturer Lumigrow.

A basic Lumigrow lamp starts at $600. More advanced models sell for $1,000 or
more. Commercial greenhouses may use hundreds of thousands of these LED lights,
said Wells. The company recently supplied the U.S. Department of Agriculture
with a number of grow lights in a bid to reduce carbon emissions and cut energy
costs. Its other clients include the likes of Bayer, which has a sizable
agriculture division. Next year, the company anticipates doing $20 million in
sales.

Even as farmers look to move some crops indoors to extend the growing season and
adapt to a changing climate, others hope to coax more water from unconventional
sources, such as clouds. Cloud seeding - the firing of silver iodide into the
cloud layer to stimulate precipitation - typically relies on ground-based
launchers or manned aircraft to distribute the chemical. But with the rise of
unmanned aerial systems, researchers dream doing cloud seeding cheaply and
easily - with drones.

Scientists in Nevada are currently evaluating such systems in the state's
federally approved testing site. It's not clear when they might start flying;
the Federal Aviation Administration only recently began offering exemptions to
its commercial drone ban on a case-by-case basis. But the agricultural industry
isn't sitting still; already, a handful of drone operators have petitioned the
government for agricultural exemptions. And large agricultural associations,
such as the American Farm Bureau and the National Agricultural Aviation
Association, have also lobbied Congress on the matter of unmanned systems.

As much as drones and grow lights might help the industry adapt to a changing
climate, the technology's also a reminder of climate change's unequal effects.
For American growers, the decision to start seeding clouds with a drone may be
easy - and cheap. For farmers in other parts of the world, it's probably a
different story.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


