                             338 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 23, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Al Qaeda Branch in Yemen Regrets Hospital Attack

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 457 words


CAIRO -- In a rare public apology, the leader of Al Qaeda's branch in Yemen has
said that one of his fighters disobeyed orders and attacked a hospital attached
to the Defense Ministry during a December assault that killed 52 people.

Qassim al-Raimi, the commander of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, said in a
video posted on websites that the attackers were warned in advance not to enter
the hospital within the complex, nor a place for prayer there. But, he said, one
fighter did.

''Now we acknowledge our mistake and guilt,'' Mr. Raimi said in the video that
was released late Saturday. ''We offer our apology and condolences to the
victims' families. We accept full responsibility for what happened in the
hospital and will pay blood money for the victims' families.''

The apology seemed prompted by an earlier broadcast of a video on Yemen state
television that showed a gunman attacking doctors and other hospital staff
members. Several Al Qaeda members tried to dismiss the video as fake, but the
outcry apparently embarrassed the Al Qaeda branch to the point of issuing an
unusual expression of regret.

''We rid ourselves of what our brother did,'' Mr. Raimi said. ''We did not order
him to do so, and we are not pleased with what he did.''

However, Mr. Raimi said that despite the group making a mistake, ''we are
continuing with our jihad.''

The authenticity of the English-subtitled video could not be absolutely
confirmed, though it was consistent with other Associated Press reporting and
came from Al Qaeda's news media arm.

That fighter and eight other Qaeda fighters were killed in the Dec. 5 suicide
bombing and attack by gunmen on the ministry complex in Sana, Yemen's capital.
Seven foreigners from Germany, India, the Philippines and Vietnam were among the
dead -- all of whom were providing aid at the hospital.

Mr. Raimi repeated Al Qaeda's earlier claim that the Defense Ministry was
attacked because it housed drone control rooms and American experts. He also
said that security headquarters used by the United States are ''legitimate
targets.''

He also warned that fighters would attack any other military posts and camps
that ''cooperate with the American drones spying, planting chips, providing
information or offering intelligence advice.''

''We have a long list of these places,'' Mr. Raimi said.

American drone strikes in Yemen have inflicted heavy losses on Al Qaeda
militants and are part of a joint United States-Yemeni campaign.

But an American drone attack on Dec. 12 that mistook a wedding party for an Al
Qaeda convoy, killing at least 11 people, has fueled anger against the United
States and the government. The Yemeni Parliament later urged the government to
end the use of Yemen's airspace by American drones.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/23/world/middleeast/al-qaeda-branch-in-yemen-apol
ogizes-for-attack-on-hospital-at-defense-ministry.html

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


