                             339 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Dismisses Suit Against Administration Officials Over Drone Strikes

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 790 words


WASHINGTON -- A federal judge on Friday dismissed a lawsuit against top Obama
administration officials that was filed by the parents of three United States
citizens whom the government killed without trial in drone strikes, including
Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical Muslim cleric.

In a 41-page opinion, Judge Rosemary M. Collyer of Federal District Court for
the District of Columbia ruled that courts should hesitate before deciding to
hold a government official personally responsible for violating a citizen's
constitutional rights in the context of a wartime action.

''The persons holding the jobs of the named defendants must be trusted and
expected to act in accordance with the U.S. Constitution when they intentionally
target a U.S. citizen abroad at the direction of the president and with the
concurrence of Congress,'' Judge Collyer wrote. ''They cannot be held personally
responsible in monetary damages for conducting war.''

The lawsuit sought unspecified damages against several top national security
officials for the deaths caused by two American drone strikes in Yemen.

In September 2011, a strike targeting Mr. Awlaki killed him and Samir Khan, also
an American citizen. Two weeks later, another drone strike killed Mr. Awlaki's
teenage son, Abdulrahman al-Awlaki. The Obama administration has said that the
deaths of Mr. Khan and the younger Mr. Awlaki were unintentional.

If it stands, the ruling suggests that courts have no role to play, before or
after, in reviewing the legality of government decisions to kill citizens whom
officials deem to be terrorists in overseas wartime operations, even away from
''hot'' battlefields where conventional American forces are on the ground.

''We believe the court reached the right result,'' said Brian Fallon, a Justice
Department spokesman. Lawyers at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
helped bring the suit, said they had not decided whether to appeal.

Baher Azmy, the center's legal director, criticized the judge for accepting ''at
face value the government's claims'' that Mr. Awlaki was a terrorist without
first conducting an adversarial hearing to gather evidence.

''The Constitution cannot permit the killing of U.S. citizens based on the
government's untested claim of dangerousness,'' Mr. Azmy said.

Judge Collyer cited officials' statements that Mr. Awlaki was a terrorist leader
with the Yemeni group known as Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. She also cited
an account of his role in a plot to blow up a Detroit-bound jet in 2009, based
on court documents from the trial of a Nigerian man who pleaded guilty to trying
to bomb the plane, and statements by Mr. Awlaki praising and encouraging acts of
terrorism.

Nasser al-Awlaki, the father of Anwar and grandfather of Abdulrahman, and Sarah
Khan, Mr. Khan's mother, filed the lawsuit in July 2012 against several
officials it accused of authorizing and directing the strikes, including the
secretary of defense and the director of the C.I.A. It did not name the
president, who is immune from such lawsuits.

Nasser al-Awlaki had filed a lawsuit in 2010 seeking an injunction to stop
attempts to kill his son, but another Federal District Court judge, John D.
Bates, dismissed the case on the grounds that Mr. Awlaki had no standing to
bring it on behalf of his son. In the second lawsuit, Mr. Awlaki was acting as
the executor of his son's and grandson's estates.

In May 2013, the Obama administration declassified and formally acknowledged the
fact that it had killed the three men. It argued that the case should be
dismissed without any further evidence before the court. Judge Collyer agreed,
saying that allowing the plaintiffs to pursue the case would ''impermissibly
draw the court'' into executive deliberations about how to protect national
security.

''The Constitution commits decision-making in this area to the president, as
commander in chief, and to Congress,'' she wrote, adding that allowing a lawsuit
against top government officials would ''hinder their ability in the future to
act decisively and without hesitation in defense of U.S. interests.''

Judge Collyer was appointed to Federal District Court in 2002 by President
George W. Bush. Last year, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. selected her to
serve a term on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which oversees
government spying on American soil, filling a seat previously held by Judge
Bates.

The Obama administration is separately fighting Freedom of Information Act
lawsuits brought by The New York Times and the American Civil Liberties Union
seeking disclosure of a classified Justice Department memo explaining its legal
reasoning for the strike, although an unclassified ''white paper'' summarizing
those arguments has become public.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/05/world/judge-dismisses-suit-against-administrat
ion-officials-over-drone-strikes.html

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


