                             336 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 12, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Militant Leader Is Killed in Pakistan

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH and IHSANULLAH TIPU MEHSUD; Declan Walsh reported from
London, and Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud from Islamabad, Pakistan. Farooq Jan Mangal
contributed reporting from Khost, Afghanistan; Matthew Rosenberg from
Washington; and Salman Masood from Islamabad.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1161 words


LONDON -- A senior leader of the feared Haqqani militant network was shot dead
on the outskirts of the Pakistani capital, officials said Monday, in a new blow
to the close-knit cluster of militant groups that shelter in northwestern
Pakistan.

The leader, Nasiruddin Haqqani -- a son of the militant group's founder, the
Afghan warlord Jalaluddin Haqqani -- was gunned down outside a bread store on
Sunday night by a man riding a motorcycle, witnesses told Pakistani news media
outlets.

Intelligence officials believe that he was a chief fund-raiser for the Haqqani
network, one of the most lethal elements of the insurgency in Afghanistan, and
he was designated as a ''global terrorist'' by the United States in 2010. Two
commanders for the group confirmed his death on Monday.

''We have received his body, and the funeral has taken place,'' said one
commander, Gul Hassan, who spoke by phone from North Waziristan, the main hub of
the Haqqani group in Pakistan. ''The mujahedeen are in shock.''

The killing added to an impression of increased turbulence for the militant
groups harbored in Pakistan's tribal belt, including Al Qaeda, the Pakistani
Taliban and the Haqqani network. Over just two months, one major leader has been
arrested, two have been killed in a drone strike, and now a major financier --
Mr. Haqqani -- has died.

The link, if any, between those events remains hidden in the miasma of tribal
politics, skulduggery and treachery that has for centuries haunted the rugged
frontier between Pakistan and Afghanistan. But many are taking the violence as a
portent of increased upheaval as rival intelligence services and militant groups
vie for power and influence ahead of the withdrawal of American combat troops
from the region next year.

The first major shot came when American forces detained Latif Mehsud, a senior
commander for the Pakistani Taliban, inside Afghanistan. Weeks later, on Nov. 1,
a C.I.A. drone strike killed the Pakistani Taliban's leader, Hakimullah Mehsud,
and a top deputy. Now, Mr. Haqqani, a looming figure in a militant network
closely allied with the Taliban and Al Qaeda, is dead.

There was no claim of responsibility for Mr. Haqqani's death, although
conflicting views about the identity of his killers abounded. Afghan
intelligence officials quickly blamed an internal Haqqani family dispute. But
among Pakistani spymasters, speculation was rife that their Afghan counterparts
had ordered the hit, possibly through a network of Afghan operatives in
Pakistan.

In any case, the fact that he was killed on the very edge of Islamabad, the
capital, is likely to discomfit the Pakistani government and military, which
have long faced accusations that they allow the Haqqanis and other militant
groups nearly complete freedom of movement within the country.

Another Haqqani network commander, speaking on the condition of anonymity from
Peshawar, claimed that militants had mourned Mr. Haqqani at a prayer service
right under the nose of the Pakistani military, at a secret spot in the garrison
city of Rawalpindi, near Islamabad. The commander said that Mr. Haqqani's body
was then sent back to the tribal belt for burial.

''Another Abottabad? Massive Embarrassment,'' Talat Hussain, a Pakistani
television journalist, said on Twitter, referring to the American commando raid
that killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad, near Islamabad, in 2011.

American and Afghan officials have for years accused Pakistani intelligence
officials of aiding, or at least turning a blind eye to, the Haqqani network as
part of a strategy to maintain influence in Afghanistan, and to attack Indian
diplomatic sites in the country.

Pakistani officials deny any collusion with the group but admit that they keep
in contact with its commanders as part of intelligence operations. And they make
little secret of the fact that the Haqqanis were their trump card in efforts to
draw the Afghan Taliban, which are linked to the Haqqani network, into peace
talks.

Nasiruddin Haqqani, who shuttled between the tribal belt and the Islamabad area,
was sometimes described as one of the group's liaisons with the Inter-Services
Intelligence spy agency.

But the recent round of killings and arrests, on both sides of the border, seems
to suggest that some players are more interested in shooting than in negotiating
for peace, at least for now.

American interest in the Haqqani network stems from its record of well-organized
attacks against high-profile targets in Afghanistan's major cities. The group
pledges allegiance to the Afghan Taliban but operates with a high degree of
autonomy, and over the years it has launched coordinated assaults on government
ministries, five-star hotels and the United States Embassy in central Kabul, on
American bases near the border with Pakistan, and on Indian diplomatic
facilities across the country.

Fund-raising is also crucial to the group's success, thanks to its involvement
in drug smuggling, kidnapping and gun running, as well as decades-old links to
rich jihadi donors in the Persian Gulf states, such as Saudi Arabia.

American, German and British officials saw Nasiruddin Haqqani, whose mother is
Arab and who spoke Arabic, as the crucial link between the network and the
legitimate businesses in the Persian Gulf area that it profits from.

The Haqqani network began as a mujahedeen group fighting the Soviet occupation
of Afghanistan in the 1980s. Back then, its leader, Mr. Haqqani's father,
Jalaluddin, was a towering figure of the resistance, and he was both a cherished
ally of the United States and a hero figure in the Persian Gulf states, where he
led fund-raising tours of mosques.

In recent years, as the group turned its sights toward driving the American
military out of the country, command of the group passed to his son Sirajuddin.
Most of the group's leadership moved to the Pakistani tribal belt, nominally out
of reach of the American military offensives targeting the network next door in
eastern Afghanistan.

But the C.I.A. drone program continued to take a toll. Another Haqqani son,
Badruddin, was killed in a drone strike in North Waziristan in August 2012.

On Monday, a Pakistani intelligence official, speaking on the customary
condition of anonymity, said that Nasiruddin Haqqani was buried in the same
graveyard as his brother, in Danday Darpa Khel -- the village where Hakimullah
Mehsud, the leader of the Pakistani Taliban, was killed in a drone strike.

Some Afghan officials said they thought it was family politics, in the end, that
brought Nasiruddin Haqqani down. A tribal leader in the eastern Afghan province
of Khost, the main stronghold of the Haqqani family's tribe, said that Mr.
Haqqani had a long-running financial dispute with a cousin, Ishaq, whom he had
accused of working with Afghan intelligence officials.

The Haqqani network has reportedly faced internal strain, with accounts of
discontent and even resentment within its tribal support base in eastern
Afghanistan's rugged mountains.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/12/world/asia/leader-in-insurgent-network-is-kill
ed-in-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Children gathered Monday at the spot where Nasiruddin Haqqani, a
senior leader of the feared  militant Haqqani network, was gunned down on the
outskirts of Islamabad, Pakistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANJUM NAVEED/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


