                              33 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 1, 2014 Tuesday 1:40 AM EST

FAA will miss deadline to integrate drones in U.S. skies, report says;
It's unclear when - or if - agency will be able to allow widespread use of the
aircraft, report says.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 908 words


The Federal Aviation Administration will miss a September 2015 deadline set by
Congress to allow drones to fly throughout the nation's skies because of
technical and regulatory obstacles that are unlikely to be resolved anytime
soon, according to a government audit released Monday.

The FAA is significantly behind schedule in drawing up rules and standards to
ensure that drones are airworthy, that pilots are trained properly and that
their aircraft won't interfere with other air traffic, the Transportation
Department's inspector general concluded in a highly critical audit.

The report said the FAA has so many hurdles to confront that it is unclear when
- or if - remotely controlled aircraft can be safely integrated into U.S.
airspace.

In 2012, Congress passed a law that effectively legalized commercial and
civilian drone flights in the United States. With backing from drone
manufacturers and other businesses eager to embrace a new era in aviation,
lawmakers directed the FAA to come up with rules and standards to permit
widespread drone traffic by Sept. 30, 2015.

The inspector general's audit, however, highlighted the difficulties of
absorbing drones into U.S. skies and concluded that "safety risks will persist"
until the FAA can establish a set of rules for doing so.

A Washington Post investigation in June found that at least 49 large military
drones have crashed while on training missions in the United States since 2001.
In addition, nearly two dozen civilian drones have been involved in accidents
since 2009, according to FAA data. More recently, a rising number of small,
unlicensed drones have flown dangerously close to passenger planes near some of
the country's busiest airports.

The FAA has already missed several interim deadlines, much to the frustration of
manufacturers and lawmakers eager to see drones used more widely. The inspector
general's audit found that many basic barriers remain and that "the magnitude of
unresolved safety and privacy issues will prevent" the FAA from meeting the
timetable imposed by Congress.

Les Dorr, an FAA spokesman, acknowledged that the agency faces numerous
challenges but said it has made "significant progress" toward safely integrating
drones into the nation's airspace.

In an e-mailed statement, Dorr said the FAA agrees with the inspector general's
recommendations for improving the process. He said the agency plans to propose
regulations governing the use of small drones - those that weigh less than 55
pounds and don't fly above 400 feet in altitude - this year.

The FAA had said it would issue proposed rules for small drones three years ago.
Transportation Department auditors said the delay was largely due to uncertainty
over how and whether the rules should include privacy protections to prevent
drone operators from conducting surveillance. Small drones are relatively cheap
- some models cost about $500 - and can be equipped with powerful cameras.

After the FAA issues proposed rules for small drones this year, the agency must
then allow for a lengthy period of public comment before finalizing the
standards. The audit estimated that the rules wouldn't become final until next
year at the earliest. Standards for larger drones that would share airspace with
passenger planes aren't expected to be fixed for several more years.

The FAA has imposed a de facto ban on commercial drones until it can sort out
the rules of the sky. The agency has issued only two permits for commercial
operations, both of them in rural parts of Alaska. FAA officials have said they
may relax restrictions in the coming months for a handful of industries,
including filmmakers, oil-and-gas producers and large-scale farms.

Because drones are inexpensive and relatively easy to operate, however, many
users are flying them anyway - increasingly in an unsafe manner.

In 15 cases over the past two years, drones have flown dangerously close to
passenger planes near airports, including two incidents on the same day in May
in New York and Los Angeles, according to FAA reports obtained by The Post. A
separate aviation safety database managed by NASA has recorded 50 other reports
of close calls or improper flight operations involving drones over the past
decade.

Although commercial drones are effectively banned for the moment, the FAA has
issued about 300 special-use certificates for public agencies to fly the
aircraft. About half of those have been granted to the military to train with
drones in civilian airspace. Many others have been issued to law enforcement
agencies, such as U.S. Customs and Border Protection, which flies large
surveillance drones along the borders with Canada and Mexico.

The audit also blamed the delays on technological barriers that the FAA and
manufacturers have been unable to resolve.

Drones rely on GPS signals to navigate and are controlled by pilots or operators
on the ground via a two-way radio transmission link. But those links are not
completely reliable, and it is common for operators to lose control of a drone
for seconds or minutes at a time.

With no pilot in the cockpit, drones also lack the technology to see and avoid
other aircraft, raising the risk of a midair collision. The inspector general
called that problem the "most pressing technical challenge to integration."

Manufacturers are hard at work on fixes to both of those technological
shortcomings. But the audit indicated that solutions are not close at hand.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


