                             340 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Show Us the Drone Memos

BYLINE: By RAND PAUL.

Rand Paul is a Republican senator from Kentucky.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 806 words


WASHINGTON -- I BELIEVE that killing an American citizen without a trial is an
extraordinary concept and deserves serious debate. I can't imagine appointing
someone to the federal bench, one level below the Supreme Court, without fully
understanding that person's views concerning the extrajudicial killing of
American citizens.

But President Obama is seeking to do just that. He has nominated David J.
Barron, a Harvard law professor and a former acting assistant attorney general,
to a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.

While he was an official in the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel,
Mr. Barron wrote at least two legal memos justifying the execution without a
trial of an American citizen abroad. Now Mr. Obama is refusing to share that
legal argument with the American people.

On April 30, I wrote to the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, urging him to
delay this nomination, pending a court-ordered disclosure of the first memo I
knew about. Since that letter, I have learned more. The American Civil Liberties
Union sent a letter to all senators on May 6, noting that in the view of the
Senate Intelligence Committee chairwoman, Dianne Feinstein, ''there are at least
eleven OLC opinions on the targeted killing or drone program.'' It has not been
established whether Mr. Barron wrote all those memos, but we do know that his
controversial classified opinions provided the president with a legal argument
and justification to target an American citizen for execution without a trial by
jury or due process.

I believe that all senators should have access to all of these opinions.
Furthermore, the American people deserve to see redacted versions of these memos
so that they can understand the Obama administration's legal justification for
this extraordinary exercise of executive power. The White House may invoke
national security against disclosure, but legal arguments that affect the rights
of every American should not have the privilege of secrecy.

I agree with the A.C.L.U. that ''no senator can meaningfully carry out his or
her constitutional obligation to provide 'advice and consent' on this nomination
to a lifetime position as a federal appellate judge without being able to read
Mr. Barron's most important and consequential legal writing.'' The A.C.L.U.
cites the fact that in modern history, a presidential order to kill an American
citizen away from a battlefield is unprecedented.

The Bill of Rights is clear. The Fifth Amendment provides that no one can be
''deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.'' The
Sixth Amendment provides that ''the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy
and public trial, by an impartial jury,'' as well as the right to be informed of
all charges and have access to legal counsel. These are fundamental rights that
cannot be waived with a presidential pen.

In battle, combatants engaged in war against America get no due process and may
lawfully be killed. But citizens not in a battlefield, however despicable, are
guaranteed a trial by our Constitution.

No one argues that Americans who commit treason shouldn't be punished. The
maximum penalty for treason is death. But the Constitution specifies the process
necessary to convict.

Anwar al-Awlaki was an American citizen who was subject to a kill order from Mr.
Obama, and was killed in 2011 in Yemen by a missile fired from a drone. I don't
doubt that Mr. Awlaki committed treason and deserved the most severe punishment.
Under our Constitution, he should have been tried -- in absentia, if necessary
-- and allowed a legal defense. If he had been convicted and sentenced to death,
then the execution of that sentence, whether by drone or by injection, would not
have been an issue.

But this new legal standard does not apply merely to a despicable human being
who wanted to harm the United States. The Obama administration has established a
legal justification that applies to every American citizen, whether in Yemen,
Germany or Canada.

Defending the rights of all American citizens to a trial by jury is a core value
of our Constitution. Those who would make exceptions for killing accused
American citizens without trial should give thought to the times in our history
when either prejudice or fear allowed us to forget due process. During World War
I, our nation convicted and imprisoned Americans who voiced opposition to the
war. During World War II, the government interned Japanese-Americans.

The rule of law exists to protect those who are minorities by virtue of their
skin color or their beliefs. That is why I am fighting this nomination. And I
will do so until Mr. Barron frankly discusses his opinions on executing
Americans without trial, and until the American people are able to participate
in one of the most consequential debates in our history.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/12/opinion/show-us-the-drone-memos.html

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


