                             349 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 20, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Drone Kills Militants in Pakistan

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 336 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Fifteen militants were killed early Saturday morning when
an American drone struck a compound in the Pakistani tribal region of North
Waziristan, according to local residents and a security official. It was the
fourth known drone strike in the region since Pakistan launched a military
operation there last month.

Residents said the drone fired four missiles into the compound about 2 a.m. They
said that 10 of the militants killed were from Punjab, Pakistan's largest
province, and that the five others were Uzbeks affiliated with the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan. The strike occurred in the village of Datta Khel, a few
miles from the Afghan border.

A security official gave a slightly different account, saying that six missiles
had been fired at the compound, and that two vehicles loaded with explosives had
been struck. ''There are tents and there are mud houses, occupied by militants
fleeing Miram Shah and Mir Ali,'' the official said, describing the compound and
referring to two nearby towns that have been hubs of jihadist activity. The army
says it has cleared Miram Shah of militants, and a ground offensive is
continuing in Mir Ali.

Most of those killed in the strike on Saturday were Taliban from Punjab, the
official said. He spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not
authorized to talk to the news media.

The Pakistani military, which began its operation in North Waziristan on June
15, says it has lost 26 men in the fighting, including two officers. It
estimates that 400 militants have been killed.

Violence has also escalated elsewhere. Late Friday night, militants killed eight
paramilitary security personnel in an attack on a vehicle in the town of Jamrud
in the Khyber tribal region, near the city of Peshawar. ''These are the people
who have fled the operation in North Waziristan and have taken shelter here,'' a
senior government official said, referring to the extremists. Four police
officers in Peshawar were also killed in attacks by militants on Friday.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/world/asia/15-militants-are-reported-killed-in
-us-drone-strike-in-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


