                             344 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Missile Strike by C.I.A. Drone Kills at Least 4, Pakistan Reports

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and
Declan Walsh from London. Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed reporting from
Islamabad, Pakistan, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 500 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Ending a five-month hiatus, the Central Intelligence
Agency resumed its drone campaign in Pakistan on Wednesday with a missile strike
that killed at least four people at a compound in the tribal district of North
Waziristan, Pakistani officials said.

The drone fired several missiles at a truck parked outside a house four miles
north of Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, said a Pakistani
security official in Peshawar.

It was uncertain initially who had been killed in the strike. But a majority of
the victims, by several accounts, were Uzbek fighters from the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan -- a Taliban-allied jihadi group that only hours earlier had
boasted of its role in Sunday's audacious assault on the Karachi airport, which
led to at least 36 deaths.

Speaking from the tribal belt, another Pakistani official reported five deaths
-- three Uzbeks and two members of the Haqqani network, a Taliban-allied faction
that regularly attacks American and Afghan forces in Afghanistan and that until
last month held the American soldier Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl hostage. Both Pakistani
officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss intelligence details
publicly. A C.I.A. official would not comment on the strike in Pakistan.

A resident of Miram Shah said by telephone that the force of Wednesday's attack
rattled windows in the town. It was the first known C.I.A. drone strike inside
Pakistan since Dec. 25, 2013, when missiles struck another compound near Miram
Shah and killed at least three people.

Although the C.I.A. has never explained the subsequent pause, many Pakistani
analysts believe it was to allow Pakistan's government a chance to negotiate
with the Taliban. However, those talks have fallen apart amid a new wave of
militant attacks and government airstrikes.

Another factor may also be involved. On Sunday, James N. Mattis, the former
leader of the United States Central Command, said on CNN that concern about
Sergeant Bergdahl's safety had weighed on any potential military strikes against
the Haqqanis. That concern is now gone, he said, adding, ''There's also a
freedom to operate against them that perhaps we didn't fully enjoy.''

Within Pakistan, the country's military and civilian leaders, spurred by public
outrage over the Karachi assault, are contemplating a new offensive against the
Taliban.

In the past week, Pakistan's military has conducted airstrikes against suspected
militant targets in North Waziristan, particularly in neighborhoods dominated by
ethnic Uighur and Uzbek militants.

China, which is a significant economic and strategic ally for Pakistan, has
pressured the government to crack down on the Uighurs, who are linked to an
Islamist insurgency in Xinjiang region in western China.

The Uzbek militants, who fled to Pakistan after 2001, have become an integral
part of the Taliban insurgency that, despite efforts to talk peace with the
government in recent months, has continued to carry out bomb attacks across the
country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/12/world/asia/missile-strike-by-cia-drone
-kills-at-least-4-pakistan-reports.html

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


