                             343 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Relatives of Victims of Drone Strikes Drop Appeal

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 287 words


WASHINGTON -- The relatives of three United States citizens killed in American
drone strikes without trial, including Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical Muslim cleric,
have decided not to appeal a federal judge's dismissal of a lawsuit they filed
against Obama administration officials.

The lawsuit sought unspecified damages against several top national security
officials for the deaths from two drone strikes in Yemen in 2011; the victims
also included Samir Khan and Mr. Awlaki's teenage son, Abdulrahman al-Awlaki. In
April, Judge Rosemary M. Collyer of the Federal District Court for the District
of Columbia dismissed the case, deferring to the government's national-security
arguments.

In a statement, Nasser al-Awlaki, the father of Mr. Awlaki and the grandfather
of Abdulrahman, said he had lost faith in the American courts. The older Mr.
Awlaki had also sought an injunction blocking the government from trying to kill
his son before the drone strike, but a Federal District Court judge dismissed
that as well.

''Although the court failed to fulfill its role in this case, my family and I
continue to hope that answers to our questions about why our son and grandson
were killed will someday see the light of day, and that there may someday be
accountability for the government's actions,'' he said.

The American Civil Liberties Union and the Center for Constitutional Rights
helped bring the suit, and the rights center said in a statement that ''our
system of checks and balances failed these families.''

Government officials have said that Mr. Awlaki was an operational terrorist who
was planning attacks on Americans with Al Qaeda's branch in Yemen. They said
that Mr. Khan and Abdulrahman were not deliberately targeted.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/04/us/relatives-of-victims-of-drone
-strikes-drop-appeal.html

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


