                              34 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 2:56 PM EST

State legislation governing private drone use

BYLINE: Michael Berry;Nabiha Syed (guest-blogging)

LENGTH: 935 words


With many people, including journalists, photographers and filmmakers, clamoring
to fly drones, and in the absence of FAA regulations, states have begun to
address the issue. Nearly all states have considered drone legislation over the
past few years. More than a dozen states have passed laws substantively
regulating drones, with most of these laws addressing the use of drones by
government agencies and focusing primarily on law enforcement use.

Several states also have enacted laws regulating private drone use. Theses
states have taken varying approaches, have articulated permissible uses, created
new causes of action and established new crimes.

Two states have sought to regulate private use of drones by addressing where
they can fly. Last year, Oregon enacted a law that allows property owners to sue
a drone operator if (1) a drone has flown less than 400 feet above the owner's
property at least once, (2) the property owner has told the drone operator that
he/she does not consent to the drone flying over his/her property, and (3) the
operator then flies the drone less than 400 feet above the property again. If
these three conditions are met, the property owner can seek injunctive relief,
"treble damages for any injury to the person or the property," and attorney fees
if the amount of damages is under $10,000.

Tennessee also seeks to restrict drones from flying over private property, but
has done so in a different way. It has amended its criminal trespass statute to
make it a crime for drones to fly over private property below navigable
airspace.

In contrast to these two states' focus on drone flight, most states that have
enacted laws on private drone use have sought to limit who, when and where
drones film and photograph.

Texas has enacted the most detailed of these laws. Its drone law - called the
Texas Privacy Act- explicitly authorizes drones to capture images in certain
circumstances. For instance, it permits owners and operators of pipelines to use
drones for inspections and university professors to use them for "scholarly
research." The Texas law also allows drones to capture images of people on
"public real property," of people "on real property that is within 25 miles of
the United States border," and "with the consent of the individual who owns or
lawfully occupies the real property captured in the image."

In addition to these permissible uses, the law prohibits certain conduct -
specifically, using a drone to capture images of people or privately owned
property "with the intent to conduct surveillance on the individual or
property." The law, however, does not define "surveillance."

Texas deems this conduct a misdemeanor and provides a defense if the alleged
offender destroyed the image as soon as he or she realizes it was captured and
has not disclosed it to anyone else. The law also makes it a misdemeanor to
possess, disclose, distribute, or otherwise use an image after capturing it in
violation of the law.

In addition, Texas law gives owners and tenants of private property the right to
file suit to enjoin an "imminent violation" of the criminal provisions and to
seek civil penalties and attorney's fees. The civil penalties include statutory
damages of up to $5,000 for "all images captured in a single episode" and up to
$10,000 for the disclosure or "use" of "any images captured in a single
episode." An owner and tenant also can recover actual damages if he or she can
show that the images were disclosed or distributed with "malice."

Tennessee has enacted a statute that follows the Texas model. It also has
enacted a statute that prohibits the use of drones to conduct surveillance of
people hunting or fishing without their consent. Illinois has passed a similar
law, making it a crime to use a drone to interfere with hunting and fishing.

Idaho's law sweeps more broadly. It bars people from using drones "to photograph
or otherwise record an individual, without such individual's written consent,
for the purpose of publishing or otherwise publicly disseminating such
photograph or recording." The law, which would undoubtedly face constitutional
challenges if enforced, allows a person to file suit and recover either $1,000
in statutory damages or "actual and general damages," whichever is greater, plus
attorney fees and "other litigation costs reasonably incurred."

North Carolina, likewise, prohibits using a drone to "photograph an individual,
without the individual's consent, for the purpose of publishing or otherwise
publicly disseminating the photograph." But, unlike Idaho, the Tar Heel state
provides an exception for "newsgathering, newsworthy events, or events or places
to which the general public is invited."

North Carolina, taking a page from Texas's statute, also prohibits people from
using drones to "conduct surveillance" of people, dwelling, and private property
without the person or property owner's consent.

If any of these provisions are violated, the person or property owner can sue,
seeking actual damages, statutory damages ($5,000 per photograph or video
disseminated), costs and fees, as well as injunctive relief.

Finally, Wisconsin has passed a criminal law to deal with private drone use. Its
law would punish anyone who uses a drone "with the intent to photograph, record,
or otherwise observe another individual in a place or location where the person
has a reasonable expectation of privacy." In Wisconsin, that crime is a
misdemeanor.

While each of these state statutes might be well-intentioned, they suffer from
several significant defects. They also seem unnecessary. We will explain why in
another post.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


