                             342 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Seeks to Censor More of Memo That Approved Drone Strike on American

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 654 words


WASHINGTON -- One week after the Obama administration said it would comply with
a federal appeals court ruling ordering it to make public portions of a Justice
Department memo that signed off on the targeted killing of a United States
citizen, the administration is now asking the court for permission to censor
additional passages of the document.

In the interim, the Senate voted narrowly last week to confirm David Barron, the
former Justice Department official who was the memo's principal author, to an
appeals court judgeship. At least one Democratic senator who had opposed Mr.
Barron over the secrecy surrounding his memo voted for him after the
administration said it would release it.

The 41-page memo, dated July 16, 2010, cleared the way for a drone strike in
Yemen in September 2011 that killed Anwar al-Awlaki, an American citizen accused
by intelligence officials of plotting terrorist attacks. The American Civil
Liberties Union and The New York Times are seeking the memo's public disclosure
in lawsuits under the Freedom of Information Act.

The Justice Department said it would soon disclose a version of the memo with
the additional passages it wants to keep redacted blacked out. It said the
additional passages discussed classified facts, not legal reasoning.

In January 2013, a Federal District Court judge ruled that the government could
withhold the memo from the public entirely. But this April, a panel of the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, ruled that
the government must make public portions of the memo that lay out legal
analysis, though not facts based on classified intelligence.

The Second Circuit's opinion specified which passages of the memo should be
disclosed and which should be redacted. But in a new court filing, Sarah
Normand, an assistant United States attorney, said that the sections of the memo
that the court had designated for public release contained further information
that should be exempt from disclosure.

''Some of the information appears to have been ordered disclosed based on
inadvertence or mistake, or is subject to distinct exemption claims or other
legal protections that have never been judicially considered,'' Ms. Normand
wrote.

The Justice Department asked to keep its entire motion seeking additional
redactions secret, but on Wednesday the court issued a five-page order denying
that request and saying that as much of the motion as possible would have to be
made public.

The order also recounted new details about several previous rounds of
then-secret negotiations between the court and the government, dating back to
February, over what would be redacted.

Last week, the administration said that Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr.
had decided to release the memo but would file a limited appeal to keep some
facts redacted in the final public version of the court's ruling. Among the
information redacted in the ruling is the identity of an agency, in addition to
the Defense Department, that had an operational role in the drone strike that
killed Mr. Awlaki. Although it is widely known that the C.I.A. operates drones,
including from a base in Saudi Arabia, and that it participated in the operation
that killed Mr. Awlaki, the Obama administration still officially treats that
information as secret.

Mr. Verrilli's decision to release the memo changed the politics of Mr. Barron's
confirmation fight. In particular, Senator Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado, who
had said he would oppose Mr. Barron because of the administration's secrecy,
said he would support him.

Mr. Udall had focused on obtaining for the public the government's legal
reasoning. In a statement on Wednesday, Mr. Udall said the administration had
told him as well that its additional ''redactions to the memo would focus on
still-classified information -- not the legal reasoning itself.'' He added, ''I
intend to hold the White House to its word.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/us/politics/us-asks-court-to-censor-more-parts
-of-target-killing-memo.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   Anwar al-Awlaki, a United States citizen accused of plotting
terrorist  attacks, was killed in a drone strike in Yemen in 2011. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY SITE INTELLIGENCE GROUP, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


