                             345 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Next Front

BYLINE: By ELIZA GRISWOLD

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 7803 words


On a searing morning this spring, Brig. Gen. James B. Linder leaned against the
red-webbing seats of a C-130 as it flew over the Sahara. On his camouflaged
knee, he balanced two dog-eared Moleskine notebooks and a map of Africa. Linder,
who is in his early 50s, commands the United States Special Operations forces in
Africa. He was on his way to visit a detachment of 12 Army Green Berets training
with African troops to fight Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Niger. Through the
plane's scratched plexiglass portholes, dunes crested like waves in an ocean of
sand, and hot blasts of wind buffeted the fuselage. An hour's flight to the
south, his team of Special Forces was deployed along the Nigerian border, where
the militant group Boko Haram was targeting children in its bid to establish an
Islamic state.

''My job is to look at Africa and see where the threat to the United States
is,'' Linder said as he unfolded his map and traced circles around the
territories where he knew extremist groups were operating. ''I see Al Qaeda in
the Islamic Maghreb, the Libyan problem set, Al Shabab in Somalia, Boko Haram in
Nigeria, Ansar al-Sharia in Tunisia, Benghazi and Darna.''

The United States Africa Command, known as Africom, was established in 2007 but
stepped up its operations after the Arab Spring uprisings in 2011, when the
overthrow of dictatorships from Tunisia to Libya to Egypt allowed militants and
criminal networks to spread. In 2012, Al Qaeda and its affiliates seized control
of Northern Mali and held a territory the size of Texas for nearly a year. With
American support, French and Chadian forces managed to dislodge them, but they
are still active in the region. In 2013, some 30 militants took over the
Tigantourine gas facility in Algeria and killed 39 hostages. That same year,
Somali militants raided the Westgate shopping center in Kenya's capital, leaving
67 dead.

These attacks underscore how the threat to U.S. interests has shifted from Iraq
and Afghanistan to Yemen and Africa. Linder arrived at Africom just after the
storming of the diplomatic mission in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012. ''Instability in
Libya is causing a lot of the instability in West Africa,'' he said. But it
isn't simply a matter of dots on a map. ''I see the enemy, and then I look for
connective tissue.'' With his index finger, he traced how the conflicts in Libya
and Syria are flooding Africa to the south with weapons and fighters. ''Foreign
fighters coming out of Syria are a serious problem,'' he added. As terrorists
move around and try to build networks between cells and like-minded
organizations, Linder looks to break them apart.

''We have a real global threat,'' Linder continued. ''The problems in Africa are
going to land on our doorstep if we're not careful.'' Linder opened one of his
battered notebooks and riffled through a stack of graphs and statistics he
clipped from The Economist and other publications. He pulled out an
international flight schedule. ''From Nigeria to the United States, there are
eight direct flights a week.'' Boko Haram hadn't yet succeeded in wreaking much
havoc beyond Nigeria's borders, but had signaled their intent to do so. In July
2010, their leader, Abubakar Shekau, declared the group's allegiance to Al Qaeda
and said to America: ''Jihad has just begun.''

Linder swept his palm over the map from Latin America to Africa and onto Europe.
All three were increasingly linked through illegal trafficking in cocaine,
weapons and people. As avenues for drug smuggling closed down in Europe, they
opened up in Africa along some of the world's oldest trade routes, where Boko
Haram and Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb meet. Smugglers made deals with
militants to protect their trafficking routes and their product. ''Thirteen
percent of the European cocaine trade flows through Africa,'' Linder read.
''That's about $4.2 billion a year.''

A gentleman farmer from Fort Lawn, S.C., Linder speaks with a drawl that does
little to soften the blade of his critical intelligence. He also speaks with the
precision of a man used to giving orders and having them followed. Before taking
up his post at Africom, he educated himself on the countless problems facing the
continent. ''I went around Washington to three-letter agencies and asked people
how they saw Africa. Some saw Africa through a lens of AIDS, others through
climate change.'' All of these require serious attention, he said. ''On
time-lapse satellite imagery, you literally can watch the desert moving south.''

Linder is ''myopically focused'' on seeing the continent through the lens of
threat: ''Africa is the battleground of the future.'' The future of war is about
winning people, not territory, he explained. Nowhere is this truer than in
Africa, where most national boundaries began as lines drawn on colonial maps and
make little sense in terms of tribal allegiances or religious affiliations.
Terrorists pay no attention to national borders, so combating them requires
leaving behind an outmoded view of nation-on-nation warfare.

Linder turned to the notebook in his lap. He'd scrawled some statistics on the
inside cover: Africa's current population of one billion was projected to double
by 2050. By then, nearly one in four people on the planet will be an African.
''In Africa, it's never about seizing terrain,'' he said. ''Tanks won't get us
there. Jet planes won't get us there. Massive naval armadas won't get us
there.''

The shift in American military strategy from huge, expensive weaponry to a
lighter, more flexible approach reflects a sharp decline in the American
appetite for foreign engagement. The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have left
nearly 7,000 Americans dead and carried an estimated price tag of $4 trillion to
$6 trillion. Conventional warfare is viewed by many Americans as too costly. As
a whole, the military has moved away from deploying large numbers of troops and
now favors targeted action like drones and raids. Increasingly, it is looking
for ways to deploy groups like Linder's: small teams of men, in fleece jackets
and sneakers, quietly fanning out across the African continent. On any given
day, there are 700 Special Forces in Africa, part of a larger U.S. military
presence that ranges from 5,000 to 8,000 people on the ground. These Special
Operations teams, which can be as small as one commando, deliver aid to places
where it has generally been too risky to dig wells or hand out eyeglasses, don
ties to work at U.S. Embassies and train with African commandos. They also
coordinate with the diplomatic corps of the U.S. government and Africom. They
are adaptable enough to shift as the nature of the threat shifts, fighting the
kind of asymmetrical warfare that special operators have been fighting since
World War II. ''This is what S.O.F. is trained to do,'' Linder said. ''This is
why they built us.''

Linder has appeared on every significant battleground of the last 30 years --
Central and South America, Afghanistan, Iraq, the Philippines and Africa. His
military career parallels America's deployment of Special Operations forces in
the post-World War II era. Like many operators of his generation, Linder served
in the jungles of Colombia, where he searched for Pablo Escobar, the cartel
leader who walked out of his self-appointed luxury prison in 1992. ''All the
guard towers faced out,'' Linder said with a smile.

Linder arrived in Somalia in the midst of Black Hawk Down, the event that would
drive America's noninterventionist foreign policies through the 1990s. He landed
on Oct. 4, 1993, when the army of Mohammed Farah Aidid was still dragging the
bodies of U.S. commandos through the streets. Linder spent most of the next
three weeks sweating on a cot, wearing black nylon gym shorts and listening to
the whistling descant of incoming shells.

The images of mutilated soldiers on TV caused an American retrenchment that
lasted until the Sept. 11 attacks. During that time, Linder served in the
Balkans and ran the Green Berets' notoriously challenging qualification course
at the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School at Fort Bragg, N.C.

After Sept. 11, Linder's résumé goes necessarily blank. As a tactical Special
Forces commander, Linder led many missions that belong to the world of ''black
ops'' -- meaning that they are secret and that he is neither particularly
accustomed to nor fond of speaking to reporters, least of all about himself. If
you know what to look for, however, some of the most interesting assignments on
Linder's official résumé are those that sound the most boring. From 2002 to 2004
and again from 2008 to 2010, his résumé reads ''Commander, United States Army ''
in Iraq or Afghanistan. From August 2004 to June 2005, he was a Senior Service
College Fellow at the Central Intelligence Agency. (During those years, in the
midst of various ''black'' assignments, he spent significant time in Africa.)

In 2005 and 2006, Linder served as the commander of the Joint Special Operations
Task Force -- Philippines. His job was to root out the militant group Abu Sayyaf
from the islands in the nation's south. Linder, then a colonel, set up
operations on an Abu Sayyaf-controlled island called Jolo. There was no how-to
manual; he fought the enemy however he saw fit. Linder thrived in this jungle
environment. He employed the methods he learned and taught at Fort Bragg. The
emphasis, as it would later be in Africa, was on building relationships with
local people. ''This isn't something that we learned in Afghanistan and Iraq,''
he said. ''That's S.O.F. 101.''

Abu Sayyaf occupied a strategic ridge above the small town where the commandos
were based. Linder's men set up medical and veterinary clinics. They built roads
to help isolated farmers bring their goods to market. They installed solar
panels and an Internet connection at a local school. They created and
distributed a comic book in which a heroic merchant marine came home from his
travels and defeated the kidnapping thugs who'd taken over his home. These
methods helped draw the local population away from the militants, Linder said,
but the bad guys were still on the ridge. One day, a visitor asked him what
success would look like. He replied: When the Abu Sayyaf guy up on the ridge
looks down and sees the new school, store and road and decides to leave the
fight and come home, then we know we've succeeded.

''I thought it was a metaphor,'' Linder said. Two weeks later, he received a
phone call that an Abu Sayyaf defector had just come down off the mountain.
''When you mature,'' Linder said, ''you see it's a far better way to get people
off the battlefield.''

When Linder's C-130 touched down in Diffa, he donned his green beret, even
though he hates wearing hats, and strode down the plane's ramp to climb into a
waiting S.U.V. His small entourage bounced over the dunes toward a training
exercise and pulled up to a concrete bunker that served as that morning's
militant hide-out. A group of men, wearing T-shirts tied over their faces,
scattered into the thorny brush like excited extras in a film. They were playing
the role of Boko Haram in the day's exercise. Around Diffa, on Niger's 930-mile
border with Nigeria, Boko Haram seeks haven by disappearing among the 50,000
refugees who have fled the violence in Nigeria. No one knows who belongs to Boko
Haram. To be safe, the people of Diffa don't speak the group's name aloud; they
call the militants ''brothers.''

''Boko Haram is attacking and destroying civil society in Nigeria,'' Linder
said. The group had recently burned children alive in a locked schoolroom,
massacred people who were watching a soccer game and killed boys in their sleep
at a boarding school. (They would kidnap nearly 300 girls four weeks after
Linder left Africa.) ''Next, they'll target traditional leaders.'' The goal was
to reach those communities before Boko Haram did.

For the past three weeks, Green Berets, along with British, French and Canadian
special operators, had been training 139 elite troops from Niger, Nigeria and
Chad. This was part of an annual exercise called Flintlock, which began in 2005
and this year involved more than 1,000 soldiers from 18 countries. It's a larger
version of a Joint Combined Exchange Training exercise, in which operators teach
indigenous forces a range of military and intelligence-gathering techniques.

In Diffa, the lessons covered basic tactics of counterinsurgency, including
manning checkpoints, foiling ambushes and conducting raids against terrorist
hide-outs like the one before which Linder now stood. Morning after morning,
under the pewter sun, the operators instructed the African soldiers in a mix of
English, French and Arabic -- ''Yalla!'' -- on how to shoulder their weapons and
aggressively approach an enemy camp. ''Come on, ladies! There ain't no dragons
in there!'' one Green Beret barked at a group of Chadians who didn't understand
him. Another said, ''If you aim your weapon like that, you're going to shoot
your friends.''

The air crackled with blank automatic rounds as African soldiers rushed over the
ridge. Someone threw a grenade simulator in the wrong direction; flames shot out
of the dry brush. A dozen traditional leaders in a rainbow of flowing robes and
fezzes approached Linder. They represented the border villages most vulnerable
to Boko Haram.

''Are you going to take us hostage?'' a tribal leader of 65,000 people joked to
Linder in French. The general waited as Melanie Zimmerman, his foreign-policy
adviser, who was wearing combat boots she ordered from Amazon, translated.
''Boko Haram is hiding here,'' the elder went on. ''No one wants them.''

Boko Haram's stronghold near Maiduguri is only 100 miles south over an unmarked
border. The militants try to gain a perch in communities suffering from a host
of complex stressors, one of which is a startling birthrate. Niger has the
highest in the world: On average, a woman gives birth to seven children. Another
is desertification. Diffa sits near the receding banks of Lake Chad, which
supplies water to 30 million people. As the lake has dried up, so, too, has the
ability of people to support themselves. ''Here we live climate change,'' says
Inoussa Saouna, the Diffa government prefect.

There are now two kinds of refugees in Diffa: those fleeing Boko Haram and those
fleeing the weather. The chaos wrought by dislocation and some of the world's
worst social indicators renders these communities vulnerable to extremism.
''Terrorists come and tell people, 'You don't even have a road, a well'; they
give out 100 euros and tell people, 'We are fighting for God,' '' Col. Mahamane
Laminou Sani, a senior military official from Niger, said later. ''We have to
fight back socially.''

Linder and his Green Berets know this well. In Niger, they have been working
with the U.S. Agency for International Development to create ''zones of
resilience'' in marginal places at risk of falling under militant sway. After
the training exercise in Diffa, Linder attended a ''goat grab'' barbecue at the
local officers' club. As Pharrell Williams's ''Happy'' played in the background,
Linder white-boarded strategies with Earl Gast, the agency's assistant
administrator for Africa. ''Since the war in the Balkans,'' Gast said,
''U.S.A.I.D. has been working with the U.S. military to deliver aid to dangerous
places, which are among the most desperately in need of help.''

In Diffa, the elite international forces hunkered down near the training ground
in a compound built in 2009 as a government hotel. They represented a veritable
United Nations of European and African countries facing a mounting challenge
with extremism. Yet given the threat of kidnapping by Boko Haram, the U.S.
Special Forces discouraged anyone from venturing off base. (Special Forces, also
known as Army Green Berets, are part of the military's larger Special Operations
forces.) The hotel's nightclub, equipped with a working smoke machine, had been
turned into a medical clinic for soldiers injured in the exercise. (One broke
his leg after a parachute jump.) Among the concrete cabins the soldiers called
''hooches,'' it was easy to spy which ones housed the confined Americans. Yellow
TRX harnesses hung from the wooden doorways, and portable lawn chairs lined the
crab grass. A sledgehammer and an enormous truck tire lay on the ground as
curious instruments in a cross-training circuit called the International House
of Pain. Despite the heat, heavily inked guys wearing running shorts and earbuds
jogged endless circles around the interior perimeter of the small compound. The
camp, where there was nothing much to do but work out, felt like a tribal
gathering of special-operator subclans.

One evening, over a dinner of tamales and chocolate milk in the makeshift mess
hall, a group of Nigerian commandos swapped stories about encounters with Boko
Haram. They belonged to the Special Boat Service, which shares its name with the
British version of the Navy SEALs. These men were trained by the British and the
Americans to help safeguard oil in Nigeria's watery south. Now, however, they
were stationed in the country's sere north to fight Boko Haram. Other than the
occasional flash flood, there was no water, and their maritime tactics were
useless.

Bawa Muse, a rangy guy in a black V-neck T-shirt, boasted that he had survived
about 20 gun battles with Boko Haram, including an ambush from which he ran
away. In Diffa, he learned that the best tactic to use in an ambush was to fight
through it. ''Now, I'll stay,'' he said. Still, he didn't think Nigeria needed
American soldiers to defeat Boko Haram. ''This is our time, and we must fight it
out,'' he said.

At the next table, a captain with the French Special Operations forces described
the growing cooperation between the French and the Americans in Africa. In Mali,
France, the former colonial power in the region, sent troops. The Americans
airlifted those troops and their vehicles and provided intelligence through the
use of an unarmed MQ-9 drone, in addition to other forms of support. The scale
of American aid shocked the captain. ''We don't give out thousands of bug
nets,'' he said. ''We can't.''

During his recent commencement address at West Point, President Obama announced
a $5 billion bid to build counterterrorism partnerships in the Sahel, among
other places, ''to train, build capacity and facilitate partner countries on the
front lines.'' Linder is tasked with carrying out this cautious mandate, part of
what's been called the Obama Doctrine: a foreign policy that's a moving target
on the spectrum between isolation and intervention.

''We can't afford to fix everyone's problems,'' Linder said. ''They have to be
fixed to their standards, not our own.'' But engaging African militaries comes
with significant uncertainty and significant costs. ''When it comes to
traditional foreign assistance,'' says Lora Lumpe, a senior policy analyst at
the Open Society Foundations, ''Congress requires report after report to show
that the aid is effective. But the Pentagon isn't required to do anything close
to that when it comes to counterterrorism assistance. There is not a single
G.A.O. or D.O.D. inspector-general report indicating any success in its approach
to counterterrorism.'' (In response to this criticism, Edward Price, assistant
press secretary of the National Security Council, said the White House plans to
put such checks in place.)

''We have major concerns about this $5 billion fund,'' says Adotei Akwei of
Amnesty International U.S.A. The problem isn't professionalizing foreign
militaries. ''They need that.'' The problem, he said, is that there has not been
equal attention to rights and rule of law. ''We've learned by now that there are
no solely military solutions to counterterrorism, but no one has the details on
how or who from civil society is going to monitor military aid. More often than
not, civil society has to run from security forces.''

With its goat grabs and training exercises, the U.S. military can sometimes seem
unaware of how inaccessible their African counterparts are to their own
civilians. African militaries often serve corrupt dictators and routinely commit
grave human rights abuses. In Nigeria, the military is essentially an
oil-skimming operation so dysfunctional that it has been unable to act on U.S.
and foreign intelligence provided in the search for the abducted schoolgirls.
According to Human Rights Watch, the joint task force of the Nigerian military
assigned to battle Boko Haram ''has engaged in excessive use of force, physical
abuse, secret detentions, extortion, burning of houses, stealing money during
raids and extrajudicial killings of suspects.'' In South Sudan, where civil war
is raging, the U.S. has trained the Sudan People's Liberation Army in the fight
against Joseph Kony, the maniacal leader of the Lord's Resistance Army. ''Since
the conflict began last December,'' says John Ryle of the Rift Valley Institute,
an independent research organization, ''the South Sudan government has been
criticized for the involvement of the S.P.L.A. in ethnic killings.'' Once hard
skills have been transferred, it's difficult to predict how they will be used.

The military is well aware of this predicament. ''We're intent on training
African forces to operate under the rule of law, respect human rights and serve
the population,'' says Gen. Carter Ham, a former commander of Africom, but the
mission is far from complete. ''We've got to talk more at the senior-leader
level about the real role of militaries in free societies.'' Linder and other
leaders see our engagement as a long game and point out that staying home isn't
an option. ''We have no choice,'' Linder said. ''We have to engage globally.''
One primary lesson learned in Iraq and Afghanistan, he notes, is that if
security forces abuse the local population, they alienate their best source of
intelligence. The opposite also holds true: Treat the locals well, and they'll
tell you who doesn't belong in the village and where the militants have buried
the latest roadside bomb. One of the first lessons that Special Operations
teaches in Africa and other places is that a good soldier serves the population,
not the leader.

But embracing a more approachable military, one that is as likely to deliver
eyeglasses and mosquito nets as to provide military training, humanitarian
organizations say, risks ''militarizing'' aid. ''It's a perversion of the
principle of humanitarian action and makes it almost impossible for other actors
to gain acceptance by the community,'' says Sophie Delaunay, the executive
director of Doctors Without Borders in the United States. It can also be
dangerous. ''We've seen the blurring of these lines result in the attacks on
foreign aid workers in Afghanistan and Iraq,'' says Akwei of Amnesty
International. ''Clearly there's a backlash here in the delivery of assistance
by U.S. security forces for U.S. security objectives.''

Linder points out that the ''art'' of balancing security and development in weak
states is the essence of Special Operations training. ''U.S.A.I.D. is
capitalizing on every tool in their tool kit, including using the military to
leverage the places where their programs are out there to reach,'' Linder said.
Nancy Lindborg of U.S.A.I.D. says the last five years has shown that to help
countries emerge from conflict and keep them from backsliding into chaos,
''we've got to look at jobs, justice and security, and advance all three at
once.''

Linder and his team describe the vulnerable communities they are serving as
''ungoverned spaces,'' not because they have no government but because their
government institutions are weak at best, rapacious at worst. ''Ungoverned
spaces'' is a bit of a shibboleth in the world of counterterrorism post-2001,
but the conditions it describes are real. ''When I see ungoverned space,'' says
Corinne Dufka, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch, ''I see failing
rule-of-law institutions and predatory, criminal behavior by those -- soldiers,
police, politicians -- mandated to protect instead of exploit their people. It
is these factors that undermine rights and drive people into the hands of rebel,
criminal and extremist groups. We should all be very worried.''

Whether it's providing humanitarian relief or battling insurgents, people are
the ''problem set.'' ''No matter how much money you spend on airplanes and
ships, when you've got a couple of megacities on your doorstep, it becomes a
matter of human terrain,'' Linder said. Since 2005, that human terrain has
increasingly been mapped by the military, using anthropological methods like
in-depth interviews and the study of culture and language to identify who is at
risk. In 2007, the American Anthropological Association ruled this practice ''an
unacceptable application of anthropological expertise.'' But Linder says he
isn't relying on anthropologists to map the Sahara. ''It's not an anthropologist
telling me about tribes and nomadic patterns,'' he said later. ''I've got
Wikipedia for that. What I need is the operator.''

To Linder, the art of special warfare is exactly that: an art. ''Nobody is born
with the natural skill for this art. It comes from years of study.'' At Fort
Bragg during the qualification course, operators are thrown into an exercise
called Robin Sage. Their ''survival'' depends on their ability to influence a
guerrilla chief who controls when and whether they eat, sleep and succeed at
their objective. What makes special operators special, according to Linder, has
nothing to do with high-tech gear. Linder tells his men, ''You can win buck
naked with a butter knife.''

One of Linder's most unconventional warriors is a Special Forces lieutenant
colonel named Patrick. Patrick, 48, and his small teams of American operators
began traveling around northern Niger in October, escorted by four to six gun
trucks filled with military members from Niger, to map populations vulnerable to
extremism. One morning, Patrick and two other special operators met at the
American Cultural Center on a dead-end street in the capital, Niamey. At a
nearby traffic circle hung a billboard for the popular Showtime series
''Homeland.'' Their job, Patrick said as the men sat around a conference table,
was to determine ''who's at risk, who's becoming more susceptible to the siren
call of violent extremism.'' Patrick spoke quickly, as if trying to keep pace
with his thoughts. The two other men -- Mike, a deeply tanned operator, and
Chris, a Special Operations captain who spoke Hausa -- said little, as if they
were accustomed mostly to listening. (Each of the men asked to be identified by
only his first name, citing security concerns.) It wasn't simple poverty that
made people susceptible to extremism, Patrick said; misdirected aid created
unsustainable ways of life that forced people further onto the margins. Systemic
injustice made things worse. ''This is a war taking place in ungoverned spaces,
where the people are facing a crisis of adapting to modern life.''

A doctoral candidate researching the psychological breakdown of tribes and clans
in violent conflict, Patrick is both an anthropologist and an operator. The
tactics of special warfare can look quite a lot like those used by the Peace
Corps, which arrived in Niger in 1962 and left in 2011 because of security
concerns. In this case, however, the goal is to build a society faster than the
enemy can take it apart.

Patrick wears cowboy boots and a tan corduroy jacket with patches, as any
anthropology professor might. But few professors' shoulders could match
Patrick's musclebound ones. He grew up in New England and Florida and joined the
Special Forces after reading ''The Sandino Affair,'' by Neill Macaulay, in which
U.S. Marines battle the father of the Sandinista movement. He fell in love with
the notion of training freedom fighters. ''That's what we do in unconventional
warfare,'' he said. ''We raise armies against bad governments -- only the
insurgents are called freedom fighters,'' Patrick said with a laugh. He has
spent 24 years in the Army, most as a Green Beret, and served in Colombia, Peru,
Ecuador, Ethiopia and Iraq.

In Niger, Patrick has traveled the trade routes of the north, where Chris and
Mike have identified important leaders and handed out gray and red coins that
looked like poker chips and were stamped with a profile of an African lion and a
dagger to represent Special Operations. ''We're betting this will be a key
relationship,'' Chris said.

''In Afghanistan and Iraq, we squandered significant amounts of money with the
best of intentions,'' Patrick said. ''Our efforts were poorly planned and poorly
placed. We have to do this right this time.'' Patience was essential. ''Give me
a year, I can do something,'' Patrick added. ''Give me six weeks, I can make a
mess.'' This echoes a T. E. Lawrence maxim that special operators love: ''Better
the Arabs do it tolerably than that you do it perfectly. It is their war, and
you are to help them, not to win it for them.''

So far, Patrick's teams had mapped several tribes that were particularly
vulnerable to the militants' recent marketing campaign. Using sermons and songs
embedded on SIM cards, the Movement for Oneness and Jihad in West Africa was
peddling its message in the name of Usman dan Fodio, a 19th-century Fulani hero
and reformer who waged jihad across West Africa to purify Islam. More than 100
years later, his message resonates among people who find themselves marginalized
by the modern world. The most vulnerable communities aren't those of isolated
mountain people, but those ''squeezed in the middle'' -- caught between a
traditional way of life and a failing contemporary landscape.

''We go into places that are ungoverned, where the Westphalian state can't
project power,'' Patrick said. ''These are the places linked to violent Islam.''
In those places, Patrick's task is to reinforce the foundations of society.
''Governance, development, security,'' he said. ''My job is to strengthen all
three.''

Ungoverned spaces are liminal places. They are, by definition, dangerous. ''The
enemy knows what we're doing,'' Chris added. ''If I've been in there a year and
I haven't been targeted, I'm probably not doing a very good job.''

Chris pointed across the table to Mike, a desert-scorched and silent operator
whose oxford-cloth shirt seemed uncomfortably tight on his thick neck. ''See how
his tan lines are a little off?'' Chris asked. ''He doesn't wear a suit. He's
out there with our partners across the desert, fighting a war that no one will
ever know about if we win. How do you sell that to the American people?''

One March afternoon in Stuttgart, Germany, Sean Poole of Invisible Children sat
in the soft spring sun outside the Broadway Cafe, the Africom coffee shop.
(Africom is based in Stuttgart because there was no politically viable host
country in Africa.) Invisible Children created the Kony 2012 viral video as part
of its campaign to stop the Lord's Resistance Army. Although Kony's group poses
no strategic threat to the United States, Kony has abducted an estimated 30,000
children over nearly three decades. Indicted in 2005 on charges of crimes
against humanity by the International Criminal Court, Kony has long been the
focus of a manhunt, which U.S. Special Operations forces in Africa joined three
years ago. He is thought to be hiding in a remote Central African territory the
size of Maine.

The fight against Kony was dragging out, so Poole had flown in from Uganda to
meet Linder. He was worried that people would stop paying attention and that
political pressure would wane. ''We really peaked in 2012,'' he said. ''Our base
is 17-to-25-year-olds, and they're moving on.''

Poole was ushered into a conference room outside the secure information facility
that serves as Linder's office. In front of Linder's heavy, locked doors,
carpets feature the shield for Special Operations in Africa: the same profile of
a lion and a dagger that decorated the coins Patrick's team was handing out in
Niger. Inside, the walls are decorated with maps, TVs, white boards and gifts
from African nations, including an original Flintlock rifle given to the United
States by Mauritania and plaques that represent significant moments in U.S.
wars, like the battle of Takur Ghar in Afghanistan's Paktia Province, one of the
deadliest early in the war.

When he took over as the commander of Special Operations in Africa in the spring
of 2012, Linder redoubled the fight against Kony by introducing tracking teams,
Green Berets trained in SERE (survival, evasion, resistance and escape). After
the two men sat down, Poole laid out on a table a map of Central Africa littered
with red and blue dots. These, he said, are villages in which Invisible Children
supplied either a two-way radio or a Thuraya satellite phone so villagers could
report attacks. Linder studied the map in silence for 10 seconds and then
pointed to a blank space that straddles the border between the Central African
Republic and Darfur. ''What's happening there?'' he asked Poole. ''That area is
hard to reach,'' Poole said. It would require weeks, maybe a month, to access
the scant villages in the largely uninhabited region to which Linder was
pointing. ''Why don't you put a bunch of Thurayas in a backpack and walk them up
there?'' Linder asked. Poole laughed nervously.

Linder couldn't resist the teachable moment. ''Kony is not the problem,'' he
said. ''Kony is a symptom of the problem. My problem is ungoverned spaces.'' The
solution lay in establishing a human network that makes it more difficult for
the next Joseph Kony, the next Abubakar Shekau, to find a foothold in Africa.
The more communities reachable by satellite phone, the more connective tissue --
and the less ungoverned space.

At the end of the meeting, Linder wondered aloud about the future of Poole's
organization. Invisible Children had helped mobilize public opinion against the
Lord's Resistance Army. But what was next? ''You have to find a way to motivate
the U.S. to give a hoot. If the U.S. doesn't give a hoot, we're not going to be
there.'' As he said later, ''I see Kony because Congress tells me to.''

Twelve days later and 4,500 miles away, in the bee-infested jungle of the
Central African Republic, a team of four Green Berets and 22 Ugandan soldiers
boarded CV-22 Ospreys, a kind of half-helicopter, half-airplane. It was 11 p.m.,
which meant they would have time to reach their objective under cover of
darkness. Their mission was to raid an L.R.A. camp near a place called Nzako
that recent defectors had described to them. Carrying compasses, maps and GPS
devices, the men landed about three miles from their target, far enough away
that no one would hear them coming. It can take two hours to fight through a
single mile of underbrush so thick that visibility is less than 10 feet. About
half a mile from the target, two Ugandans and two Americans went ahead to
conduct reconnaissance. They found a camp of 28 beds made of stacked grass that
ringed the perimeter. But the beds were empty, and the fighters were gone,
having most likely escaped a few days earlier. This happened all the time.

The next morning, the Green Berets and the Ugandans ate cornmeal and beans at a
7,700-square-mile hunting reserve. This was the most forward outpost in the
search for Joseph Kony and the L.R.A. Despite the civil war raging in the
Central African Republic, Europeans come here to hunt. A 30-minute drive away,
four luxury bungalows and a fully stocked bar are nestled in the forest.
Bushbucks, waterbucks, warthogs, baboons -- the bush was thick with them all.
''Everything we've seen on National Geographic is out here,'' said Caleb, 30,
the team captain. ''We found three black mambas in camp.'' Here, the risk is
less about who might shoot you than what might bite you. ''The only way this
turns kinetic is if a lion comes at me out of the jungle,'' said Mike, the team
sergeant. The previous evening's mission was typical in that the fighters were
probably three to four days away by the time the Ugandans and Americans found
the camp. They could be nearly 50 miles away by now. They moved fast. ''You have
to respect your enemy,'' Caleb said. ''They'll cook a meal on their heads.'' The
fighters could set a pot to boil in the morning and carry it simmering as they
walked all day and crossed rivers through impossibly thick jungle. Tracking
them, he added, ''is like tracking ghosts.''

Despite the reliance on the American planes, drones and dollars, it was the
Ugandans who trained the Americans on how to survive. To show how the L.R.A.
worked, the Ugandans gave the Green Berets a lesson in tracking by setting a
field on fire, marching through the ash and then covering their tracks. The
Green Berets tried to follow but found it impossible. The Ugandans also taught
the Americans how to find water by looking for muddy spots in the forest floor.
''Water is a struggle,'' Caleb said. Whoever needed less of it held the
advantage. The fighters lived in this bush. They ate roots and could find water
anywhere. The Ugandans could stay out on missions for 30 to 60 days. The
Americans could last as long as four before needing to resupply. The worst part,
however, was the bees.

''Before I came out, guys told me, 'The bees, sir, the bees, the bees.' I
thought they'd made this stuff up,'' Caleb said. ''But it was true. You can hear
them coming. If you stop for a minute in the bush, the bees swarm to the salt of
sweat on any exposed flesh.'' (One of Linder's chief concerns in sending his
operators to this particular area was infection. ''There are diseases in the
region that we don't even know about,'' he said earlier.) Despite these
hardships, the operators remained upbeat: There was no feeling as good as
watching defectors come out of the bush and surrender. It was like ''freeing
people from forced slavery,'' Mike said. The Americans saw defection as crucial
to combating the L.R.A. Because most of the few hundred stragglers still walking
around in the Central African bush were abducted as children, many are
disoriented and terrified that they will be killed by the Ugandan military. It's
not an idle fear; the Ugandan military has a history of killing the group's
members, including children.

''You've heard of Stockholm syndrome, but this is different,'' Col. Michael
Kabango, 48, a commander in the Uganda People's Defense Force, said the next
day. Kabango was waiting in the shade for the latest defector to arrive by
helicopter on a laterite airstrip in Obo, in the southeast corner of the Central
African Republic. This was a heavily fortified outpost -- with an
air-conditioned mess tent stocked with Red Bull, energy bars and a flat-screen
TV tuned to CNN International -- where the Americans and Ugandans made camp. It
was a Sunday afternoon, and a Ugandan soldier nearby was ironing his fatigues on
the ground beneath a mango tree as tiger-striped butterflies darted through air
filled with the scent of wild cucumber. Tabu Simon, a recent defector, waited
anxiously among the mangoes for his brother, the defector coming by helicopter.

There was nothing to do but hang around. Kabango sat in a plastic armchair
beneath the mango tree while his soldiers played with Simon's 1-year-old
daughter, named Forever, who was wearing a pale-blue basketball uniform with a
picture of Obama on it. After chasing Kony for nearly 20 years, Kabango was
tired. ''I've gone on and off this mission, but Kony hasn't. He knows how to
move, and he's always a step ahead.

''There's a feeling among the international community that we haven't done our
best,'' he went on. ''So they come out and think that they can do better.'' At
least the Americans brought practical tools, like drones that helped with
intelligence gathering. But these had limits, too. ''High tech has failed
because the L.R.A. is so rudimentary. American drones are too noisy, and their
cameras don't see well enough in the jungle. Perhaps if we had silent drones
mounted with high-definition­ cameras, but the L.R.A. is not that kind of
priority for the United States.''

Over the last six months, the U.S. had increased its support for the mission,
but it still didn't make a marked difference on the ground, Kabango thought.
''U.S. support has intensified, but the problem is if you ask me where Kony is,
I don't know. So the fight has intensified, but against what?'' he said. Playing
the game of ''Where's Joseph Kony?'' was like playing Where's Waldo? while
wearing a blindfold. ''If I knew where he was, I wouldn't be sitting here,'' he
said with a laugh. ''Kony exploits this north-south divide where the Sahara
meets equatorial Africa.''

This is the same geographic band that Boko Haram uses as a haven. Since most
intelligence is human, each group takes advantage of sparsely populated areas to
hide. Kabango continued: ''There's always been a polarization here along
religious lines, and the weather is too hostile'' -- the rivers are drying up,
and with them access to food -- ''so that no one can live here permanently. It's
a movement corridor where no one's in charge.'' To survive, people compete for
dwindling resources -- gold, ivory, coltan. ''Our biggest problem is poverty.
It's poverty that leads to disease, to joblessness and everything else.''

The American presence was essential, but not in the form of foot soldiers. ''We
need the logistics and better technology,'' Kabango said. ''It's not fair to the
American people to put American boots on the ground, and they actually slow us
down.'' Every three or four days, the Ugandans had to wait for the Americans to
resupply water. ''Working with the Americans is a bit like being a small horse
in front of a large cart,'' he said. ''You have to be careful, or the cart might
run over you.'' There was one American approach that Kabango did like: fastening
loudspeakers to airplanes and flying them over the jungle playing messages
telling the guys to come home. Recently, six men defected after one such outing.

''Quite simply, it's marketing,'' Linder said later. ''You're essentially
teaching psy-ops marketing. The message is: 'You don't have to be L.R.A. War is
over. Life doesn't have to suck.' It's about removing combatants from the
battlefield. That's what we did in the Philippines.''

Col. Kevin Leahy, a dry-witted Irish American from northern New Jersey, commands
the mission against the L.R.A. and every other Central African crisis that comes
across his desk, including the effort to rescue the more than 200 schoolgirls
who remain in captivity after 57 managed to escape. One night at his base in
Entebbe, Uganda, he spoke about the L.R.A.: ''We'll take every opportunity to
engage them without killing anybody, because every time you engage the L.R.A.
directly, children get killed.'' As for Kabango's critiques, Leahy said: ''These
guys can drink out of puddles in the bush and not get sick, and that's pretty
impressive. But what we bring to the table when we're out there with them is the
ability to manage intelligence assets, communications, and to know instantly
where people are.'' The L.R.A.'s small numbers were part of the challenge.
''When it gets down to this 250, 200, 150, and they're in these smaller groups,
they get really hard to find.''

For Leahy, the most important operations fall under what in today's special
warfare are called influence operations. His team was dropping harmless grenade
simulators to herd the L.R.A. and create the kind of chaos that allowed
defectors the chance to escape and got the others thinking. ''I'll try
anything,'' he said. With the help of the State Department, he recently
commissioned a ''Come Home'' song by a Ugandan pop star named Jose Chameleone.
He reached out to Chuck Norris to create a ''come home'' message. The group's
members, it turned out, were big fans of '80s action movies. In more than one
raided camp, there were DVDs of Chuck Norris films. ''We've gotten some feedback
from his agent,'' Leahy said.

In keeping with Africom's mandate, Leahy stressed that this was an African-led
mission. ''We give a lot of advice, but at the end of the day, it's their
commanders who call the shots.'' He went on, ''We can't bring the entire Death
Star in and set it up.'' Besides, as always, there was the question of Where's
Joseph Kony? ''He could be dead,'' Leahy said. Most of the defectors coming out
of the bush hadn't seen him or even heard him giving commands by radio in a long
time. So either Kony was gone or he was in the disputed area of Kafia Kingi or
farther north in Sudan, where his old sponsors in the Sudanese government
continue to grant him haven. ''Without the support of Sudan over the last 20
years, there would be no L.R.A.,'' Leahy said.

The Lord's Resistance Army continued to fade from view as events nearby overtook
the story of a tiny, straggling band of abductees wandering around in the woods.
Civil war battered South Sudan. A potential genocide unfolded in the Central
African Republic. But it was the abduction of the schoolgirls that caused an
international outcry.

In early May, Leahy traveled to Nigeria to lead the military component of the
interagency team charged with locating the abducted girls. The team included
representatives of the F.B.I., the State Department, U.S.A.I.D. and Africom.
''We've never worked so effectively with other components of the U.S.
government,'' Leahy said. That didn't mean the task was easy. His role was to
incorporate U.S. intelligence into what the Nigerians already knew. The
political challenges have been well documented: corruption within the Nigerian
military, poor equipment and weak troops, to name a few. As for more practical
challenges, Leahy declined to name them for fear of giving Boko Haram
information they didn't already have. ''The Nigerian government is in a very
difficult position and is trying to figure out a solution while dealing with
constant Boko Haram attacks,'' Leahy said. Since the girls were taken, Boko
Haram has killed at least 220 more people.

Nigeria could well prove a test case for the ''Obama Doctrine.'' Whether the
United States government can solve the crisis of the abducted schoolgirls is
inextricably linked to whether the Nigerians are capable of addressing the
societal ills that led to the rise of Boko Haram. For its part, Special
Operations was preparing to train three battalions of elite Nigerian forces to
confront Boko Haram. But given the Nigerian military's record on human rights
violations, its lack of professionalism and its history of either running away
from Boko Haram or killing innocent civilians, this was going to be a matter of
sink or swim. It would take the highest level of American engagement. As Linder
said, ''We're going to get in the pool with them.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/magazine/can-general-linders-special-operation
s-forces-stop-the-next-terrorist-threat.html

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: TRAINING: American Green Berets and Uganda People's Defense
Force soldiers at an airstrip in Obo, Central African Republic. (MM24-25)
ON THE GROUND: A Green Beret teaching navigation techniques to soldiers from the
Sudan People's Liberation Army. (MM27)
THE BRASS: Brig. Gen. James B. Linder, center, commands Special Operations
forces in Africa. (MM29)
 JOINT OPERATION:  A military helicopter leaving an airstrip in South Sudan
after dropping off Special Operations forces and Sudan People's Liberation Army
soldiers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER BROWN/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (MM31) MAP: AREAS OF CONCERN:  American troops are working with African
militaries to help counter Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army, led by the
fugitive Joseph Kony. (MM28)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


