                             341 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Qaeda Affiliate Steps Up Video Propaganda Push

BYLINE: By SAEED AL BATATI and DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK; Saeed al Batati reported
from Mukalla, Yemen, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1166 words


MUKALLA, Yemen -- The large microphone with the fancy logo might have belonged
to any television news crew, but these man-on-the-street interviews sounded more
like militant lectures.

''When Ansar al-Shariah was ruling these areas people lived in peace and
prosperity, didn't they?'' asked the interviewer, referring to an affiliate of
Al Qaeda here whose name means ''supporters of Islamic law.''

The man doing the asking was not a reporter, but a representative of the local
Qaeda affiliate, and the logo attached to the microphone read ''al-Malahim,'' a
Qaeda-linked news media outlet. His pseudo-journalistic reports were part of an
accelerated propaganda campaign distributed on the Internet and aimed at helping
the Qaeda affiliate here win a battle for hearts and minds that the group sees
as increasingly vital to its survival.

''We heard that the government is coming with its planes and tanks to destroy
your region,'' the interviewer said to another local resident. ''What do you
think?''

''The situation is miserable,'' the man replied. ''We need security. We do not
need the army to enter our area.''

After years of Western condemnation for the civilian casualties of terrorist
attacks, Al Qaeda's affiliate here is trying to turn the tables in a stream of
online videos arguing that Washington and its Yemeni Army allies are the ones
carelessly killing innocent bystanders in their drone attacks and military
campaigns targeting suspected militants.

The videos, Al Qaeda's latest response to the drone assassinations of many of
its leaders, seek to capitalize on growing anger over the killings of an
undisclosed number of noncombatants in drone strikes. But the campaign has now
taken on new resonance here since the disclosure last week that an American
commando and a spy killed two armed Yemenis who had tried to kidnap them while
the Americans were in a barbershop in Sana, the capital. The Americans were
later whisked out of the country with the blessing of the Yemeni government.

Analysts said the videos also reflect a continuing debate among the branches of
Al Qaeda over the priority of avoiding the killing of Muslim civilians -- and
the relative sophistication of the propaganda underscored the special danger of
the Yemeni franchise, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.

Aware that their ability to flourish depends on support of the local population,
Al Qaeda and its affiliates have long tried to position themselves as defenders
of Muslim lives, as well as Islam, against the predations of the West. For this
reason, Ayman al-Zawahri, the top Qaeda leader, has asked followers doing battle
in Iraq and Syria to try to minimize their own killing of Muslim civilians, a
push that led to a break with one of the most aggressive, sectarian affiliates,
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.

The Qaeda affiliates in Yemen ''believe that the side that kills the most Yemeni
civilians loses,'' said Gregory D. Johnsen, a Yemen scholar who recently
returned from Sana, and the author of ''The Last Refuge,'' about Al Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula. ''So they are trying to show that, 'Look, in this war we are
more careful about Yemeni civilian lives than the United States is. This is what
we have been telling you all along, and this is why you should join our side.'
''

And at the moment, Mr. Johnsen said, the propaganda campaign ''is a war that
only Al Qaeda is fighting'' and the United States is ignoring.

It is the latest evidence that Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula ''is a much
more nuanced political actor'' than its cousins around the region, said Brian
Fishman, a counterterrorism scholar at the New America Foundation. Over time, he
said, the Yemen-based Qaeda group ''will pose a bigger threat because they have
more stable relationships'' with the local population and tribes.

The new videos drive home the theme. Yemeni soldiers ''looted people's
properties and destroyed mosques,'' Hassan Ali Bashaiba, another militant, told
the interviewer in the same video, filmed in the southern district of Mayfa'a,
in Shabwa Province.

The propaganda campaign appears to have begun about two weeks ago, around the
start of a major offensive by the Yemeni Army against Qaeda militants who had
controlled pockets of the south.

As the army began to move, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula seemed to have
opened a new television studio, releasing as many as a half dozen new online
videos in less than a week. In the past, it has taken the militants as long as
20 days to release just one video to claim responsibility for a successful
attack, such as the bloody assault on the Defense Ministry compound in the
capital last December that left 52 dead.

Underscoring again the group's sensitivity to Yemeni civilian casualties, the
online video claiming responsibility for that attack even included a public
apology from a prominent leader, Qasim al-Raymi, for the deaths of those killed
in a military hospital inside the compound.

The videos also warned Yemenis not to abet the drone attacks by providing
information to the Yemeni government that might help the United States target
its strikes.

One video shows four alleged informants held in captivity and trembling as they
admitted to planting tracking microchips in militants' cars. One captive said in
the video that he received the equivalent of about $2,560 for planting two of
the microchips.

As though conducting a trial, an unidentified militant sentenced all four to
death for collaborating with the ''enemies of God.''

Any Yemenis who ''aid and abet'' the government or Washington ''will pay the
price,'' Mr. Raymi, the Qaeda leader who apologized, insisted in another video.
''Any institute, ministry, military regiment or base that is found involved in
placing the microchips or recruiting people to place them will be legitimate
targets to the mujahidin.''

The militants also offered an amnesty for any Yemeni soldier or informant
willing to renounce his collaboration before the end of May.

''Any informer who surrenders with the microchips will be pardoned, even if he
was involved in killing mujahidin,'' the militant holding the captives concluded
at the end of the video.

In another video, Jalal Bale'id Almarqashy, a Qaeda field commander, declared
the local Yemeni population and tribes were increasingly on its side. ''The
soldiers abandon their weapons once we begin shooting,'' he said, claiming that
local tribesmen had stood behind militants against the army assault. ''They
resent the U.S. airstrikes and the barbaric offensive.''

Still, the focus on collateral casualties was the hallmark of the videos. One
displayed the bodies of civilians said to be killed after an airstrike in the
province of Bayda, and part of the footage was taken from a video prepared by a
local human rights organization protesting against the American drone strikes.

''Children and women live in fear of overnight shelling,'' an unidentified man
said in the video. A younger man answered: ''Students were crying in schools.
This is terrorism.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/13/world/middleeast/qaeda-affiliate-steps-up-vide
o-propaganda-push-in-yemen.html

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A representative of a local Qaeda affiliate interviewed men in
Shabwa Province, Yemen, in a video posted on YouTube.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


