                              35 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 3, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

All about Amazon's drone delivery

BYLINE: Brian Fung

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1097 words


You may have heard that unmanned drones will eventually deliver your Amazon.com
purchases. The idea seems so crazy that it's bound to raise a few questions. Is
it really possible? What kind of obstacles will Amazon chief executive (and
Washington Post owner) Jeffrey P. Bezos have to overcome? And how will his plan
shape the future of drone technology? Answers to these questions and more are
below.

All about delivery drones

You may have heard that unmanned drones will eventually be making your Amazon
deliveries. The idea seems so crazy, it's bound to raise a few questions. Is it
really possible? What kind of obstacles will Amazon chief executive (and
Washington Post owner) Jeffrey Bezos have to overcome? And how will his plan
shape the future of drone technology? Answers to these and more are below.

First things first. What does Amazon have in mind?

In as soon as five years, Amazon says, it's going to field a fleet of drones
that will deliver anything you order - as long as it's less than five pounds -
in minutes.

What? That's crazy. How would that even work?

Conveniently, Amazon has giant distribution centers scattered across the
country. Most of the company's deliveries start out from these facilities; the
drones would cut out the truck drivers who deliver your packages today.

Why would Amazon want to do this?

Traditional retailers compete on the strength of their products. But Amazon
increasingly is competing on the basis of time - fulfilling our wishes as close
to instantaneously as possible. The drone strategy promises to cut what's now a
one- or two-day shipping window down to 30 minutes or less. Drones have an
advantage over delivery trucks in that they can use a more direct route, rather
than having to follow winding streets. That saves time.

What do we know about Amazon's drones?

Bezos has said that the drones will be able to carry a five-pound payload for
about 10 miles. A 15-minute flight out, followed by a 15-minute flight back,
would call for average speeds of 40 mph. That's pretty zippy.

Are current drones even capable of all that?

This is essentially a physics problem: The larger your payload, the more lift
you need. The more lift you need, the larger your battery has to be, which
further adds to the weight, which adds to the power requirements, and so on.

After analyzing Amazon's promotional video, Christopher Vo - a robotics
researcher at George Mason University - estimates that Amazon's "octocopter"
drone probably uses a 10,000-mAh, 22-volt lithium ion polymer battery made up of
six or 10 cells. These batteries are a lot like the ones that power a laptop,
except that their chemistry allows for a much greater energy draw. You can find
these on hobbyist Web sites. In fact, according to Vo, you can buy an octocopter
resembling the one in Amazon's video for about $24,000.

What about larger payloads? Five pounds doesn't sound like much.

It's possible, but improbable, at least for now. Some private drones can carry
more than 12 pounds. But in a "60 Minutes" interview Sunday, Bezos acknowledged
that "we're not going to deliver kayaks or table saws that way."

Where we might actually see faster progress is in the way that companies ship
things internally. Big 747s and other cargo planes can already fly on autopilot,
for the most part. From there, it's not too far of a leap to convert them into
fully autonomous aircraft.

Bezos predicts the Amazon drones will take off in about five years. How
realistic is that?

It's optimistic but not unrealistic. A spokesman for the Federal Aviation
Administration says that while current rules prohibit Amazon from rolling this
out today, a three-to-five-year target "kind of lines up" with an FAA process to
relax those regulations. Last month, the agency released a road map charting out
how those regulations will be rewritten. By August, the FAA expects to have
rules ready for consumer drones, followed by guidelines for commercial drones a
few years later.

Here's something else to think about: The United States may not be the best
place to test this program. Timothy Reuter, who heads a D.C.-based drone
hobbyist group, says Canada might be an attractive choice. "It's not so far
away, but they're much more permissive," Reuter says.

Are these drones going to crash into my dogs and kids?

Human pilots instinctively know to avoid trees and buildings. Drones don't. For
that, they need something called sense-and-avoid technology - which is pretty
good at the moment, but not so good that we can trust a machine to fly itself
exclusively. Until then, Amazon will probably hire drone pilots to fly each
drone. Then it might graduate to a system where one overseer is monitoring a
handful of machines at once from a control center.

Another way to solve the problem, Vo says, is to reduce the number of variables
that the drone will have to contend with near the ground. You could do this by
building some kind of helipad on rooftops. Maybe those will even become standard
on new homes so that other companies - FedEx, UPS, etc. - could take advantage
of them, too.

This all sounds creepy. Wait here - I'm getting my shotgun.

Whoa, okay. That actually points to something else Amazon will have to think
about - how to protect its unmanned vehicles. Residents of one Colorado town
have even considered giving out hunting permits for unmanned vehicles.

Then there's the question of how to secure the data link between Amazon's drones
and the ground control station that monitors them. You don't want your delivery
to get hacked and stolen, or worse - turned into a flying weapon.

Hang on. Didn't Amazon just announce a deal with the U.S. Postal Service? Won't
these drones supersede them?

That's a possibility. But remember, this future is still years away. Amazon's
experiment with drone technology suggests it may be looking at drones as simply
one part of a broader delivery system that integrates multiple technologies.
There are other emerging new technologies, such as 3-D printing and self-driving
cars, that might help Amazon tighten up any lags in its supply chain and get
items to consumers more quickly.

- Brian Fung

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


