                             350 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yemeni Rebels Fire at U.S. Embassy

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 450 words


SANA, Yemen -- A splinter group of Al Qaeda said that it fired a rocket that
landed near the United States Embassy in Sana on Saturday, wounding several
guards, to retaliate for what it said was an American drone strike in a northern
province of Yemen on Friday.

The State Department said that it had no indication that the embassy was the
target of the attack, and that none of its staff members were wounded.

The rocket landed about 200 yards from the heavily fortified embassy, near
members of the Yemeni special police force who guard the site. At least two were
wounded, the police said. It was fired from a car using a M72 light antitank
weapon, a police official said.

Several hours after the attack, Ansar al-Shariah, an affiliate of Al Qaeda in
the Arabian Peninsula, said on its Twitter account that it had targeted the
embassy with a rocket, wounding several guards and damaging a vehicle. The group
said the attack was an act of revenge for a drone strike on Friday that had
seriously wounded children in the northern province of Al Jawf.

Tribal officials confirmed that a drone strike killed two Qaeda members and
wounded two more in Al Jawf on Friday, and said that there were reports of some
children having been wounded.

American officials acknowledge that the United States uses drones in Yemen, but
they do not comment publicly on the practice.

Sana, Yemen's capital, is already in a state of turmoil after Shiite Muslim
rebels seized control of much of the city last week, hours before the signing of
an accord for the creation of a new government. Despite a declared cease-fire,
clashes between the rebels, known as the Houthis, and security forces in Sana
have continued since the accord was signed.

Analysts have said that the Houthis' control over the capital makes them the
main power brokers in Yemen.

Earlier on Saturday, the rebels attacked the home of Yemen's intelligence chief
in Sana, evidence of the fragility the power-sharing accord.

The attempted attack on the embassy comes a day after the United States told its
citizens to leave Yemen, and said that it was reducing the number of its
government employees in the country because of the political unrest and fears of
a possible military escalation. President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi has expressed
his concern that Yemen may be heading for civil war.

The American Embassy in Yemen has been the target of several attacks in recent
years, including one in 2008 by militants affiliated with Al Qaeda.

In 2012, demonstrators angry at a film made in the United States that they
considered blasphemous tried to storm the compound, and in May this year, the
embassy said armed individuals had tried to kidnap two of its officers in Sana.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/world/middleeast/yemeni-rebels-attack-official
s-home.html

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A checkpoint manned by Shiite Muslim rebels near the United
States Embassy in Sana. An affiliate  of Al Qaeda said it fired a rocket toward
the embassy to avenge an American drone strike. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YAHYA
ARHAB/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO ASSOCIATION)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


