                             351 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 21, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Albania: Tensions Delay a Visit

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 483 words


PARIS -- A visit that would have been the first by an Albanian prime minister to
Belgrade, the Serbian capital, in nearly 70 years has been postponed after a
provocative stunt at a soccer match in Belgrade that fanned ethnic tensions,
spurred violence and provoked apparent cyberattacks.

Prime Minister Edi Rama was scheduled to visit Belgrade on Wednesday, the first
trip there by an Albanian leader since 1946. The meeting, heralded by Albania
and Serbia as a seminal moment for regional reconciliation after a bloody ethnic
war in Kosovo in the 1990s, has now been set for Nov. 10.

Both sides said over the weekend that Mr. Rama's trip to Belgrade would be
delayed to allow tensions to subside.

Serbian officials have accused Mr. Rama's brother, Olsi Rama, of releasing a
small drone carrying a nationalist Albanian flag during a qualifying match last
week between the two countries for the 2016 European Championship.

Olsi Rama has denied launching the drone, which touched off a violent brawl.
Some Serbs took to the field and attacked Albanian team members, some of them
with chairs, and the players were forced to escape through a tunnel at the end
of the field.

After talking on the phone, the prime ministers of both countries issued a joint
statement on Sunday calling the episode at the stadium ''very unfortunate.''

''There are still obvious disagreements about how the incident occurred, but we
must not, and we will not, miss the opportunity to meet and work on maintaining
regional stability,'' the statement said.

The soccer altercation continued to reverberate over the weekend. On Saturday,
the Serbian news media reported that fans of the Serbian soccer team Red Star
Belgrade were photographed lighting an Albanian flag on fire during a match
against Partizan Belgrade. Earlier, Blic, a popular tabloid newspaper, said
ethnic Albanian hackers had attacked its website, while the Serbian news media
reported violent attacks against several Albanian-owned bakeries in Serbia.

Immediately after the match, Mr. Rama condemned what he called the ''ugly'' and
''racist'' behavior of some of the Serbian spectators, while Serbian officials
called the drone episode a planned provocation. President Tomislav Nikolic of
Serbia said Albania was decades, if not centuries, away from being a normal
country.

Politics, soccer and nationalism have long been a combustible combination in the
Balkans. Tensions between Serbia and Albania have been especially fraught since
2008, when Kosovo, which has an ethnic Albanian majority, declared independence
from Serbia. Belgrade vehemently opposes Kosovo's independence, while Albania
has ardently embraced it.

The nationalist flag pulled by the drone at the game last week was especially
incendiary for Serbs because it showed the territory of Greater Albania,
including Kosovo.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/21/world/europe/albania-edi-rama-belgrade-trip-so
ccer-match-drone.html

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


