                             369 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            December 16, 2013 Monday

Amazon Workers in Germany Strike Again

BYLINE: DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 626 words



HIGHLIGHT: As Amazon builds more warehouses around the world, it is increasingly
relying on human labor. Employees in Germany are trying to unionize to have more
control over their fates. On Monday they took their cause to Seattle.


 Updated, 5:31 p.m.

Amazon warehouse employees in Germany walked off the job again Monday even as
they tried to take their case directly to the e-commerce giant's Seattle
headquarters. The first action seemed more successful, involving more than a
thousand workers. The second drew only about 50 people. "We are humans not
robots,"one sign said.

The tech companies, including Amazon, are getting ever richer and more powerful,
but there seems to be a bit of a backlashdeveloping. In San Francisco last week,
protesters briefly blocked a Google bus transporting workers to its Silicon
Valley campus.

Amazon's announcement two weeks ago on "60 Minutes" that it is pursuing delivery
by dronesinspired not admiration but widespread mockery. Amazon, critics said,
was dwelling in fantasyland. (An Amazon spokesman disagreed with this
assessment, saying the news "did inspire some admiration.")

Perhaps Amazon brought up the subject of drones as a form of wish fulfillment.
For the retailer, the moment when machines prepare and deliver packages could
not come too soon. Humans are too much trouble. Germany is Amazon's second
largest market, and the labor turmoil there is increasing.

German warehouse workers have been conducting brief walkouts since last spring
in what were the first strikes against the company anywhere. Amazon said 1,115
workers did not show up Monday but that Christmas packages would still be
delivered on time. The company employs about 23,000 full-time and seasonal
workers in Germany.

On the surface, the dispute is about money. The German labor union Ver.di wants
Amazon workers classified as retail employees, but Amazon says they are
logistics workers who should be paid less.

Underneath this is a bigger question of whether the warehouse workers should
have any control over their workplace. The employees, also known as "pickers,"
assemble the orders. Amazon warehouses are marvels of engineering and
efficiency, but picking is still hard physical labor. There is constant
monitoring and little job security.

Amazon, in its race to stay the dominant e-commerce company, wants maximum
flexibility to use its workers as it will. Negotiating would impede efficiency
and innovation, Dave Clark, the company's vice president of worldwide operations
and customer service, told The Times last summer.

Pickers see it differently.

"The workers are treated more as robots than human," Markus Hoffmann-Achenbach,
an organizer for Ver.di at the Amazon warehouse in the city of Werne, said by
email. He was on his way to Seattle to participate in Monday's demonstration.

"As a worldwide company," Mr. Hoffmann-Achenbach added, "Amazon should treat
their workers fairly and with respect in every country. The solidarity of
American unions and Ver.di, the united services union of Germany, is a sign that
social movements are not bounded by national borders and that in times of
globalization the workers worldwide stand together as one."

Also traveling to Seattle was Nancy Becker, an American who has been an employee
of Amazon in Germany since 2001. "I'm coming to Seattle to dare Jeff Bezos to
try working as a picker for a single week," she said. "I'm sure he would not
survive."

Ralf Kleber, the top Amazon executive in Germany, dismissed the strikersin a
recent interview with Reuters, saying the walkout did not slow down deliveries.
He also said the workers were largely unskilled and had been unemployed for a
long time, with the implication that they should be grateful to be working for
Amazon.


     ·    Disruptions: At Your Door in Minutes, Delivered by Robot
     ·    Amazon Floats the Notion of Delivery Drones
     ·    Daily Report: Amazon Runs Up Against Germany's Labor Culture
     ·    Europe vs. Amazon: Anger Rising
     ·    Daily Report: Investors Love Amazon.com, Despite Lack of Profit


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


