                             364 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 3, 2014 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

Briefs

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 531 words


NEW HILLSHIRE BID FROM GREELEY FIRM

Pilgrim's Pride Corp. is planning to raise its offer for Hillshire Brands Co.,
according to people familiar with the matter, the Wall Street Journal reported
late Monday.

The new offer would value the meat company at $55 a share, according to one of
the people, or more than $6.7 billion.

The offer would escalate a bidding war for Hillshire, maker of Jimmy Dean
sausages and Sara Lee products. It would trump a $50 a share offer last week
from Tyson Foods Inc.

Both Pilgrim's and Tyson are seeking to scuttle Hillshire's $4.3 billion
acquisition of Pinnacle Foods Inc., announced last month.

FAA eyeing drone exemption washington The Federal Aviation Administration said
Monday it is considering giving permission to seven movie and television filming
companies to use unmanned aircraft for aerial photography, a potentially
significant step that could lead to greater relaxation of the agency's ban on
commercial use of drones.

To receive the exemptions, the companies must show their drone operations won't
harm safety and would be in the public interest.

Drones offer the film industries "an innovative and safer option for filming,"
said Neil Fried, senior vice president for the Motion Picture Association of
America.

Construction spending gains in April. U.S. construction spending posted modest
gains in April, driven by an uptick in homebuilding and government construction
that lifted total activity to the highest level in five years.

Construction spending rose 0.2 percent in April to a seasonally adjusted annual
rate of $953.5 billion, the strongest performance since March 2009, the Commerce
Department said Monday.

Cadbury cleared to sell chocolates in Malaysia kuala Lumpur, malaysia Cadbury
chocolates sold in Malaysia have been cleared of containing pork, the country's
top Islamic body said Monday in a statement that should lessen calls for a
boycott of the British confectionary company after earlier tests suggested two
types of chocolate bar contained pig DNA.

The now apparently discredited findings last month by the Ministry of Health
sparked outrage among some Islamist groups in Malaysia, who called for a boycott
of all Cadbury's products. Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim country,
is also testing Cadbury chocolates.

Egg producer agrees to fines iowa city, iowa An Iowa company has agreed to pay
$6.8 million in fines for selling old eggs with false labels for years as well
as the tainted products that caused a nationwide salmonella outbreak in 2010,
according to a plea agreement released Monday.

Quality Egg LLC, once one of the nation's largest egg producers, is expected to
plead guilty Tuesday to charges of bribing a U.S. Department of Agriculture
inspector.

Marathon to sell Norwegian unit houston Marathon Oil is selling its Norwegian
business to Det Norske Oljeselskap ASA in a deal valued at about $2.7 billion as
it streamlines operations and hones its focus on the U.S.

Det Norske is buying the subsidiary Marathon Oil Norge AS, which comes with the
Alvheim floating production, storage and offloading vessel, 10 company run
licenses and some non operated licenses in the North Sea. Denver Post wire
reports

Briefs

LOAD-DATE: June 06, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


