                             365 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           September 19, 2014 Friday
                               FRI SCENE Edition

Passionate pilot enters spiral as a drone flier in solo show "Grounded"

BYLINE: Claire Martin

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 5C

LENGTH: 592 words


With her exceptionally adroit interpretation of a military pilot wobbling on the
edge of sanity, Laura Norman is reason enough to see the Boulder Ensemble
Theatre Company's daunting production of "Grounded."

* * * * Military drama

Of course, she's also the only one in this 90 minute show. But she's so
compelling that, at points, you expect her husband, doctor, supervisor or seat
warmer to stride on stage.

As the story begins, she is an active U.S. Air Force pilot, flying the F 16 long
range bomber, a plane she describes as lovingly as if it were her paramour:

"It's the speed," she says.

"It's the G force pressing you back as you tear the sky. It's the ride. My
Tiger. My gal who cradles me, lifts me up. It's more. It's the respect. It's the
danger. It's... It's more... It's... you are the blue. You are alone in the
vastness and you are the blue. I'm in the blue for a reason. I have missiles to
launch. I have Sidewinders. I have Mavericks."

And the cocky Pilot is confident in the truth of her missions in Iraq, reducing
Middle Eastern buildings to particles she assumes, anyway, since she's long gone
by the time the bombs hit the earth. Remember that.

Then, thanks to a long weekend fling on leave, she finds herself pregnant and
grounded. "The Chair Force," she bitterly calls her new assignment. Married and
a new mother, the Pilot endures the Chair Force for three years and then tells
her commander that she's ready to fly again.

Great, says her commander. But drones are replacing F 16s. He wants her to pilot
a drone fly it remotely in Iraq from her base near Las Vegas, a 12 hour shift
that allows her to see her husband and daughter every day.

"We sit in a row at desks, like we're in a typing class," Pilot says grimly.
"Like we're learning how to make a spreadsheet. We learn to fly instead. We
learn to fly with our (butts) firmly on the ground."

Here is the crux. Are you still a pilot if you're never airborne? If all you see
for 12 hours is a murky screen interrupted by is that a dot? Zoom in! It's a
military age male! Await confirmation to pronounce them guilty. Then: Boom!

And back to the gray again. When her seat warmer the pilot on the replacement
shift shows up, she wants to celebrate, have a beer with her mates. But
everyone's on different shifts. So she drives home, alone, through a gray desert
a lot like the one she just watched for 12 hours.

Then, 12 hours later, she's back again in the chair, eyes on the screen,
watching for the guilty.

Imagine this for a moment: If you never served in the military, think of how
those folks bond. It's not only on the battle lines (or above them); it's
decompressing with beers (if they're lucky) and stories that restore their
center of gravity and humanity.

Denied that R&R, what happens to a human mind? That's the real question posed in
"Grounded," and it's genuinely terrifying. In Norman's interpretation, the Pilot
plummets into something like madness. Then even that qualifier disappears, and
we aren't sure if she'll pull herself out of this tailspin.

"Grounded" was directed by Josh Hartwell. The effective, minimalist set was
designed by Andrew Metzroth.

Claire Martin: 303 954 1477, cmartin@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/byclairemartin

grounded By George Brant. Directed by Josh Hartwell, starring Laura
Norman.Through Sept. 28 at the Avenue Theater, 417 E. 17th Ave. Tickets $27 at
303 321 5925 or online at betc.org

Grounded

Laura Norman is a tour de force in the Boulder Ensemble Theatre Company's
production of "Grounded," a play about a bomber pilot turned drone manipulator.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Laura Norma stars in "Grounded," a one-woman show about a military
pilot reassigned to controlling overseas war drones from a desk in Las Vegas.
Provided by Avenue Theater

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


