                             363 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           December 17, 2013 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

The Open Forum Letters to the Editor

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 778 words


Shooting at Arapahoe High

The church I serve is just a few blocks from Arapahoe High School, and dozens of
students come to our youth center. They are outstanding young people, and it's
heartbreaking to see the terror they and their families are experiencing. We
pray for all of them, for the recovery of the injured girl, and for the family
of the shooter.

Sadly, a number of young people in the south metro area have died of suicide in
recent years. Having struggled with this before, I've seen that emotional pain
can be so overwhelming that ending it becomes an obsession. God weeps at these
tragedies and is present in the midst of shock, pain and grief.

In this brief window of media attention, let's recommit ourselves to bringing
love and light into the darkness of the world. It's a time to comfort and
encourage our young people, to welcome them as they are, to help them find hope
for the future. These are concerns of the entire community, and every one of us
can contribute.

Rev. Michael Carney, Centennial

* * *

In the wake of events that occurred at Arapahoe High School on Friday, it is
important to recognize how well the situation was handled by the first
responders and school administrators. Their preparedness and their execution of
protecting students and faculty saved many lives. It is apparent that Arapahoe
High School practiced many lockdown drills and has a great communication
network. As tragic as this was, it could have been a lot worse if it weren't for
the heroic actions of the first responders and Arapahoe High School faculty.

Tyce W. O'Neill, Highlands Ranch

* * *

In the wake of another school shooting, let us come together to search for
positive solutions, rather than look for convenient excuses. Let's provide every
student the opportunity to share their strengths, so that our youth never reach
the point where one individual, or one class, pulls them down.

Supporting our students needs to happen on two different levels: in the schools
and at home. In the home, love your child. Support their interests. Give them
the opportunity to discover their own unique talents. In the schools, support
your teachers. Thank the staff that teaches, nurtures, cleans up after, and
protects your child. Volunteer with the local schools. Attend local board
meetings.

If we do not give our students the tools they need for success, let us not be
surprised when the tool they reach for is a gun. It is our responsibility to go
forth, to be part of the change, to support our students, and together, to build
a brighter future.

Erica K. Schmitt, Denver

Mistakes and the death penalty

Re: "A reason to keep death penalty," Dec. 13 letter to the editor.

Individuals supporting the death penalty usually ignore the most important
argument for eliminating capital punishment: We are killing innocent people who
have been mistakenly convicted and sentenced to death. The Innocence Project
documents 311 cases where mistakenly convicted persons have been exonerated, 18
of which were on death row. How many more are out there that we don't know
about? These numbers show that tragic judicial mistakes have been and are being
made. Many of these involved cases where potentially exculpatory evidence was
concealed from the court. Executions based on judicial mistakes result in two
victims instead of one, and the guilty person is still free in society to kill
again. We can eliminate these mistakes, and protect the public from prosecutors
long on ambition and short on scruples, by eliminating the death penalty.

Robert Enwall, Centennial

Drones, drones everywhere?

Re: "Drone delivery is a bold idea," Dec. 8 editorial.

I agree with your description of Amazon CEO Jeff Bazos' idea of using drones for
package deliveries as "bold," but this a great example of something that should
not be done just because it can be done.

Please deliver us from these money making, people be damned schemes.

Americans don't want a bunch of pilotless, brainless, thoughtless and thus
manipulatable drones, flying around in every bit of their space and able to view
them at any time, nor the ability to receive a package at any whim within a half
hour of its ordering (except in cases of dire emergency), nor millions more
people put out of work.

Since this great, exciting, new, state of the art technology would be in the
hands, ultimately, of our largest, richest, most powerful corporations (like
BP), what could possibly go wrong?

R. Kiefer, Arvada

TO SEND A LETTER

E mail: openforum@denverpost.com (text only; no attachments)

Mail: The Open Forum, The Denver Post, 101 W. Colfax Ave. Suite 600, Denver, CO
80202

Letters guidelines: denverpost.com/opinion

Reach us by phone: 303 954 1331

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


