                             374 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                      January 2, 2014 Thursday 8:32 PM EST

From shark fins to drones: New laws in 2014

BYLINE: Masuma Ahuja

LENGTH: 358 words


State legislatures passed thousands of new laws in 2013, many of which go into
effect this week. These laws address a variety of issues: from guns and voting
to drones and tanning. Here's a look at some of the most interesting and
noteworthy new laws going into effect across the country in 2014.

1.             In Connecticut            , under a new law which was passed in
response to the massacre in Sandy Hook Elementary school, all assault weapons
and large-capacity magazines bought before April 2013 must now be registered
with state authorities.

2. Colorado became the first state to legalize recreational marijuana use --
perhaps the most talked-about new law of 2014 -- starting on Jan. 1. While
Colorado stores have already begun selling marijuana, it isn't the only state
with new drug laws. Washington has also legalized recreational marijuana use,
and Illinois has legalized medical marijuana.

3. Illinois passed a law             that prohibits             drone-use
that interferes with hunters or fisherman            . This law was passed after
PETA called for the use of             "Air Angel"             drones to monitor
"hunters engaging in illegal activity." Another new law in the state prohibits
state law enforcement from using drones to gather information without a warrant.

4. There's now a bigger fine for planning violent flash mobs on social media in
Illinois.

5. In Oregon, it's now legal for mothers to take their placentas home from the
hospital after childbirth.

6. It's now illegal to sell, distribute or possess shark fins in Delaware.

7. Tanning beds are now off limits for teens under the age of 18, even if they
have parental permission, in Illinois.

8. In California, the paparazzi will face tougher penalties for harassing
celebrities and their children. The new law was backed by actresses Jennifer
Garner and Halle Berry.

9. A new California law requires schools to allow transgender students to use
restrooms and play on sports teams according to the gender they identify with.

10. Arkansas now requires voters to show photo ids at polling places.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


