                             372 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                            April 9, 2014 Wednesday

Do the Courts Have a Role to Play in Drone Strikes?

BYLINE: DOROTHY J. SAMUELS

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 387 words



HIGHLIGHT: Judges aren&#8217;t acting like it.


History will not look kindly on the succession of federal court rulings since
the 9/11 attacks that have bowed to government claims of national security to
deny meaningful judicial review for extraordinary acts, like rendition and
torture.

Judge Rosemary Collyer of the United States District Court for the District of
Columbia extended that dismal record of judicial abdication on Friday, when she
dismissed a lawsuit filed by the families of three U.S. citizens killed in two
separate drone strikes without trial or any charges being filed.

The victims of the first strike, in September of 2011, were Anwar al-Awlaki, a
radicalized Muslim who established himself in Yemen as a promoter of terrorist
acts, and Samir Khan.  Mr. Awlaki's 16-year-old son, Abdulrahman al-Awlaki, was
killed in another strike two weeks later. The Obama administration has said the
deaths of Mr. Khan and the younger Mr. Awlaki were unintentional.

The poorly reasoned ruling unfairly tossed out the due process claims made on
behalf of Mr. Khan and the teenage Mr. Awlaki. She found incorrectly that
because the two were not targeted to be killed, they were left with only a
negligence claim that did not rise to a constitutional violation.

Skipping past precedent, she also denied the plaintiffs' Fourth Amendment
excessive-force claims because an unmanned drone can only kill people, not seize
them.

The most important problem with the ruling is the overall result. It further
weakens the power of the landmark Bivens case, which allows citizens to sue
officials for violating their constitutional rights, providing a potent, if
limited remedy against government wrongdoing.

As Charlie Savage of The Times reported, "If it stands, the ruling suggests that
courts have no role to play, before or after, in reviewing the legality of
government decisions to kill citizens whom officials deem to be terrorists in
overseas wartime operations, even away from 'hot' battlefields where
conventional American forces are on the ground."

It also leaves the families of targeted-killing victims with no legal recourse
to ferret out the truth of what happened-not a minor concern.


     ·    Obama's 'Just Trust Me' Argument
     ·    The 'Signature Strikes' Program
     ·    Targeted Killing in the U.S.A.
     ·    What's a Logical Drone Strikes Policy? Hint: Not the Current One.
     ·    Too Secret for Congress


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


