                             378 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 15, 2014 Friday 6:47 PM EST

Why can't the U.S. figure out how many Yazidis are on Mount Sinjar?;
The solution is more complicated than just throwing a handful of unmanned aerial
vehicles into the sky above the Sinjar Mountains with an expectation that they
would be able to see everyone below.

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

LENGTH: 509 words


The situation for the Yazidi refugees atop Mount Sinjar has fluctuated in recent
weeks. Airdrops have provided thousands of pounds of food and water, while U.S.
assessment teams have ruled out a rescue operation because, according to U.S.
officials, most of the refugees have fled the barren stretch of earth located in
northern Iraq.

Yet even though the U.S. has declared the situation resolved, recent reports
indicate that there are still a substantial number of displaced Yazidis on the
mountain who are in need of humanitarian assistance. The number of remaining
refugees has been estimated at anywhere from the low thousands to the tens of
thousands, which begs the question: Why, with all of the U.S. assets around
Iraq, has no one been able to provide a reasonable head count of the Yazidis?
According to an officer who worked with MQ-1 Predator drone squadrons until
2010, the solution is more complicated than just throwing a handful of unmanned
aerial vehicles into the sky above the Sinjar Mountains with an expectation that
they would be able to see everyone below.

"It would be very difficult for one predator or even a couple to do a count,"
said the officer, who asked to remain anonymous because of his prior position
within his squadron. "It is very difficult for Predators to cover large swathes
of territory to come up with kind of imagery." The predators would have to be
used in conjunction with different aircraft and satellites, he added, mentioning
that unmanned aircraft like the Global Hawk, a larger drone that flies at high
altitude, along with manned aircraft like the Joint Surveillance Target Attack
Radar System (JSTARS) would be required to give an accurate assessment of the
refugees on the mountain. "[Drones like the Predator] are good at finding one
tank in a field, or a compound," the officer said. "It's almost like looking
through a straw."

Even with advanced thermal imaging carried by drones and surveillance aircraft
of all types, the ability to count the Yazidis would be difficult even if they
were spotted from above. "It can be hard to distinguish individuals because of
infrared blending," the officer said, referring to the way crowds of people
appear on thermal imaging. "You have a ton of people packed in a small place,
they're hot, exhausted and lying down, so it's going to be very difficult to
distinguish how many there are, not to mention they move around."

A drone policy expert who requested anonymity due to the sensitivity around his
current employment said in an e-mail that while the U.S. has the ability to find
out the number of Yazidis, it might not be a high priority for the overall
mission. "There is no technical reason why we couldn't get a solid ballpark
estimate of the number of refugees," he wrote. "However, there are a lot of
practical reasons, like competing priorities for aerial assets ... a limited
supply of intelligence analysts and command attention, and perhaps even some
policy reasons for rounding up on your estimate of trapped civilians, that would
lead to this miscount."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


