                             370 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                            January 14, 2014 Tuesday

Thailand Protests Are Captured in Social Media and Onstage

BYLINE: CHRISTINE HAUSER

LENGTH: 926 words



HIGHLIGHT: In Bangkok in recent days, major intersections are choked with
demonstrations, diverting the normal flow of business and traffic.


[Video: Drone video footage from Monday of a major intersection blocked by
protesters and of the surrounding boulevards. Watch on YouTube.]

In the boldest move in two months of demonstrations against the government of
Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra, Bangkok's central commercial district has
been swarmed by antigovernment protesters, and on Tuesday, the second day of the
so-called "shutdown" of the city and its consequences were widely tracked on
social media.

Along with noisy, whistle-blowing protesters at the gatherings, Bangkok
residents and others using #BangkokShutdown shared images of the unusual sight:
relatively empty streets as traffic was diverted, or as drivers simply kept
away. There were also reports of a brief, late night eruption of gunfire near a
hotel popular with tourists, and an impromptu interview of an antigovernment
protest speaker onstage.

As my colleague Thomas Fuller reported earlier this week, among the most popular
pictures posted on social media sites are images of empty boulevards in Bangkok
that on a normal day would be filled with vehicles. Richard Barrow, a travel
blogger, has been tracking the social media postings in English and in Thai,
sharing them on his Twitter account.

They keep talking about Bangkok Shutdown but the last 2 days have been more like
a Car Free Day. It has been so easy to get around the city.

- Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow)14 Jan 14

Road at Siam Skytrain station absolutely empty... earlier bicyclists took
advantage of the road. #BangkokShutdown http://t.co/G9oCjxp0DU

- Humphrey Cheung (@HumphreyCheung)13 Jan 14

@RichardBarrow @Dave_bkk sukumvit soi 3. Dead town.
Never this empty even at 4am. http://t.co/gMGACnrXLL

- Nikorn Sachdev (@nikornsachdev)13 Jan 14

Late on Tuesday, Mr. Barrow posted reports of the sound of gunfire near a hotel,
and the sound of an explosion near the home of a former prime minister.

This is the kind of thing I have been worrying about. The late night shootings
have followed the protesters to an area populated by tourists

- Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow)14 Jan 14

What we have are two separate incidents. Sound of explosion on Soi 31 near
Abhisit's house & gunfire on Phayathai near Asia Hotel #Bangkok

- Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow)14 Jan 14

Like many of Thailand's media and journalists based in the country, Humphrey
Cheung, a freelance cameraman, uses drone-like remotely controlled cameras to
cover the demonstrations, providing a bird's-eye view of the unrest in recent
months, a handy reporting tool when protesters, who oppose elections scheduled
for Feb. 2 and accuse government leaders of corruption, have blocked access to
government and public buildings.

Mr. Cheung, who posts his footage on the YouTube account called routergods,
showed further examples, such as this video of protesters at Asok intersection
and another one on Tuesday of a train station in the central business district.

[Video: Additional drone footage of the Asok intersection protest. Watch on
YouTube.]
[Video: Traffic was redirected away from the district area, as this drone
footage shows. Watch on YouTube.]

[Video: An early-morning empty street near the Skytrain station in Bangkok on
Tuesday. Watch on YouTube.]

Rajprasong is another of the seven city crossroads taken over by the
antigovernment protesters, as John Sparks, a Channel 4 news correspondent,
described in a blog post and video from the site.

In an unexpected and spontaneous portrayal of the protesters' viewpoint, Mr.
Sparks said he had been standing on the side of a stage when a protest speaker
who had been addressing the crowd suddenly turned to him:

While we were filming, a flamboyant speaker called Dr Seri Wongmontha was busy
whipping up the crowd - the sleeves of his flowing silk jacket of turquoise and
pink, flying in the wind.

"We cannot stand what Yingluck Shinawatra has done to our country," he said
before glancing over to me in the corner.

"You want an interview," he asked with microphone in hand. I responded in the
affirmative, thinking that we would catch him off-stage after his performance.
But I was mistaken.

Dr Seri, a Thai television celebrity, political columnist and judge of this
country's annual cross-dresser beauty contest, had other plans.

What followed was a live, onstage dual in front of thousands of protesters.

As Mr. Sparks mentioned, the antigovernment protesters accuse the prime minister
and her billionaire brother, Thaksin, of running the nation for their own
personal benefit. But when he pointed out to Dr. Seri that there were
allegations of corruption and vote-buying among leaders of the protest movement
itself, Mr. Seri replied in part that the people "tolerate" some greed but
Thaksin went "overboard."

[Video: A Channel 4 News reporter interviewing a protest speaker onstage on
Tuesday in Bangkok. Watch on YouTube.]

Meanwhile, large crowds have gathered in several cities north of Bangkok to hold
candlelight vigils in support of elections, under the social media campaign
using #RespectMyVote.

Mr. Barrow, the travel blogger, shared several images of those vigils as well.

More people gathering to light candles of peace. This one in Klong Saan in
#Bangkok (Pic @weeranan) #RespectMyVote http://t.co/eraV1vOdmz

- Richard Barrow (@RichardBarrow)14 Jan 14


     ·    In Thailand, a Drone's Eye View of Protests
     ·    Ukraine on Edge as Protesters and the Authorities Face Off
     ·    Police Officer in Brazil Jokes on Facebook About Breaking Truncheon
          Over Protester
     ·    Detained Opposition Leader's Name Echoes at Rallies on Eve of Iran
          Vote
     ·    Pakistanis Explain What the Election Means to Them


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


