                             379 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      September 8, 2014 Monday 5:17 PM EST

The Department of Defense 'respectfully declined' to participate in new drone
movie;
"Good Kill," which premiered last week during the 71st Venice Film Festival,
follows Hawke, a former fighter pilot who gets reassigned to drone duty.

BYLINE: Helena Andrews

LENGTH: 436 words


The folks behind "Good Kill," a new movie about the U.S. military's drone
operations in the Middle East, hope the film becomes a cinematic flash point
(think "Zero Dark Thirty"). And that's probably why the Department of Defense
RSVP'd no when invited to participate.

"When production went to ask for [Department of Defense] support, they very
respectfully declined. They didn't know if they wanted to lend their support,"
said actress January Jones in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter. Jones
stars opposite Ethan Hawke in the film.

"Good Kill," which premiered last week during the 71st Venice Film Festival,
follows Hawke, a former fighter pilot who gets reassigned to drone duty,
battling the Taliban remotely from a trailer in the Nevada desert. The
Associated Press called it "a sobering 21st-century riposte to 'Top Gun.' "

Now, "Top Gun" was a flick the DOD could get behind. The 1980s classic was about
camaraderie, courage and one of its main characters, "Charlie," was based on
real-life Pentagon official Christine Fox, who was the highest-ranking woman
ever to serve at the Department of Defense before she retired last May.

"The Navy provided an enormous amount of support for 'Top Gun,' " said Phil
Strub, the DOD's entertainment liaison.

In fact, according to Strub, the department had been working closely with "Top
Gun" director Tony Scott's long-time researcher on the film's reboot up until
Scott's death in 2012. Like "Good Kill," the plot of "Top Gun 2  was to focus on
drones, or what Strub called RPAs, remotely piloted aircrafts.

"We were moving along quite steadily," said Strub, until Scott died "and
everything ground to a halt. I have not heard anything substantive since then."
In March, producer Jerry Bruckheimer told the Huffington Post that the sequel
was a go and it's listed on the movie database IMDB as "in production."

Despite the similar script points, "Good Kill" is no "Top Gun." In the new film,

 Hawke's character struggles with the reality and isolation of his new job. "I
feel like a coward every day," says his character. Not exactly awe-inspiring
stuff, which is what the Pentagon looks for when it loans its considerable
resources to a production.

Hawke told the Hollywood Reporter that "Good Kill" presented "a truth" and that
he hoped the film provoked a "constructive" dialogue.

More from The Reliable Source:

Parties You Missed: A glossy Gio Gonzalez bash and a pop-up dinner in Yard's
Park (VIDEO)

What Washington wears: costume designers from 'The Americans' and 'House of
Cards' dish

New Kennedy Center chief buys $1.6 million AU Park home

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


