                             373 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                               May 9, 2014 Friday

Students, Please Welcome ... Jeff Bezos?

BYLINE: NICK WINGFIELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 473 words



HIGHLIGHT: The chief executive of Amazon is known for being selective about his
public speaking engagements, speaking in front of few groups. Now elementary and
middle school students have joined the club.


"All big ideas start small." Jeff Bezos to kids. http://t.co/lH2B77GfEC

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Some children get visits at their schools from firefighters and police officers.
Some get time with zookeepers bearing marsupials and iguanas.

One lucky school in the Seattle area got an audience on Friday morning with a
more exotic visitor: Jeffrey P. Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon.

Wearing a dark suit, Mr. Bezos spoke in an auditorium before a crowd of students
at a kindergarten through eighth grade school attended by one or more of his
children. His talk emphasized personal passions like space exploration and
inspirational messages about focusing on customers first and having long-term
vision (the title of the speech was "Dream Big"). He brought an Amazon delivery
drone with him.

Word of Mr. Bezos's visit to the school came from Spencer Rascoff, the chief
executive of the online real estate firm Zillow, who did a thorough job of
live-tweeting Mr. Bezos's talk. Mr. Rascoff's son attends the school, which he
declined to name.

Mr. Bezos is known for being selective about his public speaking engagements.
Other than Amazon's own events, he has spoken at the TED Conference and given a
commencement speech at Princeton University, his alma mater. Now elementary and
middle school students have joined the club.

Here, courtesy of Mr. Rascoff's tweets, are some of the highlights of Mr.
Bezos's school visit, including some video clips and photographs.

1) customer focus (not competitor focus), 2) take big swings & invent, 3) have
long term view. Bezos to schoolkids. http://t.co/Etyi71dE51

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Who succeeds at amazon? "Explorers and pioneers." Who fails? Those who focus on
killing our competitors. -Bezos

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Highest compliment to an inventor is when years later people won't believe that
life existed before the invention. -Bezos

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Bezos showing drone delivery at my son's school https://t.co/ERBhguO3hD

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Innovation is a team sport, at least at large scale. -Bezos

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Bezos role model: grandfather who taught him self-reliance and importance of
tinkering.

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

"Become entrepreneurs, scientists, musicians" and "pick something you are
passionate about." Great advice to kids. Bravo Bezos

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14

Explaining to kids the physics behind the drone. So cool. http://t.co/rnqcpF0HQi

- Spencer Rascoff (@spencerrascoff)9 May 14


     ·    Jeff Bezos, Please Call Your Office
     ·    Ecuadorean Navy Delivers for Amazon Chief
     ·    Amazon Workers in Germany Strike Again
     ·    Disruptions: At Your Door in Minutes, Delivered by Robot
     ·    Amazon Floats the Notion of Delivery Drones


LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


