                             377 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 11, 2014 Friday 12:38 PM EST

The Switchboard: Amazon asks FAA for drone exception

BYLINE: Hayley Tsukayama

LENGTH: 569 words


Published every weekday, the Switchboard highlights five tech policy stories you
need to read.

Join us for Switchback, our weekly livechat, Friday at 11 a.m. Eastern! Come
hang out with The Switch's writers to talk tech, gadgets and nerd culture. You
can submit your comments and questions early right here.

Amazon wants an exemption from the FAA's drone restrictions  "In a filing to the
agency this week, Amazon says that it's made tremendous strides with its drone
technology. It's now working on eighth- and ninth-generation copter designs,
just three months after the company's chief executive, Jeff Bezos, told
shareholders Amazon was drawing up plans for its seventh-gen drone," writes The
Washington Post's Brian Fung. The majority of the filing is "devoted to Amazon's
main purpose, which is two-fold: To get permission from the FAA to put its
drones in the air, and to be able to test them at its own research facilities in
Washington state rather than having to visit one of the six test sites that the
agency approved late last year. "

AT&T slowly expanding "Toll-Free" data trial, but still no big-name customers
"AT&T grabbed a lot of attention back in January when it announced plans to
offer companies the option to pay for data used by their customers. Since then?
Crickets," reported Re/Code's Ina Fried. But now AT&T is signing up some
partners, the report said. "Seattle-area startup Syntonic Wireless is announcing
on Thursday that it is now a part of the AT&T effort and plans to launch a
sponsored content marketplace that will allow smartphone owners to see a range
of available content that won't count against their monthly data cap."
E-commerce and content sites have shown the most interest so far, the report
said.

We need to talk about the right to be forgotten So says Google's chief legal
officer, David Drummond, who wrote a column for the The Guardian that " search
engines across Europe face a new challenge - one we've had just two months to
get our heads around." Drummond described Google's early process for screening
out search results and outlined all of Google's objections but also said, " we
obviously respect the court's authority and are doing our very best to comply
quickly and responsibly."

Samsung Electronics looks into child labor allegations at China supplier
"Samsung Electronics Co Ltd on Thursday said it is investigating an allegation
that a supplier in southern China used child labor," reports Reuters' Se Young
Lee. "U.S. activist group China Labor Watch on Thursday released a report
alleging that Dongguan Shinyang Electronic Co Ltd, a supplier of mobile phone
covers and parts, hired child labor for its assembly lines."  FTC sues Amazon
over children's in-app purchases "Federal regulators announced Thursday they
have filed a lawsuit against Amazon.com for allegedly making it too easy for
children to make purchases when using mobile apps without a parent's
permission," reports The Washington Post's Cecilia Kang. "Amazon, whose chief
executive Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The Washington Post, did not immediately respond
to the lawsuit. But a spokeswoman pointed to a letter sent to FTC Chairwoman
Edith Ramirez saying the decision was "deeply disappointing" and that the firm
has improved its controls since the Amazon app store was first launched in
2011."

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


