                             375 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Plum Line

                        July 7, 2014 Monday 1:14 PM EST

Morning Plum: The Tea Party worldview, extreme even in red states?

BYLINE: Greg Sargent

LENGTH: 1545 words


As Congress returns from recess, big battles loom over whether to reauthorize
the Export-Import Bank and over whether to prevent the Highway Trust Fund from
going insolvent, which could stall infrastructure projects across the country
and lead to the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs.

A key question at the core of these fights, particularly the one over
infrastructure spending, is this: Is there a point at which the Tea Party
economic worldview - which demands a scaled back role for government that is
radical even for some conventional Republican politicians - becomes a political
liability even in hard core red states and districts?

Perhaps the most interesting place this question is being put to the test is in
the Arkansas Senate race. The campaign of Dem incumbent Mark Pryor has released
a video showcasing local officials from the town of Mayflower attacking the
Republican challenger, GOP Rep. and national Tea Party hero Tom Cotton, for his
votes against disaster aid. Mayflower was ravaged by tornado damage earlier this
year.

You can expect this footage - of local officials attacking Cotton, and of
tornado devastation - to be on the air in the weeks ahead. One Dem Super PAC has
already aired an ad slamming Cotton as "the only Arkansan in Congress,
Republican or Democrat, to vote against disaster relief five times." Politifact
rated the claim as "half true," noting that his votes weren't really about
Arkansas, but adding that Cotton did cast votes against "immediate aid or funded
disaster relief programs" and that he "typically doesn't support spending that
isn't balanced out with cuts in other areas."

The broader point here is that even in deep red Arkansas, Pryor is arguing that
Cotton's view of the proper role of government is extreme and radical, and
harmful to the state's interests. Cotton was widely seen as having the ability
to bridge the Tea Party and "establishment" wings of the GOP. But Cotton's
actual views are deep in Tea Party territory on a number of issues, of which
disaster relief is only one: He voted against the Farm Bill and the Violence
Against Women Act and supports a GOP budget to the right of the Paul Ryan
blueprint. Meanwhile, David Ramsey reports that Cotton continues to avoid taking
a position on whether the state should raise the minimum wage and on the state's
version of the Medicaid expansion, which is backed by some Republicans there.

As Ed Kilgore recently put it:

This man with the golden resume is a stone ideologue who may be incapable of
adjusting himself to political reality even in the relatively benign territory
of a midterm election in a southern red state.

I believe we'll be seeing a similar dynamic play out with some GOP lawmakers in
the coming battle over the Highway Trust Fund. But more on that another time.

* BOEHNER LAWSUIT SCRATCHES IMPEACHMENT ITCH: John Boehner publishes an op-ed
explaining the coming House GOP lawsuit against the president, noting it is
designed to force Obama to "faithfully execute the laws of our country." The
Speaker offers a clue to the lawsuit's specifics:

In my view, the President has not faithfully executed the laws when it comes to
a range of issues, including his health care law, energy regulations, foreign
policy and education.

No mention of immigration. If the lawsuit does target Obama for de-prioritizing
the deportation of the DREAM kids, it will be a reminder that the de facto GOP
position - which many lawmakers have fudged - is to call for their immediate
removal.

* WHAT'S REALLY DRIVING HOUSE GOP LAWSUIT: Mike Lillis cuts to the core of the
real motive here, and explains how the battle will be framed:

House Republicans plan to bring legislation to the floor authorizing a lawsuit
against Obama's use of executive action, a move they believe will underline the
importance to their base voters of coming to the polls in November to elect a
GOP House and Senate. The White House and Senate Democrats are equally focused
on winning in November. They see the House lawsuit as a classic case of
Republican overreach, and believe it will backfire.

In other words, dramatizing Obummer Tyranny will help keep the base enraged all
the way through elections four months from now. Of course, this could also end
up reminding everyone else of all the areas where the GOP refuses to govern.

* HMMM - GUN CONTROL AS AN ISSUE 2014? The Post reports that Michael Bloomberg
is gearing up his gun control network to "score" candidates' positions on the
issue, with plans to spend for or against them in multiple races. This is key:

"We're going to be very, very data-driven, metrics-driven, making sure that we
identify the people who care about this issue," said Mitch Stewart, formerly the
Obama campaign's battleground-states director and now a political consultant
advising Everytown. "We're going to show these candidates and these members of
Congress that there is a sizable group of people in their districts and states
who care about these issues and they're going to demand some answers."

The problem has always been that "gun rights" voters are far more motivated; the
question is whether a more comprehensive data-driven effort to find voters
motivated in favor of gun control can do anything to change this.

* ANOTHER BIG TEA PARTY-GOP BATTLE HEATS UP: The Wall Street Journal has a good
overview of the battle over the Export-Import Bank, which helps American
companies by offering low-cost loans to their foreign customers. The key
revelation: Supporters of the bank are launching an aggressive effort to remind
lawmakers - mostly Republicans - exactly which companies in their districts
benefit from the bank and how many jobs they represent.

As I reported here the other day, Dems relish this battle because they believe
it will reprise a split between the GOP's Tea Party and pragmatic business
wings, causing Republicans to consume one another over it.

* NEW REPORT WARNS OF DANGERS OF DRONES: The New York Times has a useful
discussion of a new report warning that if we continue our drone program without
adequate oversight, the U.S. could be on a "slippery slope" into new forms of
perpetual warfare that other countries will emulate, with unforeseen
consequences:

The Obama administration should be addressing these issues with regular reports
to the public about the rationale for the use of drones and the numbers of
militants and civilians killed. Instead, excessive secrecy shrouds these
operations. While the report points out that there may be fewer civilian
casualties in a drone strike than in a conventional bombing, drone operations
need to be subject to credible oversight.

Obama himself has promised more oversight, but Congress should be stepping up
and forcing the administration's hand. Yet in Congress, proposals that would
force more oversight and transparency are languishing.

* THE WILD CARD IN NORTH CAROLINA SENATE RACE: Karen Tumulty and Reid Wilson
profile the libertarian candidate in the North Carolina Senate race and explain
why his surprising support could end up keeping the seat in Dem hands:

Four polls lately put his support somewhere between 8 and 11 percent - not
enough to suggest a realistic possibility of winning, but conceivably enough to
affect the outcome of the race. The same surveys show the margin between
incumbent Democrat Kay Hagan and her GOP challenger, state House Speaker Thom
Tillis, at six points or less.

Incumbent Senator Hagan - like Mark Pryor - was long thought to be a Dead Dem
Walking, but here again, reality just isn't cooperating.

* CONSERVATIVES TREAT ECONOMICS AS 'THEOLOGICAL ISSUE': Paul Krugman's column
gets at the larger meaning of the tendency of Republicans and conservatives to
blame liberals and activist monetary policy for the economic crisis:

It turns out that money is indeed a kind of theological issue. Many on the right
are hostile to any kind of government activism, seeing it as the thin edge of
the wedge - if you concede that the Fed can sometimes help the economy by
creating "fiat money," the next thing you know liberals will confiscate your
wealth and give it to the 47 percent. Also, let's not forget that quite a few
influential conservatives, including Mr. Ryan, draw their inspiration from Ayn
Rand novels in which the gold standard takes on essentially sacred status.

* AND NO, CONSERVATIVES DON'T OWN THE CONSTITUTION? E.J. Donne runs through the
most recent scholarship arguing that conservative claims to be in touch with the
Constitution's "original intent" are deeply at odds with history:

For too long, progressives have allowed conservatives to monopolize claims of
fealty to our unifying national document. In fact, those who would battle rising
economic inequalities to create a robust middle class should insist that it's
they who are most loyal to the Constitution's core purpose. Broadly shared
well-being is essential to the framers' promise that "We the people" will be the
stewards of our government.

As Dionne adds, it's particularly difficult to see decisions like Citizens
United - maximizing the influence of individual wealth over the political
process - as compatible with constitutional "originalism."

What else?

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


