                             371 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                             March 21, 2014 Friday

What's a Logical Drone Strikes Policy? Hint: Not the Current One.

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 634 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Obama administration&#8217;s &#8220;targeted killing&#8221;
policy has been the subject of furious debate that has not nearly been put to
rest by the government&#8217;s equivocations.


The Obama administration's "targeted killing" policy has been the subject of
furious debate that has not nearly been put to rest by the government's
equivocations.

President Obama said last May that he was placing limits on the use of drones in
foreign countries, and senior administration officials have said the United
States cannot exist in an inchoate state of war against terrorists everywhere
(the sort President George W. Bush fantasized about) But there's still no cut
and dry, publicly available legal framework setting out when and where the
government can launch drone strikes.

The Center for National Security Studies, a Washington think tank, has tried to
clarify the situation in a paper for the American Bar Association's Center for
Human Rights, which I hope gets read by Mr. Obama and his lawyers.

Kate Martin, the director of the center, said the basic argument is fairly
simple: Follow the laws of war. "The only time you are allowed to target and
kill someone in another country is under the laws of war," she said. "There has
to be an 'armed conflict' under way, Al Qaeda or its affiliate has to be a
participant in the armed conflict, and they have to be planning attacks on the
United States from that country."

The International Red Cross defines "armed conflict" as a sustained level of
violence involving opposing states, opposing non-governmental military forces,
or opposing governmental and non-governmental forces. When combatants move back
and forth across a border carrying out military operations, that's an armed
conflict. But civil unrest or widespread rioting and lawlessness do not qualify.

What does this mean in real terms? Obviously, there is a war in Afghanistan, so
military strikes there are clearly authorized. We also know that the Taliban and
Al Qaeda cross the Pakistani border to carry out attacks on American and NATO
forces. So, the laws of war - according to the center - would allow strikes in
Pakistan targeting anyone directly involved in planning or carrying out those
attacks. (It's not good enough to say that they support the cause, or even that
they are providing financial backing.) Drone strikes into Yemen, under the logic
of the paper, could also be justified because there is an armed conflict in that
country.

But the government can't launch strikes anywhere it wants. "If Al Qaeda is holed
up in the mountains in Africa planning an attack against the United States, but
in a country in which there is no war, the United States cannot use military
force against them," Ms. Martin explained.

The Obama administration seems to think otherwise. It seems to think it can
attack targets in a country where there is no armed conflict involving groups
that are engaged in attacks on the United States - if the government of that
country is unable or unwilling to go after those targets itself.

Using this flawed logic, the United States sent commandos into Libya last year
to grab a suspect in the 1998 World Trade Center bombing. "The effect of their
ridiculous claim that they have this authority, which they are not using except
to pick up a 50-year-old diabetic Qaeda guy, is that the whole world thinks that
the United States thinks we can go anywhere after anybody," Ms. Martin said.

The solution, she said, is that "the president needs to go to Congress and say
when the war in Afghanistan is over, we need to continue the war or not, and
here's where we need to do that and here is the legal justification."

President Obama said last May that it was time to repeal the Authorization for
Use of Military Force, and replace it with a less expansive document. We're
supposed to be out of Afghanistan this year. So what's he waiting for?


     ·    The G.O.P.'s Cold-War Posture
     ·    The 'Signature Strikes' Program
     ·    The Forever War
     ·    Drone Disdain
     ·    Targeted Killing in the U.S.A.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


