                             381 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     January 30, 2014 Thursday 8:14 PM EST

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 456 words


CALIFORNIA          Strict curbs ondrones advance

California would establish what supporters say are some of the nation's
strictest standards for the use of drone aircraft by government entities, under
a bill approved Wednesday by the state Assembly.

The measure would require law enforcement agencies to obtain warrants except in
certain emergencies. It also would require that government agencies notify the
public when they intend to use drones and that data collected by unmanned
aircraft be destroyed within six months. Public agencies would be prohibited
from arming their drones.

The measure passed 59 to 5, and it now goes to the Senate.

"The future of aviation is unmanned," said Assemblyman Jeff Gorell, an
intelligence officer in the U.S. Navy Reserve who said he is familiar with
drones from a tour in Afghanistan. The Federal Aviation Administration estimates
that more than 30,000 drones will be flying over the United States within the
next two decades.

- Associated Press

MISSOURI          Supreme Court liftsstay of execution

The U.S. Supreme Court has denied last-minute requests to halt the execution of
a Missouri man convicted of killing a local jeweler two decades ago.

The high court issued a temporary stay less than three hours before Herbert
Smulls was scheduled to be executed at 12:01 a.m. Wednesday. But the court
lifted the stay without explanation late Wednesday afternoon, meaning the
execution can move forward.

Lawyers for Smulls, 56, sentenced to death in 1991 for killing Stephen Honickman
and badly injuring his wife, challenged among other things the state's refusal
to disclose where it obtained its lethal-injection drug.

- Associated Press

An eye on tax refunds in Utah:Republican Rep. Merrill Nelson, a member of the
Utah State House, has proposed a bill that would give residents the option of
donating a portion of their income tax refund to a "Marriage Defense Fund."
Nelson said the option is meant to placate proponents of same-sex marriage who
complain the state is wasting money appealing a federal decision striking down
Utah's gay marriage ban. It also allows supporters of "traditional marriage" a
way to show their support for the cause, he said.

Autistic boy's death prompts tracking plan:After the death of an autistic
teenager who walked away from his New York City school last year, the Justice
Department said it will fund voluntary GPS tracking devices for children with
autism or other conditions that put them at risk for fleeing their caregivers.
Avonte Oquendo's disappearance from his Queens school on Oct. 4 triggered a
massive search. The 14-year-old's remains were found in the East River earlier
this month.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


