                             384 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 17, 2014 Tuesday 3:15 AM EST

Path to possible airstrikes fraught with complications

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1171 words


The Defense Department has enough forces in the Persian Gulf region to conduct
airstrikes that would probably prevent Sunni insurgents from marching into
Baghdad, but other missions would be far more complex and risk drawing the
United States back into an Iraqi civil war, according to retired military
commanders.

The Pentagon announced that the USS Mesa Verde, an amphibious transport dock
ship, had arrived in the gulf on Monday to join an aircraft carrier, a destroyer
and a guided-missile cruiser. Together, the warships carry a large number of
fighter jets and search-and-rescue aircraft, along with Tomahawk cruise missiles
and other ordnance, that would give President Obama an assortment of tactical
options should he decide to take military action in Iraq.

"Militarily, we can do just about anything we want," said David Deptula, a
retired Air Force lieutenant general who helped lead previous air campaigns over
Iraq and Afghanistan. "The question is, to what end?"

The Pentagon's ability to deploy drones to conduct surveillance and carry out
airstrikes -  a move endorsed by many in Congress - may be limited. The U.S.
military has Predator and Reaper drones at several bases in the region but would
have to get permission from reluctant host countries to use them in Iraq.

Targeting fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) would not be
difficult if they continue to advance toward Baghdad along highways and other
visible routes, the former military commanders said. But airstrikes would become
far more complicated if the insurgents stay within the cities they have taken
control of in recent weeks, raising the likelihood of civilian casualties.

No ground forces

Obama on Friday ruled out sending ground forces "back into combat in Iraq." That
decision means there may not be large numbers of U.S. personnel in the country
to help gather intelligence and identify targets for airstrikes. Unlike
conventional military forces, the ISIS fighters don't operate from fixed bases
and can easily blend in with noncombatants.

On Monday, U.S. officials said the White House was considering sending up to 100
Special Operations troops to Iraq in a training and advisory role. Although the
White House said those forces would not be directly involved in combat, it was
unclear whether they could be used to select targets or call in airstrikes.

Without forces on the ground to verify that U.S. airstrikes had hit legitimate
military targets, the United States would become more vulnerable to enemy
propaganda about mass civilian casualties, said Gary Roughead, a retired
four-star admiral and chief of naval operations from 2007 to 2011.

"The other side gets to generate the narrative, whether it's fact or fiction,"
he said. "Not having the ability to coordinate from the ground makes it very
hard."

For targets in populated areas, the United States would have to rely to a large
extent on intelligence provided by the Iraqi military. Although the U.S.
military could also turn to satellite imagery and airborne surveillance, having
troops on the ground to coordinate with Iraqi forces would greatly lessen the
odds of a mistake, said James O. Poss, a retired Air  Force major general who
helped oversee the bombing of Afghanistan in 2001.

"It's the president's decision, and it's a pretty gut-wrenching decision to put
a single soldier, airman or sailor on the ground," Poss said. "But I think to
have a much higher confidence in the targeting and the source of intelligence, a
presence on the ground may be necessary."

Permission to use bases

U.S. military officials said the naval presence in the gulf puts plenty of
firepower at Obama's disposal. The Defense Department also has several large air
and naval installations in the region that played key roles during the last war
in Iraq. But it is uncertain whether the countries that host those bases would
allow them to be used for potential military action in Iraq this time around.

The Pentagon, for instance, has major air bases in Qatar, Kuwait and the United
Arab Emirates. The rulers of those countries are Sunni Muslims and are generally
leery of Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, a Shiite whom the White House has
criticized for exacerbating sectarian tensions.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, declined to comment when
asked if the U.S. military was seeking permission from Persian Gulf countries to
use their bases in the event that Obama decides to act in Iraq. He said that the
basing agreements "vary from country to country, and I'm not going to speculate
on that right now."

An inability to use the gulf bases would make it difficult for the Pentagon to
deploy armed drones over Iraq. Predator and Reaper drones cannot take off from
ships and lack the range to be effective from U.S. bases in Afghanistan.

The U.S. military has fighter aircraft and unarmed drones in Turkey, including a
handful of Predators that have conducted surveillance flights over northern Iraq
since 2011.

The Turkish government denied permission to use its bases for the 2003 invasion
of Iraq, a lingering source of resentment in the Pentagon. More recently,
relations have cooled between Washington and Ankara as Prime Minister Recep
Tayyip Erdogan has cracked down on political opponents.

But Turkey may have stronger incentive to cooperate with the U.S. military this
time. Last week, ISIS insurgents overran the Turkish Consulate in the Iraqi city
of Mosul and took scores of Turks hostage.

Samuel J. Brannen, a former senior defense official who served as the Pentagon's
country director for Turkey, said cutting a deal with Ankara would be
complicated but probably easier than winning permission from the gulf states to
use the bases there.

"On the one hand, there is more willingness to cooperate on the part of Turkey,"
said Brannen, now a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies in Washington. "On the other hand, doing anything with the Turks is
very, very hard."

'We are scared'

In Iraq, refugees from Mosul said they were fleeing their homes in anticipation
of U.S. airstrikes against ISIS fighters who have taken over the city.

"When we heard that the plane carriers had reached the gulf, we left," said
Ahmad Ziad, a 30-year-old taxi driver who was leaving Mosul with his wife and
two children, a cage carrying the family's pet bird perched on the front seat.
"We aren't scared of ISIS; they are much better than the Iraqi army. We are
scared of the airstrikes."

Some expressed frustration that the international community or the Iraqi
government had not acted to strike the militants sooner.

"They should have struck [ISIS] when they were outside the towns and cities -
now they are among the people," said Mohammed Abdullah, a local council member
from the town of Hatra, southwest of Mosul. "How are they going to tell who is
who?"

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

Loveday Morris in Irbil, Iraq, and Karen DeYoung in Washington contributed to
this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


