                             383 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        June 13, 2014 Friday 2:32 AM EST

'Grounded' takes an uneasy look at drone warfare

BYLINE: Celia Wren

SECTION: Style; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 775 words


The eye in the sky. This image, once warbled about in the chorus of an '80s pop
hit, gains a terrible new meaning for the protagonist of "Grounded," George
Brant's solo play. Now on view at Studio Theatre, this propulsive drama
chronicles several years in the life of a female American fighter pilot. When
this brash aviator accidentally gets pregnant, her career takes a new turn:
Instead of soaring above the Earth, sovereign and self-reliant, she finds
herself part of a team, steering a drone from a trailer in the Nevada desert. As
she peers down through her monitor at Afghanistan, day after day, the activity
of watching becomes first an uneasy thrill - and then something more
threatening.

In a fireball performance, Lucy Ellinson portrays the Pilot in this production,
which hails from London's Gate Theatre and is directed by Christopher Haydon.
(The show rounds out Studio's New British Invasion Festival.) When you enter the
Mead Theatre space, the ace Air Force officer is already present - standing
confidently, legs apart, thumbs in her flight-suit belt, inside what appears to
be a cube made of scrim. This striking, spartan set, which is pierced by
unnerving colored lights during the course of the 75-minute show, suggests both
a cage and a cold corner of virtual reality.

The cocksure attitude expressed in her initial pose turns out to be typical of
the Pilot, who sees herself as a "rock star" - at least until she is relegated
to what she disparages as the "Chair Force," spying upon and periodically
killing insurgents at no risk to herself. The fact that she is able to return
each night to the suburban Las Vegas home she shares with her young daughter and
supportive husband (a hardware store worker turned blackjack dealer) only adds
to her psychological strain. At work, she tracks militants and contemplates
explosions and flying body parts; at home, her daughter wants to play My Little
Pony. The experiences seem a world apart - just as the cramped gray images on
the drone monitor seem irreconcilable with the blue sky she once winged through.
When you are in a plane, as a pilot, "You are the blue," she observes in one of
the script's bursts of brusque, vernacular lyricism. In the Nevada trailer, by
contrast, she stares for hours "at a world carved out of putty."

Ellinson fleshes out every inch of the Pilot's swaggering, profane, secretly
agitated self, firing off her remarks at a clear but breakneck pace, stalking
the cube, tossing off assertive gestures - a fist smashed into a palm, a victory
sign etched with two outstretched arms. Subtle fluctuations of voice and
expression testify to repressed inner conflict: When she relates the birth of
her daughter, whose premature arrival will require extra solicitous parenting
for the "first few years," the Pilot's face falls at the word "years," and she
pauses as she contemplates the reality of her new, domestic life. Then she tears
off into talk again, fierce and stoical - at least on the surface.

A fascinating exploration of personality, "Grounded" is, of course, all the more
interesting because the controversial subject of drone warfare is so much in the
news. We hear about devastating strikes all the time, but we are more rarely
invited to think about the individual lives behind the phenomenon. With its
details about monitors, joysticks and Nevada commutes, and glimpses of
individual Afghan combatants, Brant's drama issues this invitation. At the same
time, the playwright has woven some poetic themes and oppositions (some of them
arguably a little too tidy) into his script. The Pilot becomes haunted by the
color gray; the Las Vegas setting adds a layer of meaning to the notion of
Predator (the name of a drone type, of course) and prey. (Tom Gibbons's sound
design, which samples ominous radio-headset static and, at one point,
one-armed-bandit ka-chings, contributes to the resonances. So do Mark Howland's
lighting and Benjamin Walden's video design, with laser-sight-evoking spots and
garish Sin City colors.)

Most significant, the play ponders instances and ramifications of watching and
being watched. In its thought-provoking final moments, we in the audience are
swept up into this brooding dynamic. To what extent are we - watching a play -
too comfortable being the voyeurs of an ongoing war?

style@washpost.com

Wren is a freelance writer.

'Grounded'

By George Brant. Directed by Christopher Haydon; set and costume design, Oli
Townsend; technical tour manager, Katy Munroe Farlie. 75 minutes. Tickets,
$39-$49. Through June 29 at Studio Theatre, 1501 14th St. NW. Visit
www.studiotheatre.org or call 202-332-3300.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


