                             380 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

Pakistan livid over U.S. drone strike

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 896 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - The U.S. drone strike that killed the head of the
Pakistani Taliban drew expressions of outrage from political officials here
Saturday, capped by a public rebuke of the Obama administration.

A day after three missiles were fired into a vehicle in northwestern Pakistan,
senior Pakistani Taliban members confirmed Saturday that Hakimullah Mehsud and
four others had been killed in the attack, a major victory in the decade-old
U.S. campaign targeting Islamist militants. But after they had buried their
former chief, Pakistani Taliban leaders began to regroup, vowing retaliatory
strikes against U.S. interests.

With security heightened across Pakistan, the sharpest effect so far has been
the derailment, at least temporarily, of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's efforts
to engage Mehsud and other Taliban leaders in peace talks. In an angry,
hour-long, televised news conference Saturday, Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar
Ali Khan accused the United States of "ambushing" the Sharif government's
efforts by authorizing the strike.

"The government of Pakistan does not see the drone attack as an attack on an
individual, but as an attack on the peace process," he said.

After Khan spoke, Pakistan's Foreign Ministry lodged a formal protest with U.S.
Ambassador Richard G. Olson, saying the attack had violated Pakistan's
sovereignty. The Foreign Ministry also plans to protest to the five permanent
members of the U.N. Security Council.

When Sharif returns here after spending the weekend in London, he and his
national security team will reexamine "the entire perspective" of future
relations with the United States, including NATO's use of Pakistani highways to
transport equipment to and from Afghanistan, Khan said.

U.S. officials had no immediate comment Saturday, although a White House
official noted Friday that Mehsud was linked to a 2010 plot to bomb Times Square
in New York.

Mehsud, who Taliban leaders said was buried early Saturday in North Waziristan,
was also implicated in a 2009 attack on a CIA outpost in eastern Afghanistan
that killed seven Americans. The United States posted a $5 million bounty for
him, as well as for another senior Pakistani Taliban leader, Wali ur-Rehman, who
was killed in a drone strike in May.

Several analysts said those killings represent a major setback for the militant
group, which is composed of dozens of factions and is loosely affiliated with
al-Qaeda, as well as with the Afghan Taliban.

But Pakistani Taliban leaders met Saturday to try to select a new leader and
shake off suggestions that Mehsud's death will have a lasting impact on the
group.

Some Taliban officials said that Khan Said, the group's second-in-command, has
emerged as a front-runner to succeed Mehsud. But two Taliban members who spoke
on the condition of anonymity said the group has decided to appoint Sheheryar
Mehsud, a little-known 33-year-old militant who has fought in both Kashmir and
Afghanistan, as its temporary leader.

Other officials said that a final decision could come as early as Sunday.

Saifullah Mehsud of the Islamabad-based FATA Research Center, which investigates
terrorism organizations, said that whoever is chosen is likely to be less rigid
than Hakimullah Mehsud, who was controversial even among Taliban sympathizers
for authorizing attacks on civilians.

"The first reaction [from the Pakistani Taliban] is going to be one of
retaliation, and they will want revenge, and they may call off the peace talks,
but in the long run, having a figure like him not being around is going to make
it easier for all parties involved," Saifullah Mehsud said.

Several Pakistani cities, including the capital, Islamabad, were on high alert
Saturday, and an Interior Ministry official said additional precautions were
being taken around diplomatic compounds.

"Every drop of Hakimullah's blood will turn into a suicide bomber," Azam Tariq,
a local Taliban spokesman, told reporters in South Waziristan.

Khan, the interior minister, blamed the United States for Pakistan's security
problems, saying that the drone campaign is fueling instability in the country.
He said Sharif had asked Obama during a White House meeting last month for
assurances that the United States would not interfere in the planned talks with
the Taliban.

"Is this how you support the dialogue?" Khan said. "One day before discussions
are supposed to start, you take out the leader who was supposed to talk?"

Also expressing outrage, the chief political leader of the northwestern province
of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa said Saturday that he will immediately press for a
blockade of NATO supply routes through Pakistan.

"We will not allow it. Even if our government falls, then let it be so," said
Imran Khan, the leader of the Movement for Justice party, which heads the local
government in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, a main route for NATO convoys to and from
Afghanistan.

But Zahid Hussain, a military analyst based in Islamabad, said that much of
Pakistan's military and political establishment is privately "quite happy" that
the country's "No. 1 most-wanted man" is dead. Neither the military nor the
powerful intelligence service commented on Hakimullah Mehsud's death Saturday.

"They knew the peace talks were never going to go anywhere," Hussain said.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Haq Nawaz Khan, Shaiq Hussain and Saleem Mehsud contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


