                              38 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Opinionator)

                           September 14, 2014 Sunday

Drones and the Democracy Disconnect

BYLINE: Firmin DeBrabander

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 1664 words



HIGHLIGHT: Can the sort of honorable military battles that strengthen our
national identity possibly be fought by drones?


With President Obama's announcement that we will open a new battlefront in yet
another Middle Eastern country - in Syria, against ISIS (the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria) - there is widespread acknowledgement that it will be a
protracted, complex, perhaps even messy campaign, with many unforeseeable
consequences along the way. The president has said we will put "no boots on the
ground" in Syria; he is wary of simply flooding allies on the ground with arms,
for fear that they will fall into the wrong hands - as they already have. Obama
wants to strike against ISIS in a part of Syria that is currently outside the
authority of the Syrian government, which the president has accused of war
crimes, and is thus, in our eyes, a legal no-man's land. He has also made clear
that he is ready to go it alone in directing attacks on ISIS - he has asked for
Congress's support, but is not seeking their authorization. All these signs
point to drones playing a prominent role in this new war in Syria.

Increasingly, this is how the United States chooses to fight its wars. Drones
lead the way and dominate the fight against the several non-state actors we now
engage - Al Qaeda, the Shabab in Somalia and now ISIS. Drones have their
benefits: They enable us to fight ISIS without getting mired on the ground or
suffering casualties, making them politically powerful and appealing. For the
moment, the American public favors striking ISIS; that would likely change if
our own ground forces were involved.

If any group deserves drone strikes, it may well be ISIS.

This fundamentalist Muslim group, so brutal that even Al Qaeda shunned it, has
taken to forcibly converting and exterminating Christians and other minority
religious groups; one such minority, the Yazidis, may have narrowly escaped
genocide at ISIS' hands. The West has received vivid proof of the group's
ferocity. On Saturday it released its third video of a beheading - this time of
a British aid worker - after two other such videos of the beheadings of American
journalists within the past month.

The use of drones raises not just strategic and political problems, but ethical
questions as well. In particular, what does our use of and reliance on drones
say about us? How do drones affect the nation that endorses them - overtly, or,
as is more often the case, tacitly? Are drones compatible with patriotism? With
democracy? Honor? Glory? Or do they, as I fear, represent - and exacerbate - a
troubling, even obscene disconnect between the American people and the wars
waged in our name?

Writing in The Guardian in 2012, George Monbiot declared the United States'
drone strikes in Pakistan cowardly. He echoed the howls of many Pakistanis on
the ground, who suffer the drone onslaught firsthand, while those who carry it
out are safely removed thousands of miles away. The new breed of warriors is
strange indeed: They are safely ensconced here in the United States, often
commuting to work like ordinary citizens, and after a day spent monitoring and
perhaps striking enemy targets, they return home to kids, homework and dinner.

Drone apologists, and many defense experts, claim drones are a reasonable
development in warfare technology. The Slate commentator Jamie Holmes argues
that extreme complaints about military innovations are hardly new. To people
like Monbiot, or the BBC commentator Jeremy Clarkson, who scoffs that medals for
drone pilots "should feature an armchair and a Coke machine or two crossed
burgers," Holmes says, "the hyperventilating about heroism being killed by
machines misses the point. For one, the list of weapons once considered
'cowardly' ... include[s] not only the submarines of World War I but also the
bow and arrow and the gun. The point of each of these technologies was the same:
to gain an asymmetrical advantage against adversaries and reduce risk."

There are few philosophers more clear-eyed, frank, even cynical when it comes to
war than Niccolò Machiavelli. In "The Prince," he asserts that war is
inescapable, inevitable. He praises the Romans for understanding the danger in
putting it off. To the simple question of when you should go to war,
Machiavelli's simple answer is, "When you can" - not when it is just, or
"right." And yet, in another work, "The Art of War," Machiavelli reveals that
how a nation goes to war, how a nation chooses to fight is just as critical,
perhaps even more so. At this point, the issue of military technology is
pertinent, and Machiavelli's discussion of the topic is highly reminiscent of
our current debate about drones and character.

In "The Art of War," Machiavelli again praises the ancient Romans, for their
battlefield exploits, and states his worry that newly introduced artillery
"prevents men from employing and displaying their virtue as they used to do of
old." Machiavelli ultimately dismisses such fears - though he was only
contemplating cannons at the time. But elsewhere he declares that "whoever
engages in war must use every means to put himself in a position of facing his
enemy in the field and beating him there," since a field war "is the most
necessary and honorable of all wars." Why is this? Because on the battlefield,
military discipline and courage are exhibited and forged, and your opponent gets
a true taste of what he's up against - not only the army, but the nation he is
up against.

For Machiavelli, military conduct is a reflection, indeed an extension - better
yet, the root and foundation of a nation's character, the bravery and boldness
of its leaders, the devotion and determination of its citizens. Military conduct
is indelibly linked to civic virtue, which is why he argues that nations should
reject a professional army, much less a mercenary one, in favor of a citizen
militia. Every citizen must get a taste of military discipline - and sacrifice.
Every citizen must have a stake, an intimate investment, in the wars his nation
fights.

Machiavelli was highly sensitive to the role military glory plays in inspiring
the public and uniting, even defining, a nation. Great battles and military
campaigns forged the identity, cohesion and indomitable pride of the Roman
Republic, Machiavelli maintains - across the different social classes - and
stoked the democratic energy of the people. Haven't they served a similar
purpose in our own republic? War has offered iconic images of our national
identity: George Washington crossing the Delaware with his ragtag soldiers;
marines hoisting the flag at Iwo Jima. These images are inherently democratic -
they offer no king on his steed, lording over kneeling troops. To that extent,
they nourish and reinforce our democratic identity and sensibilities.

This is no longer the case in the age of drones. I have strained to imagine the
great battles drones might fight, which the public might rally around and
solemnly commemorate. But this is a silly proposition - which cuts to the heart
of the matter.

Never have the American people been more removed from their wars, even while we
are the most martial nation on earth, and drones are symptoms, and drivers, of
this troubling alienation. The United States has been engaged in two expensive
and protracted wars in the past decade, as well as the seemingly endless war on
terror spread the world over. The war in Afghanistan - where drones have made
their mark as never before - is the longest in the nation's history, and we have
spent more money rebuilding Afghanistan than we did on Europe after World War
II. Through all our recent wars in the region, however, most Americans have
hardly felt a thing. Given the extent of our military engagement, unparalleled
in the world, that is astounding, shameful even, and politically treacherous.

Critics have long warned that drones put too much warmaking power in the hands
of few government actors, who increasingly operate on their own, or in the
shadows. Many felt we saw a preview of political abuses to come when President
Obama unilaterally ordered a drone strike against an American citizen in Yemen.
This new technology has already emboldened our government to openly wage war in
countries against which we have not officially declared war. We operate there
with the tacit, and dubious, assent of a few ruling interests.

Perhaps it is not inevitable that drones are linked to arbitrary, centralized
government; perhaps drone warfare can be waged transparently, democratically,
legally, though it is admittedly hard to imagine what that would look like. What
is certain, however, is that drone technology offers manifold temptations to
those who would expand the borders of our wars, or wage war according to their
own agenda, independent of the will, or interest, or attention of the American
public.

Most American citizens are quick to let someone or something else bear the brunt
of our wars, and take up the fight. Hence there is less worry about whether a
given incursion is necessary, justified, logical or humane. Drones point to a
new and terrible kind of cruelty - violence far removed from the perpetrator,
and easier to inflict in that regard. With less skin in the game - literally -
we can be less vigilant about the darker tendencies of our leaders, the
unintended consequences of their actions, and content to indulge in private
matters.

The United State is gradually becoming a warring nation with fewer and fewer
warriors, and few who know the sacrifices of war. Drones represent the new
normal, and are an easy invitation to enter into and wage war - indefinitely.
This is a state of affairs Machiavelli could not abide by, and neither should
we. It is antithetical to a democracy for its voting public to be so aloof from
the wars it fights. It is a feature, I fear, of a democracy destined to lose
that title.

Firmin DeBrabander, an associate professor of philosophy at the Maryland
Institute College of Art, Baltimore, is the author of "Spinoza and the Stoics"
and a forthcoming book critiquing the gun rights movement.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


