                             387 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       July 17, 2014 Thursday 2:55 AM EST

Airstrikes in Pakistan kill at least 50 people

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 615 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Airstrikes killed at least 50 people in northwestern
Pakistan on Wednesday as the military pressed a month-old offensive to rid the
region of violent extremists, officials said.

One strike targeted a house in North Waziristan as well as a vehicle passing
nearby, local intelligence officials said. Although authorities said 15 people
were killed in the strike, some officials said at least 20 died.

Several local officials said they thought the strike was carried out by a U.S.
drone. The CIA declined to comment.

"The compound was being used by foreign militants, and some local terrorists
were present in the vehicle that got targeted," said one of the Pakistani
intelligence officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was
not authorized to talk to the news media.

The attack occurred in an area suspected of housing fighters affiliated with the
Afghan Haqqani network as well as Islamist militants from Uzbekistan, local
officials said. One villager said he saw the aircraft fire at least four
missiles.

Also Wednesday, a separate Pakistani airstrike killed 35 suspected terrorists
who were trying to flee North Waziristan, military officials said. Since the
start of the military operation, at least450 militants have been killed in the
region, they added.

There have been at least two U.S. drone strikes in Pakistan since the military
offensive began. It is designed to drive Pakistani Taliban and other militants
from North Waziristan, which extremist groups have been using as a base to carry
out attacks in Pakistan and nearby Afghanistan.

Most senior militant leaders are thought to have escaped before the operation
began. But Pakistani military commanders say their offensive will permanently
disrupt the ability of terrorist groups to congregate in the country's restive
tribal areas.

Both U.S. and Pakistani officials have denied that the two countries are
coordinating military activities in North Waziristan.

After a suspected U.S. drone strike killed several people last week, Pakistan's
Foreign Ministry condemned it, saying in a statement that the attack would have
"a negative impact on the Government's efforts to bring peace and stability" to
the country.

But Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and other leaders have generally appeared more
tolerant of the CIA drone campaign since the North Waziristan operation began.

Although the number of drone attacks in Pakistan continues to decline, President
Obama has said such strikes will keep targeting those who threaten U.S. troops
or interests in Afghanistan.

It is difficult for foreign journalists to independently verify Pakistani
military claims because they are generally not permitted to travel to tribal
areas. For weeks, Pakistan's military has refused to identify those killed in
the operation.

On Tuesday, Pakistani intelligence officials said senior Pakistani Taliban
leader Adnan Rashid was captured over the weekend in South Waziristan. Rashid,
who was apparently injured during the recent fighting in North Waziristan, was
caught as he tried to flee the area, the officials said.

Rashid was arrested in 2004 on charges that he conspired to assassinate
then-President Pervez Musharraf. In 2012, he escaped from prison with 400 other
militants.

Last year, Rashid made international headlines when he wrote a letter to Malala
Yousafzai expressing regret that a Pakistani Taliban militant shot her in 2012.

Yousafzai, who was 15 at the time of the shooting, was targeted after she began
publicly pressing for more educational opportunities for girls in Pakistan's
western Swat Valley.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Aamir Iqbal in Peshawar, Pakistan, contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


