                             394 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2014 Tuesday
                        The International New York Times

The Pakistani Taliban's P.R. Offensive

BYLINE: By HUMA YUSUF

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg.

LENGTH: 1049 words


LONDON -- A joke has been circulating among Pakistanis on Twitter: ''How to
negotiate with the Taliban: Blast. Condemn. Blast. Condemn. Blast. Condemn.
#Fail.'' It mocks the government's swiftness at denouncing terrorist attacks
while doing too little to stop them.

In 2013 alone, the Pakistani Taliban, a coalition of radical Islamists who want
to overthrow the state and impose Shariah law, carried out 645 attacks in
Pakistan, killing 732 civilians and 425 security personnel. And there can be no
suicide bombing or gun attack, it seems, without politicians from the center,
the opposition and even fringe parties joining a chorus of woe and regret.

Now the Pakistani Taliban are chiming in. The spokesman of the Pakistani Taliban
condemned a blast on Jan. 16 at an Islamic center in Peshawar that killed 10
people and wounded more than 50. He spoke against attacks in public places that
claim innocent lives and blamed the bombing on groups seeking to ''tarnish the
image of the mujahedeen.''

No one claimed responsibility for the attack, but the target and its method were
characteristic of the Taliban.

The disclaimer, however, was not. If anything, the Pakistani Taliban have long
bragged about their operations, sometimes circulating gory videos to document
them. In late September, the group posted on Facebook a clip showing a roadside
blast in northwest Pakistan on Sept. 15; the attack killed a general, one of the
group's highest-ranking targets in its bid to destabilize the state. Circulating
such footage allows the Pakistani Taliban to glorify their commanders and try to
convince the public and new recruits that their mission to bring Islamic law to
Pakistan is making progress.

The Pakistani Taliban's P.R. strategy began to shift last year when the
center-right government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, which was elected in the
spring, proposed holding peace talks, and perhaps offering members of the group
amnesty in exchange for a cease-fire. (Previous governments had favored limited
military action, which only sparked more attacks.) But the idea of negotiating
with the Pakistani Taliban -- who have killed tens of thousands of Pakistanis
since the mid-2000s -- divides the country: Some people believe talks are the
only option, others equate them with surrender. The public is confused partly
because the Taliban fight in Islam's name and, feeding off rampant
anti-Americanism, target officials they declare to be American stooges.

And so even as they have intensified the pace of their activities -- increasing
suicide attacks across Pakistan by 39 percent between 2012 and 2013, from 33 to
46 -- the Pakistani Taliban have been trying to sow more confusion about their
agenda. One of their spokesmen decried a double suicide bombing at All Saints'
Church in Peshawar in October, which killed more than 80 Christians, saying the
attack had been carried out by malign forces intent on sabotaging the peace
talks. Yet the group has targeted religious minorities before, specifically
Christians, in the name of avenging the victims of American drone strikes. And
two minor terrorist outfits with known links to the Pakistani Taliban, Jundullah
and Junood ul-Hifsa, eventually claimed responsibility.

The Pakistani Taliban are an umbrella group with many chapters in most cities
and small towns, and close operational ties with other extremist organizations
with sectarian or anti-India agendas. They train with anti-Shiite groups like
Lashkar-e-Jhangvi. By virtue of their vast network, they can be said to have a
hand in virtually any terrorist attack in Pakistan.

But there are so many different sub-groups, with their own names and chiefs, and
there is so much infighting among them, that the public gets bogged down trying
to differentiate them. More and more there also are ''pop-up'' militant groups
-- small radical bands that come together, often with support from the Taliban,
to carry out specific attacks and then disband -- that are virtually impossible
for law-enforcing agencies to track.

Meanwhile, Pakistanis are primed for manipulation. For years, conspiracy
theories have swirled around suggesting that terrorist attacks are being carried
out by foreign agents who want to destabilize the country. And decades of
shadowy politicking have left the public thinking that government officials may
be less trustworthy than terrorists.

For years Pakistani politicians slammed Washington for violating Pakistan's
sovereignty with drone strikes, but then, last April, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the
former president and army chief, admitted that his government had secretly
signed off on the United States' drone attacks. In November, soon after
announcing that the government had initiated talks with the Taliban, the
interior minister backtracked. The government then designated center-right
politicians and leaders of religious political parties to serve as interlocutors
with the Pakistani Taliban -- only to rescind the appointments a few days later.
Last week, even as the government confirmed wanting to pursue talks, leaders of
the ruling Pakistan Muslim League-N announced an imminent military operation
against Taliban hideouts in North Waziristan.

The government's equivocations afford the Pakistani Taliban a rhetorical
advantage: All they have to do is point out its contradictions and say the
government isn't serious about negotiating. This puts the onus on the state to
prove its commitment to peace, perhaps by meeting the Taliban's preconditions
for talks, like an end to drone strikes. The point is also to generate public
pressure on the government to pursue talks without resorting to military action.

With its history of savage attacks and audacious jail breaks, the Pakistani
Taliban have long been two steps ahead of Pakistan's security forces and
intelligence agencies. Now, the increasingly P.R.-savvy organization is also
outwitting the government in terms of messaging. By obfuscating their precise
responsibility for Pakistan's security issues, the Pakistani Taliban are
dampening the public's enthusiasm for a sustained push against terrorist groups.
And progress in the war of words is progress in its war for power.

Huma Yusuf is a Pakistani journalist and global fellow at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars in Washington.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/04/opinion/the-pakistani-talibans-pr-offensive.ht
ml

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


