                             396 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones, Notes of Discord and a Sip of Cognac

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 518 words


The organ was already playing when Charlemagne Palestine sat down to the
keyboards of the Aeolian-Skinner instrument at Plymouth Church in Brooklyn
Heights on Thursday night. Flat wooden pegs had been wedged under a few keys,
creating a hovering tone cluster, a drone that seemed (as an acoustic
phenomenon) to ripple gently as its overtones reverberated around the church.
For the next hour or so, Mr. Palestine filled the room with one continuous
piece, changing gradually but thoroughly, luxuriating in the organ's infinite
sustain and tonal depth.

It was Mr. Palestine's debut performance as an organist in New York City, after
decades of recognition since the 1960s, as a leading Minimalist composer
(although he prefers the term ''Maximalist'') and visual artist. He has long
been fascinated by drones, rituals, repetition, extended duration and the
physicality of sound. He's also known for his teddy bears and other stuffed
animals, and the altar at Plymouth Church was decorated with them, some with
LED's in their bellies that glowed and changed colors as he played the organ.
Unlike most church organists, Mr. Palestine also kept a snifter of cognac within
reach.

Born in Brooklyn but now living in Brussels, Mr. Palestine is having his latest
wavelet of attention in New York City. In December, the Sonnabend Gallery
exhibited his intensely physical ''Body Music'' videos from the 1970s, in which
he hurled himself at a wall. At the current Whitney Biennial, the museum
stairwell holds his sound installation of droning and vocalizing, issuing from
small speakers topped with stuffed animals. He has generally appeared in New
York as a pianist, notably with his immersive 1974 composition ''Strumming
Music.'' More recently, he has been performing on cathedral organs in Europe.

On Thursday, Mr. Palestine's organ music started out by meditating over the
organ's flutelike and reedlike tones, adding more and more notes to a cluster
that lingered in the midrange. Sometimes Mr. Palestine manipulated the organ
stops to sharpen the focus on a particular note; occasionally he played a brief
melodic phrase that would melt into the larger cluster.

He added more discordant notes, transforming the drone from soothing to ominous
and expanding toward the organ's higher and lower range. Then he cleared notes
away to unveil a soothing major chord. But tranquillity gave way to tension:
Brassier notes appeared, and the music thickened and darkened again; dissonances
started to bristle, then lingered as a different kind of meditation, eventually
to be joined by the bass tones Mr. Palestine had been holding in reserve.

They became the foundation of a newly consonant stretch: more annuciatory and
somber, thinning out again to the purity of an open fifth. That became the core
of a closing meditation, inexorably thickening and deepening, glowering and
resolving and slowly clearing, exulting in the sonority of massed pipes. When
Mr. Palestine switched off the organ's power, the audience was silent, raptly
listening for a long two minutes before Mr. Palestine stood up and, eventually,
raised his cognac.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/08/arts/music/charlemagne-palestine-at-plymouth-c
hurch.html

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Charlemagne Palestine at the Aeolian-  Skinner organ at Plymouth
Church in  Brooklyn Heights on Thursday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROYUKI ITO FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


