                              39 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 22, 2014 Monday 5:14 PM EST

The possible perils of private drones

BYLINE: Michael Berry;Nabiha Syed (guest-blogging)

LENGTH: 559 words


While the advantages of drones are numerous, as we mentioned earlier Monday,
they are not without risks.

At the top of the list is safety. Drones can cause serious injuries if not
operated properly. Last year, a Brooklyn man was killed when his own drone hit
him in the head. Other incidents have been close calls, including a drone in
Manhattan falling hundreds of feet and landing at the feet of pedestrians on the
sidewalk below, and a wedding photographer's drone accidentally flying into a
groom who was posing for romantic images with his bride-to-be. Recently, we have
seen news reports of drones flying too close to airports and in the paths of
helicopters. And, it's not hard to imagine the safety concerns that arise from
many drones flying through the sky - something like a three-dimensional highway
system with no roads, no traffic lights, and no drivers in the cars. Those same
concerns might have implications for safety on the ground: just think of drones
flocking to catch a glimpse of medical emergencies, forest fires, or a
presidential motorcade.

The security of drones themselves is an important safety issue. Drones are
vulnerable to hijacking through tactics like GPS spoofing. It is conceivable
that drones could be hacked or stolen, compromising any data they have
collected.

Drones also implicate questions of private property rights, as others at the
Volokh Conspiracy have explored in the past. Drones raise issues about property
rights in airspace that rarely come up for most landowners. These issues have
the potential to inflame passions and raise a host of additional questions.
Indeed, some individuals have expressed the desire to defend themselves and
their property against drones flying overhead.

Any review of potential drone risks is not complete without mentioning privacy.
Privacy concerns have dominated the discussion about domestic drone use.
Camera-equipped drones have elicited the most concern: Sen. Dianne Feinstein
claimed that a drone was flown outside the window of her house during a protest,
and Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor recently spoke about the privacy
concerns drones raise. Government officials are not the only ones who have
expressed privacy concerns. Indeed, a woman reportedly assaulted a teenager
flying a drone above a beach. The possibility of sensors attached to drones -
such as infrared sensors - also raise privacy concerns.

Some of these risks and concerns may eventually be mitigated by technological
solutions like airborne sense-and-avoid technology (which would help drones
avoid collisions), return-to-base functionality (which would automatically send
a drone back to its starting point if it loses contact with its operator),
systems that would slow a drone's fall to the ground in case of damage or low
battery, and technology that can alert someone if a drone is hovering nearby.

Nevertheless, each of these risks and concerns - safety, security, property, and
privacy - have sparked calls for legislation and regulation. Federal regulators,
members of Congress, and state lawmakers have heard these calls and have set
their sights on addressing each concern. In our next post, we'll begin to
explore the legal landscape governing drone use, first discussing the
philosophical approaches to drone regulation and then turning our attention to
where the law stands today.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


