                             390 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 28, 2014 Sunday 2:11 AM EST

Rocket launched at U.S. Embassy

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 511 words


SANAA, Yemen - An al-Qaeda splinter group launched a rocket attack on the U.S.
Embassy in Sanaa on Saturday, injuring several guards. The group said the attack
was in retaliation for a U.S. drone strike in a northern province on Friday.

The rocket landed about 650 feet from the heavily fortified embassy, which lies
in a compound surrounded by high walls, hitting members of the Yemeni special
police force who guard the site. At least two were injured, police said. The
attacker fired the rocket from a M72 light anti-tank weapon from a car before
speeding away, a police source told Reuters.

The U.S. Embassy has been a frequent target of attack. The compound was stormed
in 2012 by demonstrators angry at a film made in the United States that they saw
as blasphemous. And in May, the embassy said armed individuals had attempted to
kidnap two of its officers at a small commercial business in Sanaa.

Several hours after Saturday's attack, Ansar al-Sharia, an affiliate of al-Qaeda
in the Arabian Peninsula, said on its Twitter account it had targeted the
embassy with a rocket, injuring several guards and damaging a vehicle. The group
said the attack was revenge for a drone strike on Friday that had seriously
wounded children in the northern al Jawf province.

Tribal sources confirmed that a drone strike killed two al-Qaeda members and
wounded two more in al Jawf on Friday, and that there were reports of some
children having been wounded.

The United States regularly uses drones to attack Islamist militants in
countries such as Yemen as part of a strategy to combat al-Qaeda militants
without committing troops on the ground.

Washington acknowledges using drones in Yemen but does not comment publicly on
the practice. Al-Qaeda in Yemen, including AQAP and its affiliates, are among
the most active wings of the network founded by Osama bin Laden.

Saturday's attack came a day after the United States told its citizens to leave
Yemen and said it was reducing the number of U.S. government staff there because
of political unrest and fears of a possible military escalation.

Recent weeks have seen regular clashes between Shiite Houthi rebels and
government forces in Sanaa. The Houthi, who overran much of the capital last
week, signed a security deal on Saturday that stipulates disarmament and
withdrawal from areas they have seized in recent months. The deal is part of a
comprehensive agreement brokered by the United Nations. The Houthi's political
rivals, the Muslim Brotherhood-linked Islah party, and other parties signed as
well.

It remains to be seen whether the Houthi will abide by the deal. Earlier on
Saturday, Houthi rebels attacked the home of Yemen's intelligence chief in
Sanaa, in a sign of the fragility of the power-sharing accord.

The takeover of the capital has given the Houthis unprecedented political power
in Yemen, a U.S.-allied country whose political, tribal and sectarian unrest
poses risks to the world's top oil exporter Saudi Arabia next door.

President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi has said Yemen may be heading for civil war.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


