                             393 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Journeyman Playwright's Latest Journey

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 938 words


''This is wild,'' George Brant murmured, struggling to be heard as the AC/DC
anthem ''Back in Black'' blared and rehearsal got underway for his play
''Grounded.''

His flight from Cleveland arriving late because of frigid weather, he had
sprinted to Walkerspace in TriBeCa to get started on his New York debut after
more than two decades and a couple of dozen plays without much national notice.
But ''Grounded,'' a poetic monologue about a hotshot fighter pilot sidelined by
pregnancy and reassigned to manage drone strikes, had changed all that.

Even before reaching New York, where it opened on Jan. 16 to generally strong
reviews, ''Grounded'' was already something of a phenomenon, putting a spotlight
on Mr. Brant, an unassuming, 44-year-old who lives in Cleveland.

''When theater after theater expressed interest in the play -- it's hard to
express how much an out-of-body experience that was,'' he said, as Hannah
Cabell, who plays the unnamed pilot in the New York production, launched into
the performance, which begins with the crunch of AC/DC's guitars.

''Grounded'' won the National New Play Network's 2012 Smith Prize, which honors
a new play on American politics, leading to well-received productions at the San
Francisco Playhouse in August and at Borderlands Theater in Tucson in October.
It picked up a Fringe First award at the 2013 Edinburgh Festival Fringe in
August and went on to a twice-extended run in September at the Gate Theater in
London. The London Evening Standard and The Guardian (which called it ''a
searing piece of writing'') both listed it as among their top 10 plays of 2013.

''It's had a pretty meteoric rise for a playwright who's not a household name,''
said Derek Goldman, the artistic director of the Davis Performing Arts Center at
Georgetown University, who directed early readings of ''Grounded.''

''The topicality of drones is part of its appeal,'' he added. ''But I think we
connect deeply to what the play has to say about estrangement in modern life --
about being there and not being there.''

A Northwestern University graduate who earned an M.F.A. at the University of
Texas at Austin, Mr. Brant turned to playwriting after trying his hand at
acting. Like many of his other works, Mr. Brant said, ''Grounded'' is at heart
about moral responsibility and contradictory choices. But the form is different:
a spare, profane yet surprisingly lyrical string of words that invites us into
the head of the swaggering pilot, whose work day involves killing from afar and
home life includes a husband longing for her to unwind and a daughter who plays
with pink ponies.

''It's the worst-case scenario for the question of whether it's possible to be
two different places at once, for those trying to have it all,'' Mr. Brant
explained.

His interest in drones was piqued by a 2011 article in The Columbia Journalism
Review that noted how much more President Obama was using unmanned aircraft than
his predecessor. Mr. Brant spent five months on research, which included reading
the military publication Stars and Stripes, and interviewing a (male) Air Force
lieutenant colonel. When he decided to make his pilot a woman, he looked at
interviews with female fighter pilots, including those who had become pregnant
on the job. ''Somehow, having a woman's voice in connection with a new
technology brings a certain newness and freshness to the play as a whole,'' he
said. ''The story of war has been told so many times from a male perspective.''

He began waking up in the middle of the night with bits of dialogue in his head,
and he pounded out a first draft in two days at a playwright's retreat in 2011.
His wife, Laura Kepley, the artistic director of the Cleveland Playhouse,
directed a first reading at the New Harmony Project in Indiana in May 2012,
right after he won the Smith Prize.

But the show took off internationally thanks to Liz Frankel, the literary
manager at the Public Theater in New York. Mr. Brant said he'd been sending her
work for a while. When Christopher Haydon, the artistic director of the Gate
Theater in London, asked her for suggestions for a political monologue to
produce, ''Grounded'' was among the works she sent.

His production has prompted interest from producers and directors in places as
diverse as China, Libya and Lebanon, Mr. Haydon said. Page 73 Productions, which
develops the work of writers whose plays have never been professionally mounted
in New York, is presenting ''Grounded,'' with Ken Rus Schmoll directing. It
closes next Saturday, but four more productions are already scheduled in 2014 in
this country and in Australia.

While pleased that ''Grounded'' is being produced so often, Mr. Brant has
continued to adjust it. In New York, for example, the love story of the pilot
and her husband has been fleshed out. He deliberately provided minimal stage
directions in the script, saying he hoped that designers would bring their own
vision and ''honestly invite collaboration and not just pay lip service to the
idea.'' (The San Francisco production featured projections and a runway-shaped
stage.)

He hopes, too, that the play's success will bring a fresh look at his other
work, which includes ''Elephant's Graveyard,'' based on the true story of the
lynching of an elephant in a small town in Tennessee in 1916; and ''The
Mourners' Bench,'' about a tragedy in suburbia. And he is 30 pages into a
musical about Sister Rosetta Tharpe, a guitar-playing gospel singer popular in
the '30s and '40s.

But on opening night, he was in the third row at Walkerspace, where he confessed
to shedding a few tears: ''It was pretty overwhelming. It just washed over me.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/theater/george-brants-play-grounded-brings-him
-to-new-york.html

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Hannah Cabell in ''Grounded,'' written by George Brant, left.
Ms. Cabell's character is a fighter pilot reassigned to directing drone strikes
because she's pregnant. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 ROB STRONG)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


