                             399 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's So Scary About Smart Girls?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS KRISTOF

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1056 words


WHEN terrorists in Nigeria organized a secret attack last month, they didn't
target an army barracks, a police department or a drone base. No, Boko Haram
militants attacked what is even scarier to a fanatic: a girls' school.

That's what extremists do. They target educated girls, their worst nightmare.

That's why the Pakistani Taliban shot Malala Yousafzai in the head at age 15.
That's why the Afghan Taliban throws acid on the faces of girls who dare to seek
an education.

Why are fanatics so terrified of girls' education? Because there's no force more
powerful to transform a society. The greatest threat to extremism isn't drones
firing missiles, but girls reading books.

In that sense, Boko Haram was behaving perfectly rationally -- albeit
barbarically -- when it kidnapped some of the brightest, most ambitious girls in
the region and announced plans to sell them as slaves. If you want to mire a
nation in backwardness, manacle your daughters.

What saddens me is that we in the West aren't acting as rationally. To fight
militancy, we invest overwhelmingly in the military toolbox but not so much in
the education toolbox that has a far better record at defeating militancy.

President Obama gives the green light to blow up terrorists with drones, but he
neglects his 2008 campaign promise to establish a $2 billion global fund for
education. I wish Republicans, instead of investigating him for chimerical
scandals in Benghazi, Libya, would shine a light on his failure to follow
through on that great idea.

So why does girls' education matter so much? First, because it changes
demography.

One of the factors that correlates most strongly to instability is a youth bulge
in a population. The more unemployed young men ages 15 to 24, the more upheaval.

One study found that for every 1 percentage point increase in the share of the
population aged 15 to 24, the risk of civil war increases by 4 percent.

That means that curbing birthrates tends to lead to stability, and that's where
educating girls comes in. You educate a boy, and he'll have fewer children, but
it's a small effect. You educate a girl, and, on average, she will have a
significantly smaller family. One robust Nigeria study managed to tease out
correlation from causation and found that for each additional year of primary
school, a girl has 0.26 fewer children. So if we want to reduce the youth bulge
a decade from now, educate girls today.

More broadly, girls' education can, in effect, almost double the formal labor
force. It boosts the economy, raising living standards and promoting a virtuous
cycle of development. Asia's economic boom was built by educating girls and
moving them from the villages to far more productive work in the cities.

One example of the power of girls' education is Bangladesh, which until 1971 was
(the seemingly hopeless) part of Pakistan. After Bangladesh gained independence,
it emphasized education, including of girls; today, it actually has more girls
in high school than boys. Those educated women became the backbone of Grameen
Bank, development organizations like BRAC and the garment industry.

Likewise, Oman in the 1960s was one of the most backward countries in the world,
with no television, no diplomats and radios banned. Not a single girl attended
school in Oman. Then there was a coup, and the new government educated boys and
girls alike.

Today, Oman is stable and incomparably better off than its neighbor, Yemen,
where girls are still married off young and often denied an education. America
is fighting Al Qaeda affiliates in Yemen and Pakistan with drones; maybe we
should invest in girls' schools as Bangladesh and Oman did.

Girls' education is no silver bullet. Iran and Saudi Arabia have both educated
girls but refused to empower them, so both remain mired in the past. But when a
country educates and unleashes women, those educated women often become force
multipliers for good.

Angeline Mugwendere was an impoverished Zimbabwean girl who was mocked by
classmates because she traipsed to school barefoot in a torn dress with nothing
underneath. She couldn't afford school supplies, so she would wash dishes for
her teachers in hopes of being given a pen or paper in thanks.

Yet Angeline was brilliant. In the nationwide sixth-grade graduation
examinations, she had the highest score in her entire district -- indeed, one of
the highest scores in the country. Yet she had no hope of attending seventh
grade because she couldn't afford the fees.

That's when a nonprofit called the Campaign for Female Education, or Camfed,
came along and helped pay for Angeline to stay in school. She did brilliantly in
high school and is now the regional director for Camfed, in charge of helping
impoverished girls get to school in four African countries. She's paying it
forward.

Educating girls and empowering women are also tasks that are, by global
standards, relatively doable. We spend billions of dollars on intelligence
collection, counterterrorism and military interventions, even though they have a
quite mixed record. By comparison, educating girls is an underfunded cause even
though it's more straightforward.

Readers often feel helpless, unable to make a difference. But it was a
grass-roots movement starting in Nigeria that grabbed attention and held leaders
accountable to address it. Nigeria's leaders perhaps now realize that they must
protect not only oil wells but an even greater treasure: the nation's students.

Likewise, any of us can stick it to Boko Haram by helping to educate a girl. A
$40 gift at Camfed.org buys a uniform so that a girl can go to school.

We can also call on members of Congress to pass the International Violence
Against Women Act, which would elevate the issue of sexual violence on the
global agenda.

Boko Haram has a stronghold in northeastern Nigeria because it's an area where
education is weak and women are marginalized. Some two-thirds of women in the
region have had no formal education. Only 1 in 20 has completed high school.
Half are married by age 15.

Obviously, the situation in the United States is incomparably better. But we
have our own problems. It's estimated that 100,000 girls under 18 years old in
the United States are trafficked into commercial sex each year. So let's fight
to #BringBackOurGirls in Nigeria but also here in the United States and around
the world.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/11/opinion/sunday/kristof-whats-so-scary-about-sm
art-girls.html

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A classroom in Mali. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SUSAN MEISELAS/MAGNUM PHOTOS
(2007)) (SR13)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


