                             398 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Officers Kill Armed Civilians in Yemen Capital

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Cairo,
and Saeed Al-Batati from Sana, Yemen. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1075 words


WASHINGTON -- A United States Special Operations commando and a Central
Intelligence Agency officer in Yemen shot and killed two armed Yemeni civilians
who tried to kidnap them while the Americans were in a barbershop in the
country's capital two weeks ago, American officials said on Friday.

The two Americans, attached to the United States Embassy, were whisked out of
the volatile Middle East nation within a few days of the shooting, with the
blessing of the Yemeni government, American officials said.

News of the shootings comes at a perilous moment for the government of President
Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, whose collaboration with American drone strikes against
suspected members of Al Qaeda is already a subject of seething resentment in
Yemen. Yemenis believe, with some evidence, that the drone strikes often kill
nearby civilians as well as their targets, so any indication that Mr. Hadi's
government helped conceal the killing of Yemenis by American commandos could be
problematic.

Violence in the country is increasing, and on Friday, militants attacked a
checkpoint outside the presidential palace, apparently in retaliation for the
government's roughly 10-day offensive against Qaeda strongholds.

Exactly what the two Americans were doing at the time of the shooting on April
24 is unclear. Some American officials said they were merely getting a haircut
in a barbershop on Hadda Street in Sana, in an upscale district frequently
visited by foreigners, playing down any suggestions that they were engaged in a
clandestine operation.

Late Friday, both the Pentagon and C.I.A. declined to comment on the shooting,
and referred all questions to the State Department.

''We can confirm that, last month, two U.S. Embassy officers in Yemen fired
their weapons after being confronted by armed individuals in an attempted
kidnapping at a small commercial business in Sana,'' a State Department
spokeswoman, Marie Harf, said in an email response to questions from The New
York Times. ''Two of the armed individuals were killed. The Embassy officers are
no longer in Yemen.''

A spokesman for the Yemeni Embassy in Washington, Mohammed Albasha, said he was
aware of the shooting but had no information about any American role in the
matter or his government's response to that role.

The killings were reported in the Yemeni news media in the days after the
shooting but attributed to unknown gunmen.

American officials refused to identify the Americans or their jobs in Yemen,
where the Pentagon and the C.I.A. have been training Yemeni security forces in
addition to carrying out the drone strikes. But a senior American official said
one individual involved in the shooting was a lieutenant colonel with the elite
Joint Special Operations Command and the other was a C.I.A. officer.

It was unclear whether the two American officers violated embassy security
protocols when they visited the barbershop, apparently alone. In high-risk
countries like Yemen and Pakistan, American diplomatic personnel are often
tightly restricted in where and when they can travel outside the embassy walls,
and are typically accompanied by armed security personnel.

''Per standard procedure for any such incident involving embassy officers
overseas, this matter is under review,'' Ms. Harf said in the email.

The killings have an echo of a 2011 case in which a C.I.A. security officer,
Raymond A. Davis, was jailed for weeks after killing two Pakistanis on a crowded
street in Lahore. The ensuing furor brought relations between the C.I.A. and
Pakistan's spy service to perhaps their lowest ebb since the Sept. 11 attacks.

The Yemeni government is a staunch counterterrorism ally, and administration
officials are no doubt seeking to avoid a replay of the 2011 debacle. ''There
will certainly be an investigation, and one would have to assume it will be
informed by what happened in Pakistan,'' one American official said.

American officials have voiced fears about the violence erupting in Yemen. The
State Department announced on Wednesday that it had closed its embassy in Sana
to the public because of security concerns, citing recent attacks against
Western interests in Yemen as the reason for temporarily suspending operations.

The violence came close to the president's doorstep on Friday when militants
believed to be from Al Qaeda's franchise attacked a security vehicle and killed
three soldiers in the area of the presidential palace. News reports said the
militants had fought a prolonged gunfight in the streets of the capital before
escaping. In a second attack in the Bayda Province, militants believed linked to
Al Qaeda killed two soldiers and injured many more in an ambush, according to
officials in the area.

And in a third attack the same day, armed fighters from the Abida tribe in the
restive province of Marib attacked security checkpoints, electricity towers as
well as oil and gas pipelines, residents there said. All of Friday's attacks
appeared to be retaliation for the Yemeni government's campaign against Qaeda
strongholds, which follows a series of American drone strikes last month that
resulted in the deaths of more than three dozen militants linked to Al Qaeda's
affiliate in Yemen, one of the largest flurries of strikes in recent years.

As the army's ground campaign has picked up, so have a series of attacks against
Western interests. Several diplomatic outposts have pulled back or pulled out.
At the American Embassy, personnel are not being evacuated, but closing the
facility to the public will stop the processing of visas and other services, the
State Department said.

In the Yemeni news media, the involvement of American commandos in the shooting
has not been disclosed. The day after the shooting, the Yemeni Defense
Ministry's website, 26sep.net, reported that a foreigner living in Yemen had
shot dead two gunmen who tried to abduct him.

''Two armed men tried to kidnap a foreign citizen as he was leaving a barber in
Hadda Street in Sana,'' the website said. ''But he was able to resist and shot
them with a revolver he had in his possession,'' the website said, citing
security sources.

The ministry gave no indication of the intended victim's nationality or that of
those who planned to kidnap him. In subsequent news reports, however,
unidentified Yemeni security officials attributed the shootings to various
suspects, including a well-trained American citizen with a licensed weapon and a
Russian specialist in the oil sector.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/10/world/middleeast/us-officers-kill-armed-civili
ans-in-yemen-capital.html

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Yemenis gathered at the scene of a bomb blast that targeted a
troop carrier near two Western embassies  in Sana, the capital, on Friday. The
barbershop shooting happened two weeks ago. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YAHYA ARHAB/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A9)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


