                             395 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Airstrike Kills 5 Soldiers of Afghanistan

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND; Habib Zahori contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 402 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- An American airstrike killed five Afghan National Army
soldiers and wounded eight more Thursday morning, according to Afghan and
American officials.

The attack took place at 3:20 a.m. in the Charkh district of Logar Province, in
eastern Afghanistan. Local officials attributed it to a drone strike, though a
spokesman for the American military later said that crewed aircraft had been
involved.

''We believe the strike was the result of poor coordination between the people
on the ground and the operators of the drone,'' said Din Mohammad Darwish, a
spokesman for the governor of Logar.

''The area is frequented by insurgents both foreign and local, and drone strikes
are carried out quite often in that part of Charkh,'' Mr. Darwish said. ''The
A.N.A. outpost was part of the security belt in the province.''

American officials said they would investigate the deaths, which happened while
aircraft were supporting a ground mission led by Afghan forces.

''We can confirm that at least five Afghan National Army personnel were
accidentally killed this morning during an operation in eastern Afghanistan,''
said Maj. Cathleen Snow, a spokesman for the American-led International Security
Assistance Force. ''We value the strong relationship with our Afghan partners,
and we will determine what actions will be taken to ensure incidents like this
do not happen again.''

Gen. Zaher Azimi, the spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense, confirmed in
a Twitter message on Thursday the death toll from what he called ''an ISAF
airstrike.'' He declined to discuss the matter further.

While no hard data is available, the American military has apparently been using
drones in Afghanistan with increasing frequency after strict controls were
imposed on airstrikes to prevent civilian casualties, as well as complaints by
the Afghan military that it was not getting adequate air support for its
operations.

''What happened in Logar might have been the result of miscommunication or
miscoordination between the tactical air command and the pilot, which is normal
and happens,'' said Col. Bahadur Rais Khail, a spokesman for the Afghan Air
Force.

He said the country's ground units usually have an air force officer embedded
with them who is in contact with the Ministry of Defense's tactical air command
in Kabul, who in turn have multilingual officers coordinating airstrikes with
the American authorities.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/world/asia/united-states-airstrike-kills-afgha
n-soldiers.html

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


