                             400 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poll Finds Dissatisfaction Over Iraq

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR and DALIA SUSSMAN; Megan Thee-Brenan, Allison
Kopicki and Marina Stefan contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1075 words


Dissatisfaction with President Obama's conduct of foreign policy has shot up
among both Republicans and Democrats in the past month, even though a slim
majority supports his recent decision to send military advisers to Iraq to
confront the growing threat from militants there, according to the latest New
York Times/CBS News poll.

The survey suggests that most Americans back some of Mr. Obama's approaches to
the crisis in Iraq, including majority support for the possibility of drone
strikes. But the poll documents an increasing lack of faith in the president and
his leadership, and shows deep concern that further intervention by the United
States in Iraq could lead to another long and costly involvement there.

The poll found that 58 percent of Americans disapprove of the way Mr. Obama is
handling foreign policy, a jump of 10 points in the last month to the highest
level since Mr. Obama took office in 2009. The spike in disapproval is
especially striking among Democrats, nearly a third of whom said they did not
approve of his handling of foreign policy.

Fifty-two percent of Americans say they disapprove of how the president is
dealing with the current violence in Iraq (including about a third of
Democrats); 37 percent approve.

''I voted for him because he said, 'Give me four more years and I will fix
everything,' but nothing is being fixed,'' Michelle Roberts, 34, a Democrat from
Salem, Mass., said in a follow-up interview. ''I understand he wants to fight
terrorism, but send in robots, drones. Don't send in our troops. Our men and
women are dying for what?''

The erosion in support across both parties has contributed to a drop in Mr.
Obama's overall rating that threatens to undermine his administration's
political ambitions during the remaining two and a half years of his second
term. The president's approval rating is now at 40 percent, while 54 percent say
they disapprove of the job he is doing in office, a six-point jump since May.

Despite the unhappiness about Mr. Obama's leadership, 51 percent of those
surveyed, including Republicans, Democrats and independents, said they supported
his recent decision to send 300 military advisers to Iraq. Fifty-six percent
said they supported the use of drones in Iraq, a military option that Mr.
Obama's advisers have said is still on the table as the militants, known as the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, have extended gains across the northern parts
of the country.

A little over half of Americans also favor the idea of working with Iran in a
limited capacity to try to resolve the situation in Iraq. Iran's Shiite leaders
support the Shiite-led government in Baghdad, but Iran's supreme leader,
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has publicly opposed efforts by the United States to
help Iraq's government fight back against Islamic extremists and Sunni
militants.

The national poll was conducted June 20 to 22 by landline and cellphone among
1,009 adults with a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage
points.

Although the survey suggests that Mr. Obama's small steps toward military action
in Iraq are in line with those of many Americans, it also indicates that people
may still yearn for their commander in chief to manage foreign crises, even when
the solutions are not obvious to them. A large majority thinks that the United
States has important interests in Iraq's future. Two-thirds said Mr. Obama had
not done enough to explain American goals in the country.

Mr. Obama built his 2008 presidential campaign in part on opposing George W.
Bush's decision to invade Iraq in March 2003, and the departure of all troops in
2011 for a time appeared to close a searing chapter in American life. The latest
questions about a new United States involvement there threatens to reopen old
wounds.

''We didn't finish up the job in Vietnam, and we didn't finish up the first time
in Iraq or the second time in Iraq,'' said Phil Clark, 62, a Democrat and
retired nurse from Santee, Calif. ''I have a lot of animosity toward Bush
because of those actions. I just see it all happening again.''

Also, three-fourths of those surveyed said the war was not worth the American
lives lost and other costs of attacking Iraq, a record level of regret about a
conflict that lasted nearly nine years.

Mr. Obama's declaration in recent weeks that he will not send ground troops back
into Iraq mirrors the views of a wide majority of Americans. But after a decade
of war, a substantial number -- 42 percent -- said the United States still had a
responsibility to do something about the violence in Iraq.

And yet, the poll showed that the country is divided about how to meet it.
Republicans tend to favor more aggressive action: Fifty-four percent of
Republicans support using manned aircraft to carry out targeted attacks in Iraq,
while only 38 percent of Democrats favor such action. Nearly 70 percent of
Republicans said they would support the use of drones in Iraq, compared with 55
percent for Democrats.

Similarly, Republicans largely said Mr. Obama should be doing more to address
the situation in Iraq, while most Democrats said he was doing the right amount.
Well over half said the situation in Iraq was beyond the control of the United
States.

The violence in Iraq has renewed the debate about whether the United States
should have kept some troops in Iraq after all American military forces withdrew
at the end of 2011. In the survey, 50 percent said the United States should have
removed all of its forces and 42 percent said it should have left some there.
There were large partisan divisions, with a wide majority of Republicans saying
some troops should have been left and about as many Democrats disagreeing.

''I would have preferred it if the troops had never left,'' said Gregory M.
Taylor, 62, a Republican and retired business owner from Three Rivers, Mich.
''Their government has no inner structure and is totally falling apart. Keeping
military advisers keeps our presence known.''

Nikki Bahls, 41, a Democrat from Edgewood, Iowa, said she did not ''agree with
getting our nose into something that has been going on for centuries.''

''We are not going to be able to fix it,'' she said. ''I used to have hope. I
had hope when I voted for Obama, but it's changed.''

Americans are also split over whether the threat of terrorism against the United
States will increase as a result of the violence in Iraq. Half said it would
stay the same while 44 percent said it would increase.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/24/world/middleeast/sharp-rise-in-disapproval-of-
obamas-handling-of-foreign-policy-poll-finds.html

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Most Americans disapprove of the way President Obama is handling
foreign policy, a poll found. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
CHART

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


