                             409 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 26, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

Senator becoming athorn on Obama's left

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1005 words


Twice in the past year, President Obama has set plans to get U.S. spy agencies
out of secret missions that had come under harsh public scrutiny: killing
militants with drone strikes and stockpiling the phone records of U.S. citizens.

And twice, those plans have run into opposition from a seemingly unlikely
source: Sen. Dianne Feinstein, a former Senate colleague of the president, a
California Democrat and, as chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee,
increasingly an obstacle to Obama's push to revamp intelligence programs.

Within hours of Obama's Jan. 17 speech declaring his intention to "end"
government collection of Americans' phone records because of the potential for
abuse, Feinstein issued a statement that ignored the overall thrust of the
presidents' remarks. Instead, she and her GOP counterpart in the House described
the speech as an endorsement of "the importance of using telephone metadata to
rapidly identify possible terrorist plots."

Feinstein is also an ardent opponent of Obama's plan to shift control of lethal
drone operations from the CIA to the Defense Department. This month, Congress
inserted a secret provision into a massive funding bill, designed to delay - if
not derail - that transfer.

Feinstein's willingness to oppose Obama is seen by some as evidence of a
laudable independence from political considerations. To others, her positions
are regarded as troubling indications that a committee created to serve as
skeptical overseer of spy agencies has instead become their most reliable ally.

The issue "is not the daylight between the president and Senator Feinstein. It's
the lack of apparent daylight between Senator Feinstein and the intelligence
community," said Stephen Vladeck, a professor of terrorism and surveillance law
at American University.

Amid an ongoing deluge of disclosures about U.S. surveillance programs, Vladeck
said, "to my mind the larger concern over the last six months is a lack of any
evidence that there's ever been a significant pushback from either of the
intelligence committees on any of the more controversial initiatives."

Feinstein declined requests for an interview. In a written statement to The
Washington Post, she said, "I am enormously supportive of the administration's
major foreign and national security policies." She also expressed support for
some of Obama's more modest intelligence proposals, including limiting the
National Security Agency's authority to search its phone database.

Feinstein has often indicated that her views are shaped by her access to
classified information about how programs are run, as well as secret
intelligence on terrorist threats.

"I think a lot of the privacy people don't understand that we still occupy the
role of Great Satan," she said in a recent television interview, referring to
hostility toward the United States among Islamist extremists.

Feinstein, 80, has served as chairman of the intelligence committee since the
start of Obama's presidency. She has defended the administration on some
politically charged issues, including the 2012 attacks by militants on U.S.
government compounds in Benghazi, Libya.

She has also launched investigations of intelligence programs she opposed. Her
largest undertaking as chairman was a multi-year investigation of the CIA's
interrogation program after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks - a George W. Bush-era
program that was dismantled before the probe began. A 6,000-page report produced
by the committee remains classified.

Feinstein backed Obama's decision at the outset of his first term to shutter the
CIA's prisons and his pledge to close the detention camp at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba. But Feinstein has more often been at odds with Obama in his second term,
opposing him on the only two intelligence-related issues he has considered
important enough to address in a major public speech.

After Obama announced plans in May to impose new restrictions on drone strikes,
Feinstein came out against a White House plan to shift such operations to the
Pentagon, saying she was skeptical that the military could conduct strikes with
the same level of precision as the CIA.

Her effort to head off major changes to the NSA's collection of billions of
Americans' phone records has been more aggressive and open. After the
disclosures by former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden triggered a public
outcry, Feinstein introduced a bill that proposed minor changes, including
requiring more detailed reporting to Congress, but that would leave the bulk
collection of U.S. phone records in place.

Former U.S. officials fault Obama for the friction with Feinstein, saying that
he appears to have done little to cultivate her support before announcing
potentially major changes to the spy agencies she oversees. A White House
spokeswoman declined to comment.

The leaders of U.S. spy agencies have come to see Feinstein "as an unlikely
bedfellow sent from heaven," said a former senior Obama administration official
involved in deliberations on the drone program who spoke on the condition of
anonymity. Feinstein is "a hawk who is asserted to be a liberal. She covers
their left flank."

Feinstein's position on the NSA program has put her at odds not only with Obama
but also with many of her Democratic colleagues, as well as two White House
panels that have recommended ending the government's role in gathering phone
data and concluded that it had been of no discernible value in preventing
terrorist plots.

In her statement, Feinstein expressed a willingness to consider Obama's plan to
shift control of call data to phone companies or a new entity, but only if
"security is maintained, costs are contained and the operational speed and
flexibility of the program is preserved."

Mark Lowenthal, a former CIA official and senior congressional aide, said
Feinstein should be praised for being independent. "It makes her a very serious
voice in this debate because she is in [Obama's] party," Lowenthal said. "She's
been looking at these programs for many years."

greg.miller@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


