                             405 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

From Pen and Phone to Bombs and Drones

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1154 words


WASHINGTON -- THE president was at the United Nations on Wednesday urging young
people across the Muslim world to reject benighted values, even as America
clambers into bed with a bunch of Middle East potentates who espouse benighted
values.

President Obama has been working hard to get a coalition that includes Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, Bahrain, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates because they provide
cover in the fight against the brutal, metastasizing threat of the Islamic
State, a ''network of death'' known as ISIS, that our blunders -- both of action
and inaction -- helped create.

He and Secretary of State John Kerry have cajoled this motley crew for the
coalition -- American warplanes are doing most of the airstrikes in Syria --
even though in countries like Saudi Arabia and Qatar, powerful elements are
financing some of the same terrorists that their governments have been enlisted
to fight.

At the U.N. on Tuesday, in a scene in a fancy-old New York hotel that evoked
Marlon Brando making the peace with the heads of the five families in ''The
Godfather,'' President Obama offered a tableau of respect to the leaders of
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Jordan, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.

''This represents partners and friends in which we have worked for very many
years to make sure that security and prosperity exists in the region,'' he said.

When American presidents rain down bombs on Muslim countries, they use the awful
treatment of women in the Middle East as one of their justifications.

In his speech at the United Nations, President Obama said he wanted ''to speak
directly to young people across the Muslim world'' and urged them to create
''genuine'' civil societies.

''Where women are full participants in a country's politics or economy,
societies are more likely to succeed,'' he said. ''And that's why we support the
participation of women in parliaments and peace processes, schools and the
economy.''

Yet, because we need the regressive rulers in the Persian Gulf to sell us oil
and buy our fighter jets and house our fleets and drones and give us cover in
our war coalitions, we don't really speak out about their human rights
violations and degradation of women as much as we should. The Obama
administration was sparked to action by the videos of ISIS beheading two
American journalists. Yet Saudi Arabia -- wooed to be in the coalition by Kerry
with a personal visit this month -- has been chopping off heads regularly,
sometimes for nonlethal crimes such as drugs or sorcery.

The president should just drop the flowery talk and cut to the chase. Americans
get it. Let's not pretend we're fighting for any democratic principles here.

America failed spectacularly in creating its democratic model kitchen with Iraq.
So now we have to go back periodically and cut the grass, as they say in Israel,
to keep our virulent foes in check.

It is pre-emption. But the difference with President Obama's pre-emption is that
there is an actual threat to the globe from a vicious, maniacal army. President
Bush, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, Paul Wolfowitz and Condoleezza Rice made up
a threat to America from a contained and diminished Saddam Hussein to justify
pre-emption and serve their more subterranean purposes.

Eight months ago, the president was reduced to threatening to act without
Congress, warning: ''I've got a pen, and I've got a phone.''

Now he's brandishing bombs and drones on a scale he's never done before. The
ex-community activist elected on a peace platform has grown accustomed to coldly
ordering the killing of bad guys.

''It's hard to imagine that in his wildest dreams -- or nightmares -- he ever
foresaw the in-box he has,'' said Richard Haass, the president of the Council on
Foreign Relations.

But, as Harold Macmillan, the former British prime minister, said once, when
asked what disrupted his best-laid plans: ''Events, dear boy, events.''

As the U.S. woos the Arab coalition, Arab leaders are not speaking out against
the atrocities of ISIS against women.

''It is the obligation and duty of Arab countries, where men always feel so
possessive about their mother, their wife, their daughter, to condemn ISIS's
violence against women,'' said Haleh Esfandiari, the director of the Middle East
Program at the Wilson Center. ''Why don't they say a word?

''I've been working with women in the Middle East for 40 years, and I've never
seen such brutality, such barbarism as that which ISIS is committing against
women. It is unbelievable.''

We are so far from where the dunderheads of the Bush administration were in
2003, with George W. Bush bragging about his cakewalk of weakening dictators,
forging democracies and recognizing the rights of women. As it has rampaged like
a flesh-eating virus through the region, ISIS has been targeting professional
women. An Iraqi lawyer who worked to promote women's rights was grabbed from her
home last week after she posted complaints on her Facebook page about ISIS's
''barbaric'' destruction of mosques and shrines in Mosul. Sameera Salih Ali
al-Nuaimy was tortured for days; then a masked firing squad executed her on
Monday and then told her family she could not have a funeral.

In a Wall Street Journal piece headlined ''ISIS's Cruelty Toward Women Gets
Scant Attention,'' Esfandiari toted up a litany of horrors, including the tragic
story of a woman who was tied to a tree, naked, and repeatedly raped by ISIS
fighters, who are ''rewarded'' with droit du seigneur as they assault and
pillage their way toward an Islamic caliphate.

She noted that even though ISIS propaganda emphasizes protecting the morality of
women, it has taken little girls playing with dolls and married them off to
fighters three times older, set up ''marriage bureaus'' in captured Syrian towns
to recruit virgins and widows to marry fighters, and tied together women with a
rope as though ''they were being led to a makeshift slave market.''

She told me that ''it's a strategy to shame women and undermine their families.
In our part of the world, a woman who has been raped, whether once or 50 times,
feels ashamed, her family feels ashamed. Some commit suicide. Others become
pregnant and are ostracized by their family and community, with no fault at all
of their own.''

Haass noted that one of the lessons we should have learned in fighting halfway
around the world, from Vietnam to Iraq, is ''the power of local realities.''

''One of the things we've learned is that we can't deliver fundamental social
and cultural transformation in this part of the world,'' he said. ''Our ability
to influence the position or status of women in the Arab or Muslim world is
limited.''

He said the Arab coalition is necessary because ''our priority has got to be to
push back and weaken ISIS.

''Even if we're not in a position to give women the better life they deserve,''
he concluded, ''we are in a position to save many of them from what ISIS would
do to them. And that's significant.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/opinion/sunday/maureen-dowd-from-pen-and-phone
-to-bombs-and-drones.html

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


