                             404 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Boy at Play in Gaza, a Renewal of Warfare, a Family in Mourning

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN and FARES AKRAM

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1139 words


GAZA CITY -- Sabah Dawawsa was in the kitchen Friday morning, frying the chicken
livers her 10-year-old son, Ibrahim, had requested for the after-prayer meal.
With Palestinian rockets having resumed at the 8 a.m. expiration of a 72-hour
cease-fire, followed by Israeli airstrikes, Ms. Dawawsa said she had told
Ibrahim to stay inside, in their house in Gaza City's Sheikh Radwan
neighborhood.

Around 11 a.m., right as she realized that he had nonetheless gone to play at
the mosque under construction down the street, Ms. Dawawsa heard the drone drop
the missile.

It killed Ibrahim, leaving a pool of blood from his skull next to a crushed
SuperCola can and an abandoned flip-flop. Two other boys were wounded.

''What shall I say? It was only a few minutes after he went out,'' Ms. Dawawsa,
37, wailed as she clutched a picture of her son at 5 years old in a camouflage
outfit. ''It was only minutes, only minutes.''

Hundreds of mourners gathered at another nearby mosque to pray over the body of
the first casualty in the latest chapter of the monthlong battle that has
claimed the lives of nearly 1,900 Palestinians, including more than 300
children, and, on the Israeli side, 64 soldiers and three civilians. The renewed
violence came as an Israeli delegation left Cairo, where talks toward a more
durable truce had made dubious progress.

Leaders of Hamas, the Islamist faction that dominates Gaza, had warned on
Thursday that they would resume the battle if their demands to open border
crossings, remove Israeli restrictions on trade and, especially, build their own
seaport on the Mediterranean were not met. Israel had promised to return fire
with fire. Both kept their word.

Gaza militants launched a rocket toward southern Israel exactly at 8 a.m. -- it
was intercepted over Ashkelon -- and followed with about 40 others by midday,
according to the Israeli military. Israel, in turn, fired artillery shells at
Gaza's already destroyed northern towns of Beit Lahiya and Beit Hanoun, dropped
at least one bomb from an F-16, and struck a home in Gaza City belonging to a
Hamas leader, Mahmoud al-Zahar, and hit other targets in Gaza City, Jabaliya,
Rafah and Khan Younis, killing four people in addition to Ibrahim before 8 p.m.,
Palestinian health officials and witnesses said.

''I was happy for the last three days -- today I felt sick because the
cease-fire ended,'' said Amal al-Masri, 45, who bought a small bag of green
grapes at the Jabaliya refugee camp to share among 30 relatives whose home in
Beit Hanoun had been flattened. ''We lost everything. If an earthquake happened
here, it would be better.

''I don't want the war to resume,'' she added, ''but who's going to bring back
our rights? This is the only way.''

As news spread that the cease-fire was over, many shops remained open, and cars
and people were on the streets of Gaza City. Groups of teenagers roamed and men
sat smoking on the sidewalks. In the Jabaliya camp, a man exercised seven camels
on a leash, and young boys toted cartons of supplies on their heads back to the
school where their families have been sheltering for weeks.

Heading north, it grew quieter. In Beit Hanoun, a ghost town of felled concrete
buildings, Anas Kaferna, 25, and his sister and brother were tying thin
mattresses and blankets atop a fading silver sedan. ''I don't want to be the
last one in the town,'' he said.

Since the first attack on Beit Hanoun weeks ago, Mr. Kaferna said they had been
staying at the maternity hospital where he worked as a security guard, though it
was also pocked by shelling. Now they were bound for Gaza City, though uncertain
where they would stay. ''It seems the situation will get harder,'' he said.
''Maybe yes and maybe no. I don't understand politics.''

Back at the Jabaliya market, Amir el-Fassis, 17, and Muhammad Bahtini, 21, said
they were awoken by a drone strike the Israelis refer to as a ''knock on the
door,'' warning of a larger bombing to follow. It hit a six-story apartment
building under construction next to their home, they said. They evacuated, but
waited in a growing crowd nearby to see what would happen next.

''They are peaceful people, they sell tomatoes in the market,'' Mr. Bahtini said
of the Sherafi family, who own the apartment building and live on its ground
floor. ''When it is down, we will say, 'May God get us revenge.'

''We have suffered, but we can endure for the sake of having a rest forever
after that,'' he added, invoking an Egyptian proverb, heard frequently around
Gaza this week, that means, ''Either we live in happiness or all of us die.''

Zuheir Dawawsa, 19, one of Ibrahim's brothers, said he, too, was awoken by the
too-familiar sound of a drone. He ran to the construction site where, three
months ago, work began on a 13,000-square-foot mosque, called Al Nour, to
replace the one destroyed by an Israeli strike during Operation Cast Lead in
2008-9.

Neighborhood children told him that his brother had been among the boys playing
there when it was hit. Then a youth approached with Ibrahim in his arms.

''His skull was open,'' said Mr. Dawawsa, who was wearing a T-shirt that said,
''Nothing Is Impossible,'' and could hardly speak. ''He was already dead.''

Family members and neighbors said Ibrahim was an energetic boy, nicknamed
Barhoum, who loved his PlayStation and soccer, like so many others. He was the
second-youngest of eight children from his father's two wives, and slept on a
mattress in the spacious second-floor salon where his mother sat mourning on
Friday. ''He was a good heart,'' said a sister, Raghda, cradling her own
7-month-old daughter. ''He was always giving what was in his hand to others.''

Photographs of President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and his
predecessor, Yasir Arafat, hung above the women's heads. In the next room was a
map of British Mandate Palestine, with cities and villages labeled in Arabic.
Outside, the house's stone wall bore a painted mural of the Dome of the Rock in
Jerusalem's Old City.

At the construction site, men and boys pointed up at the place where the missile
had shaved off a concrete pylon and sundered the wooden scaffold before,
apparently, hitting Ibrahim in the head. They had found several pieces of
jagged-edge metal shrapnel.

The neighborhood leader, Nasser Abu Raid al-Ghoul, 60, said he was among about
30 men in the temporary mosque next to the site, reading the Quran in
preparation for the midday prayer, when the missile hit. They first saw the two
wounded boys, and 10 minutes later found Ibrahim's bloodied body under the
debris.

''What, the boy was shelling Israel with this wood?'' said a scowling neighbor,
Mahmoud el-Amoudi, 31, pointing to two-by-fours from the scaffold. ''I'm sure
Israel will say he killed himself.

''Where is Barack Obama? Where is Human Rights Watch? Where is the free world,
just crying on TV?''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/world/middleeast/boy-killed-in-israel-gaza-str
ip-conflict.html

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sabah Dawawsa, center, the mother of 10-year-old Ibrahim, said
she realized that he had left their house in Gaza City just before she heard a
drone drop a missile. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WISSAM NASSAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Left, Ibrahim Dawawsa's father crying over the boy's body. In the shadow of a
minaret toppled by an airstrike, residents in Gaza City gathered for the Friday
Prayer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY  KHALIL HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


