                             407 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 18, 2014 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Drone Stunt at Belgrade Soccer Match Stirs Ethnic Tensions

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 766 words


Ahead of a planned visit to the Serbian capital of Belgrade by the prime
minister of Albania, ethnic tensions fueled by a stunt at a soccer match earlier
this week have escalated into a full-scale diplomatic incident.

Prime Minister Edi Rama was scheduled to visit Belgrade on Wednesday, the first
visit by an Albanian government leader in 70 years. But Serbian officials have
accused Mr. Rama's brother, Olsi Rama, of releasing a small drone trailing a
nationalist Albanian flag during a qualifying soccer match for the 2016 European
Championship between Albania and Serbia. Olsi Rama has vehemently denied
launching the drone.

Video of the event showed some Serbian spectators -- Albanian fans were
discouraged from attending -- shouting ''Kill! Kill! Kill!'' Others ran onto the
field, attacking Albanian players, sometimes with chairs, and forcing the
Albanian team to escape through a tunnel at the end of the field. The game,
expected to overcome historic enmities, was abandoned while the score was still
0-0.

In a region where ethnic nationalism is seldom far below the surface, the
incident has provoked suspected cyberattacks, violence and the lobbing of verbal
insults with a fervor usually reserved for the soccer field. The recriminations
come at an awkward time when Albania and Serbia are struggling to prove their
Western credentials so that they can join the European Union.

On Thursday evening, the Albanian ambassador to Serbia, Ilir Bocka, who had been
summoned by Serbian officials for a stern rebuke, told reporters in Belgrade
that efforts were being made to try to save the prime minister's visit, which
both sides had earlier described as an example of a new era of reconciliation.
He called on the Serbian authorities to ''unequivocally condemn the extremist
behavior'' of spectators at the match, according to Serbian news media reports.

Soccer and nationalism, twin forces in countries as varied as Britain and
Brazil, are a particularly potent cocktail when it comes to relations between
ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians, whose history is marked by civil war and
ethnic cleansing. Relations have been particularly tense since Kosovo declared
independence from Serbia on Feb. 17, 2008, almost a decade after NATO bombs
helped eject Serbian forces under Slobodan Milosevic from Kosovo, ending a
vicious war against Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority.

While Serbia vehemently rejected Kosovo's independence, Albania ardently
applauded it, with some Albanians clamoring to make Kosovo part of Albania.
Several players on the Albanian team, including its captain, Lorik Cana, were
born in Kosovo when it was part of Serbia. The nationalist flag released at the
game, which also featured portraits of two Albanian patriotic leaders, was
particularly provocative as it depicted a Greater Albania that included Kosovo
and parts of neighboring countries like Greece, Macedonia and Montenegro.

Petrit Selimi, deputy foreign minister of Kosovo, said it was imperative that
the match not be allowed to spoil regional reconciliation, including recently
improved ties between Kosovo and Serbia. ''I do hope that politicians in both
Albania and Serbia will find a way to focus on the progress to be reached in
their respective E.U. paths,'' he said, ''rather than provocations by those
hellbent on repeating the violence of the past.''

The soccer skirmish rippled across both countries throughout the week, and the
Serbian broadcaster B92 reported that several Albanian bakeries in Serbia had
been attacked apparently in retaliation, including in Sombor, a town in northern
Serbia, where a gasoline bomb was lobbed at a store. Blic, a popular tabloid
newspaper, said ethnic Albanian hackers from Kosovo and Albania had attacked its
website. In Kosovo, B92 said, ethnic Albanians set fire to a Serbian flag in
Mitrovica, an ethnically divided city. The stadium fight even spilled into
Austria, where a group of 50 Albanians attacked Serbs dining in a restaurant,
the broadcaster said.

The war of words was equally strong. President Tomislav Nikolic of Serbia was
quoted by B92 as saying, ''The only thing missing to get an impression there
were ties with the world terrorist No. 1 was an explosive device in the craft.''
He said that the attack was particularly worrying given the hundreds of ethnic
Albanians in Kosovo who he said had gone to fight in Iraq and Syria.

In case the insult was unclear, he added that Albania, one of the poorest
countries in Europe and once cut off from the West during a brutal dictatorship,
would take ''decades, if not centuries, to become a normal country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/world/europe/drone
-stunt-at-belgrade-soccer-match-stirs-ethnic-tensions.html

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


