                             401 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Aids Iraq With Drones and Military Gear

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Michael R. Gordon reported from
Brussels, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1017 words


BRUSSELS -- Iran is directing surveillance drones over Iraq from an airfield in
Baghdad and is supplying Iraqi forces with tons of military equipment and other
supplies, according to American officials.

The secret Iranian programs are a rare instance in which Iran and the United
States share a near-term goal: countering the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria,
or ISIS, the Sunni militants who have seized towns and cities in a blitzkrieg
across western and northern Iraq. But even as the two nations provide military
support to the embattled government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, they
are watching each other's actions warily as they jostle for influence in the
region.

Senior American officials emphasized that the parallel efforts were not
coordinated, and in an appearance at NATO headquarters here on Wednesday,
Secretary of State John Kerry highlighted some of the potential risks.

''From our point of view, we've made it clear to everyone in the region that we
don't need anything to take place that might exacerbate the sectarian divisions
that are already at a heightened level of tension,'' Mr. Kerry said.

Both the United States and Iran have small numbers of military advisers in Iraq.
As many as 300 American commandos are being deployed to assess Iraqi forces and
the deteriorating security situation, while about a dozen officers from Iran's
paramilitary Quds Force have been sent to advise Iraqi commanders and to help
mobilize more than 2,000 Shiites from southern Iraq, American officials say.

''Iran is likely to be playing somewhat of an overarching command role within
the central Iraqi military apparatus, with an emphasis on maintaining
cohesiveness in Baghdad and the Shia south and managing the reconstitution of
Shia militias,'' said Charles Lister, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Doha
Center in Qatar.

Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the head of the Quds Force, has paid at least two visits
to Iraq to help Iraqi military advisers plot strategy. And Iranian transport
planes have been making twice-daily flights to Baghdad with military equipment
and supplies, 70 tons per flight, for the Iraqi forces.

''It's a substantial amount,'' said a senior American official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity because he was discussing classified reports. ''It's not
necessarily heavy weaponry, but it is not just light arms and ammunition.''

The Iranian involvement comes as Syria has intervened militarily by carrying out
airstrikes in western Iraq against ISIS fighters, according to American
officials, who said they could not confirm reports of civilian casualties. It is
not clear whether Syria decided on its own to target ISIS or whether President
Bashar al-Assad was acting at the behest of Iran or Iraq, the officials said.
But it appears that Syria, Iran and the United States are all fighting a common
enemy.

In his news conference at NATO, Mr. Kerry expressed concern that the war in Iraq
was being ''widened.''

''That's one of the reasons why government formation is so urgent, so that the
leaders of Iraq can begin to make decisions necessary to protect Iraq without
outside forces moving to fill a vacuum,'' he said.

The Obama administration has sought to open a dialogue with Iran on the Iraq
crisis. William J. Burns, the deputy secretary of state, met briefly last week
with an Iranian diplomat at the margins of the negotiations over Iran's nuclear
program taking place in Vienna. But Western officials say there appear to be
divisions between the Iranian Foreign Ministry, which may be open to some degree
of cooperation, and General Suleimani, who was the mastermind of Iran's strategy
when Iraqi Shiite militias trained by Iran attacked American troops there with
powerful explosive devices supplied by Tehran. The general is also the current
architect of Iranian military support in Syria for Mr. Assad.

In the weeks since ISIS swept across northern Iraq, the United States has
increased its surveillance flights over Iraq and is now flying about 30 to 35
missions a day. The flights include piloted aircraft, such as F-18s and P-3
surveillance planes, as well as drones.

Mounting its own effort, according to American officials, Iran has set up a
special control center at Rasheed Air Base in Baghdad and is flying a small
fleet of Ababil surveillance drones over Iraq.

An Iranian signals intelligence unit has also been deployed at the airfield to
intercept electronic communications between ISIS fighters and commanders, said
another American official, who, like the others, spoke on the condition of
anonymity.

The airfield may be the first former American base in Iraq to be used for
Iranian operations. American forces used it after they invaded Iraq in 2003, and
during the early phase of the occupation, an aviation squadron was based there,
calling it Camp Redcatcher.

''The Iranians are playing in a big way in Iraq,'' Senator Saxby Chambliss of
Georgia, the ranking Republican on the Intelligence Committee, said in an
interview.

While Iran has not sent large numbers of troops into Iraq, as many as 10
divisions of Iranian and Quds Force troops are massed on the Iran-Iraq border,
ready to come to Mr. Maliki's aid if the Iraqi capital is imperiled or Shiite
shrines in cities like Samarra are seriously threatened, American officials
said.

Some officials said that about two dozen Iranian aircraft had been stationed in
western Iran for possible operations over Iraq.

The security crisis in Iraq was just one topic discussed in Mr. Kerry's meetings
with officials who have gathered here for a meeting of NATO foreign ministers
focused on Ukraine and alliance issues. Afterward, he departed for Paris, taking
the train with his staff because of an air-traffic control strike.

On Thursday, Mr. Kerry plans to meet in Paris with the Israeli foreign minister,
Avigdor Lieberman, as well as with Saad Hariri, the former Lebanese prime
minister. But a major reason for the stop is to discuss Syria and the ''grave
security situation'' in Iraq with his counterparts from Jordan, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates, a senior State Department official said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/26/world/middleeast/iran-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Relatives mourned Thaha Ahmed Shabab, 62, a Sunni who was
fatally shot in front of his home near Baghdad on Tuesday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AYMAN OGHANNA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


