                             403 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 16, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Order Vs. Disorder, Part 2

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 879 words


I've argued for a while now that it is always useful to study the Israeli-Arab
conflict because it is to the wider war of civilizations what Off Broadway is to
Broadway. A lot of stuff starts there and then goes to Broadway. So what's
playing Off Broadway these days? The Israeli-Arab conflict has become a
miniature of the most relevant divide in the world today: the divide between the
''world of order'' and the ''world of disorder.''

Israel faces nonstate actors in civilian clothes, armed with homemade rockets
and drones, nested among civilians on four of its five borders: Sinai, Gaza,
Lebanon and Syria. And what is most striking about this play is that the
traditional means of bringing order seem ineffective. Israel, a mini-superpower,
keeps pummeling the ragtag Islamist militias in Gaza with its modern air force,
but the superempowered Palestinian militants, leveraging cheap high-tech tools,
keep coming back with homemade rockets and even a homemade drone. You used to
need a contract with Boeing to get a drone. Now you can make one in Gaza.

What to do? For starters, it would be great if the big powers of the world of
order -- the United States, Russia, China, Japan, India and the European Union
-- were able to collaborate more in stemming the spread of the world of
disorder. That is certainly necessary. But the prospects for that are limited.
No power these days wants to lay hands on the world of disorder because all you
win is a bill. And even if they did, it would not be sufficient.

In my view, the only way Israel can truly curtail the Hamas rocket threat is if
the Palestinians of Gaza demand that the rockets stop. Sure, Israel can inflict
enough pain on all of Gaza to get a cease-fire, but it never lasts. The only
sustainable way to do it is by Israel partnering with moderate Palestinians in
the West Bank to build a thriving state there, so Gaza Palestinians wake up
every day and say to the nihilistic Hamas: ''We want what our West Bank cousins
have.'' The only sustainable controls are those that come from within.

That is how the U.S. military defeated the earlier version of the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, when the jihadists largely took over Iraq's Anbar
Province in 2006-7. The U.S. partnered with the Sunni Muslim tribal leaders who
didn't want puritanical Islam, or their daughters to be forced to marry
fundamentalists, or to give up their whiskey. But we did not just arm them. We
brokered an agreement of shared guns, shared power and shared values -- about
the future of Iraq -- between those Sunni tribesmen and Iraq's ruling Shiite
prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. That is what ended the jihadist disorder
there in 2007.

And then what did Maliki do as soon as we left Iraq? He stopped paying the Sunni
tribal militias and tried to arrest moderate Sunni politicians. Rather than
building on the foundation we laid of power-sharing, Maliki uprooted it. That is
why ISIS found it so easy to move in. Iraqi Sunnis weren't going to fight for
Maliki's government. No trust, no power-sharing -- no order.

Jewish settlers in Israel have done all they could to build more settlements and
undermine Palestinian trust that Israel will ever share sufficient power for a
West Bank Palestinian state to emerge. And the moderate, secular Palestinian
leadership in the West Bank all too often has shown too little courage to
compromise at crunchtime. So no compelling West Bank alternative to Hamas's
nihilism exists. Israel, the moderate Palestinians and Maliki all wasted the
quiet of the last few years. And Maliki and Israel's leaders now insist on
wiping out the military threats they face from radicals -- before rebuilding or
reconsidering any of the political alternatives that they themselves helped to
scuttle. That won't work.

Patrick Doherty, author of ''A New U.S. Grand Strategy'' in Foreign Policy
magazine, argues that if you look at the traditional responses to the world of
disorder by both American and other leaders, you notice that there are a lot of
''controllers and disrupters but no builders. Our leaders were trained in the
control tactics of the Cold War -- a.k.a. 'crisis management.' So it's no
surprise that we are using our power only to hedge risk and preserve a failing
status quo. But now we need our leaders to be builders with enough foresight to
shape a sustainable international order -- and to support regional leaders
committed to the same.'' Control, notes Doherty, is surely better than chaos.
But as we have seen with the controllers America has tended to adopt in Egypt,
Iraq and Israel, their brand of control ''tends toward stagnation and excesses,
as power is concentrated to counter the forces of chaos.''

When all the old means of top-down control are decreasingly available or
increasingly expensive (in a world of strong people and strong technologies,
being a strongman isn't what it used to be), leaders and their people are going
to eventually have to embrace a new, more sustainable source of order that
emerges from the bottom up and is built on shared power, values and trust.
Leadership will be about how to cultivate that kind of order. Yes, yes. I know
that sounds impossibly hard. But when isolated Gazans can make their own drones,
order doesn't come easy anymore.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/16/opinion/thomas-friedman-israeli-palestinian-co
nflict-order-disorder.html

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


