                              41 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 14, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New to the Archaeologist's Tool Kit: The Drone

BYLINE: By WILLIAM NEUMAN and RALPH BLUMENTHAL; William Neuman reported from
Peru and Ralph Blumenthal from New York. Andrea Zarate contributed reporting
from Lima, Peru.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1376 words


CHEPÉN, Peru -- A small remote-controlled helicopter buzzed over ancient hilltop
ruins here, snapping hundreds of photographs. Below, stone walls built more than
a thousand years ago by the Moche civilization gave way to a grid of adobe walls
put up only recently by what officials said were land speculators.

''This site is threatened on every side,'' said Luis Jaime Castillo Butters,
Peru's vice minister of cultural heritage as he piloted the drone aircraft.

Archaeologists around the world, who have long relied on the classic tools of
their profession, like the trowel and the plumb bob, are now turning to the
modern technology of drones to defend and explore endangered sites. And perhaps
nowhere is the shift happening as swiftly as in Peru, where Dr. Castillo has
created a drone air force to map, monitor and safeguard his country's ancient
treasures.

Drones mark ''a before and after in archaeology,'' said Dr. Castillo, who is
also a prominent archaeologist and one of a dozen experts who will outline the
use of drones at a conference in San Francisco next year.

In remote northwestern New Mexico, archaeologists are using drones outfitted
with thermal-imaging cameras to track the walls and passages of a 1,000-year-old
Chaco Canyon settlement, now buried beneath the dirt.

In the Middle East, researchers have employed them to guard against looting.

''Aerial survey at the site is allowing for the identification of new looting
pits and determinations of whether any of the looters' holes had been
revisited,'' said Morag Kersel, an archaeologist from DePaul University in
Chicago who is part of a team using drones in Jordan and Israel.

Peru, with its stunning concentration of archaeological riches, is suddenly
fertile ground to try out this new technology. The country is becoming a
research hot spot as archaeologists in the Middle East and elsewhere find their
work interrupted by unrest.

But in Peru they encounter another kind of conflict. Here they struggle to
protect the country's archaeological heritage from squatters and land
traffickers, who often secure property through fraud or political connections to
profit from rising land values. Experts say hundreds, perhaps thousands of
ancient sites are endangered by such encroachment.

The drones can address the problem, quickly and cheaply, by providing bird's-eye
views of ruins that can be converted into 3-D images and highly detailed maps.

The maps are then used to legally register the protected boundaries of sites, a
kind of landmarking that can be cited in court to prevent development or to
punish those who damage ruins by building anyway.

''While various scholars are utilizing drones in their individual
investigations, no other country is systematically using drones to manage and
protect their sites,'' said Lawrence Coben, founder of the Sustainable
Preservation Initiative, a nonprofit organization providing economic
opportunities to poor communities in which archaeological sites are located.
Encroachment has become a particular concern in cities like Lima or Cuzco, near
Machu Picchu, the Inca citadel, where land values have risen steadily as the
population increases and the economy booms. Many Peruvians were shocked last
year when workers using heavy machinery illegally demolished a 4,000-year-old
pyramid in Lima to make way for possible development.

''Lima has grown to a point where the only land left is archaeological land,''
said Dr. Castillo, who is also a professor at the Pontifical Catholic University
of Peru.

Though his work is focused on the deep past, Dr. Castillo is fascinated by
gadgets and new technology. He began experimenting with drones about two years
ago, buying a $100 one from the Sharper Image. Now he has a squadron of eight,
all miniature helicopters that cost about $1,500 to $20,000. He hopes to soon
add 20 more.

The drones, he said, ''solve the first riddle of archaeology.''

''Finally you can fly whenever you want to, wherever you want to, in any angle,
for anything you want and get the great picture you always thought you should
take,'' he said.

Dr. Castillo's eureka moment occurred in 2012, while teaching in Sweden, where
researchers were working with a powerful Russian-made computer program that
could meld hundreds of photographs into a 3-D composite image. Dr. Castillo
realized that by feeding his drone photographs into the program, he could
produce incredibly detailed and clear 3-D images of ancient temples,
fortifications and burial sites.

When asked last year to become a deputy culture minister with jurisdiction over
archaeology, he brought his fledgling air force with him, using the drones in
the cities but also in more remote areas like this one, known as Cerro Chepén, a
sprawling site on the northern coast of Peru that dates to about A.D. 850 and
the late stages of the Moche civilization. While the immense stone walls here
may not be as sophisticated as those at some later sites like Machu Picchu, they
are still impressive.

Pointing to a nearby hillside, Dr. Castillo said that last year a survey team
spent two months, at a cost of thousands of dollars, to map the area using
conventional methods. Now, with a drone, he covers a similar area in less than
10 minutes. Once he loads the photos into a computer program, he can have a map
the next day.

''The faster we produce the maps, the more parts of the site we're going to be
able to save,'' he said.

Drones do have some drawbacks. Their batteries last as little as six minutes.
The dust common at archaeological sites, especially in Peru's coastal desert,
can foul the equipment.

Earlier on Cerro Chepén, Aldo Watanave, who leads Dr. Castillo's drone team, had
been unable to get a larger drone to work when the apparatus that controls the
camera's movement failed. Dr. Castillo and his staff often must rely on their
ingenuity, jury-rigging the drones to hold cameras in place. In this instance,
Mr. Watanave tried tying the apparatus in place with string but then the
mechanism that made the camera take pictures at regular intervals also went on
the fritz. Dr. Castillo ended up using a smaller drone for the job.

The nerve center for the drone effort is in the basement of the Culture
Ministry, a massive gray concrete building in Lima. In cramped cubicles, eight
men and women work with the 3-D maps created from drone photographs, refining
them and adding information, including details about land ownership and
archaeological excavations.

The task before them is daunting. Peru has an estimated 100,000 sites of
archaeological importance, though experts acknowledge that is little more than a
guess. Of those, only about 2,500 have been mapped in some way and only about
200 are fully inscribed in public registers owing to money and manpower issues.

''We have a mountain of work to do and a very small budget,'' said Nohemí Ortiz,
who directs the office responsible for registering sites. ''But we have to start
somewhere.''

Recently their work brought them to Pimentel, a Pacific beach town where about
700 years ago a fishing village occupied a raised expanse of sand. The sand on a
recent visit was littered with artifacts, pieces of pottery, a ceramic shard
featuring the snout of a feline creature, notched stones once used as fishing
weights and chunks of coral that may have once marked the perimeter of houses.

But a large area of sand around the mound, and perhaps parts of the mound
itself, were recently flattened with heavy equipment. Stakes were driven into
the sand in what appeared to be an effort to establish property lines.

Government archaeologists discovered the encroachment when they arrived to map
the site with conventional methods.

Carlos Wester La Torre, an archaeologist who directs the nearby Brüning National
Archaeological Museum, said it appeared that local leaders had begun to parcel
up the beachfront to take advantage of escalating land values.

''I think they wanted to disturb this so they could say it's not worth
anything,'' he said of the damage to the site, ''like taking a book and ripping
out the pages so you can't read the story anymore.''

Dr. Castillo's team had arrived just that day. Soon one of his drones was
buzzing overhead, recording what was left of local prehistory before it, too,
would be obliterated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/14/arts/design/drones
-are-used-to-patrol-endangered-archaeological-sites.html

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Aldo Watanave, top, uses drones to track ancient sites in Peru.
Drones help create 3-D images like the one of Inka Wasi, an Incan palace, left.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MERIDITH KOHUT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE OF PERU) MAP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


