                             415 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             May 10, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Massachusetts court rules 'under God' in pledge does not discriminate against
atheists

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 442 words

MASSACHUSETTS

Court: 'Under God' in pledge is patriotic

The Pledge of Allegiance does not discriminate against atheists and can be
recited at the start of the public school day, Massachusetts' highest court
ruled Friday.

The Supreme Judicial Court said the words "under God" in the pledge have a
"religious tinge" but they reflect patriotic practice, not a religious one.

The court was ruling in a lawsuit filed in 2010 by an atheist family who claimed
that reciting the pledge in classrooms violated their  three children's equal
protection rights under the state constitution. The family was not identified in
the lawsuit.

The phrase "under God" was added to the pledge in 1954. The U.S. Supreme Court
has ruled that students cannot be compelled to recite the pledge, nor punished
for refusing to recite it.

- Associated Press

NEW JERSEY

Citizenship ceremony canceled over prayer

A New Jersey town has canceled a naturalization ceremony at its borough hall
because federal immigration officials refused to let the event begin with a
prayer.

Carteret Mayor Daniel Reiman said he requested that U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services relocate the Saturday ceremony, which will now be held in
the immigration agency's Newark office.

Katie Tichacek Kaplan, a spokeswoman for the immigration agency, said it is
long-standing policy to make sure naturalization ceremonies are conducted in a
manner that is "inclusive and excludes political, commercial and religious
statements."

Both Reiman and immigration officials cited Monday's Supreme Court opinion
affirming the right of local governments to include certain prayers in official
proceedings. Reiman said the ruling means he should be able to open any event at
city hall with a prayer and moment of silence. The immigration agency said the
ruling does not require federal agencies to include prayer as part of their
ceremonies.

- Associated Press

Aviation

Plane, drone had near miss in March

Federal officials say a U.S. jet airliner nearly collided in March with an
airborne drone over Tallahassee, Fla.

Jim Williams of the Federal Aviation Administration's unmanned aircraft systems
office acknowledged the incident Thursday at a San Francisco drone conference.

The near-collision was reported to air traffic control on March 22 by an
American Airlines pilot as the plane approached  the runway in Tallahassee en
route from Charlotte, N.C.

The pilot of the 50-seat Canadair Regional Jet CRJ-200 said the  drone was at an
altitude of about 2,300 feet. FAA rules state that the unmanned aircraft should
be kept below 400 feet above ground level and at sufficient distance from
full-scale aircraft .

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


