                             412 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 5, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

Judge dismisses lawsuit over drone strikes in Yemen

BYLINE: Pete Yost

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 593 words


A federal judge on Friday dismissed a lawsuit against Obama administration
officials for the 2011 drone-strike killings in Yemen of three U.S. citizens,
including an al-Qaeda cleric.

U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer said that the case raises serious
constitutional issues and is not easy to answer, but that "on these facts and
under this circuit's precedent," the court will grant the Obama administration's
request.

The suit was against then-Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta, then-CIA Director
David H. Petraeus and two commanders in the military's Special Operations
forces. Permitting a suit against individual officials "under the circumstances
of this case would impermissibly draw the court into 'the heart of executive and
military planning and deliberation,' " Collyer said. She said the suit would
require the court to examine national security policy and the military chain of
command as well as operational combat decisions regarding the designation of
targets and how best to counter threats to the United States.

At oral arguments last July, the judge challenged the Obama administration's
position repeatedly, pointedly asking, "Where was the due process in this case?"
for the now-dead U.S. citizens targeted in the drone attacks. When an
administration lawyer said there were checks in place, including reviews done by
the executive branch, Collyer said, "No, no, no, no, no," and declared that "the
executive is not an effective check on the executive" when it comes to
protecting constitutional rights.

But in Friday's ruling, it was clear that the administration's arguments had a
strong impact on the judge, who was appointed by President George W. Bush.

The government argued that the issue is best left to Congress and the executive,
not judges, and that courts have recognized that the defense of the nation
should be left to those political branches.

Cleric Anwar al-Awlaki's classification as a key leader raises fundamental
questions regarding the conduct of armed conflict, Collyer's 41-page opinion
stated. The Constitution commits decision-making in this area to the president,
as commander in chief, and to Congress, the judge said.

U.S.-born al-Qaeda leader Awlaki and Samir Khan, an al-Qaeda propagandist, were
killed in a drone strike in September 2011. Awlaki's son, Abdulrahman, 16, was
killed the following month.

The lawsuit was filed by Nasser al-Awlaki - Anwar's father and the teen's
grandfather - and by Sarah Khan, Samir Khan's mother.

Allowing a suit against the individual officials "would hinder their ability in
the future to act decisively and without hesitation in defense of U.S.
interests," Collyer added.

Awlaki had been linked to the planning and execution of several attacks
targeting U.S. and Western interests, including a 2009 attempt on Christmas Day
on a Detroit-bound airliner and a 2010 plot against cargo planes. "The fact is
that Anwar al-Awlaki was an active and exceedingly dangerous enemy of the United
States, irrespective of his distance, location, and citizenship," Collyer said.
"As evidenced by his participation in the Christmas Day attack, Anwar al-Awlaki
was able to persuade, direct and wage war against the United States from his
location in Yemen, without being present on an official battlefield or in a hot
war zone."

She said that the U.S. government moved against Awlaki as authorized by the
defendants, and she said the officials acted in accordance with the
Authorization for Use of Military Force, which was enacted by Congress after the
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


