                             418 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 29, 2014 Monday
                                Regional Edition

IT digest for Sept. 29, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 255 words

SOFTWARE

SAP to buy Concur for $7.4 billion

SAP has agreed to buy Concur Technologies for $7.4 billion in the biggest
acquisition by the 42-year-old German software maker.

Concur's software can book flights and manage expenses on the Internet or mobile
devices. It is used by corporations including Google, Kellogg and Hess,
according to Concur's Web site.

SAP agreed to pay $129 a share for Concur, 28 percent more than the stock's
Sept. 2 close, the day before reports surfaced suggesting the Bellevue, Wash.,
firm was exploring a sale. Including debt, the deal is valued at about $8.3
billion. The acquisition is slated to be completed by the first quarter of 2015,
according to SAP.

SAP chief executive Bill McDermott is racing to add revenue from software
delivered over the Internet as growth has stalled  for traditional products.

- Bloomberg News

aircraft

Drones neglected in new air traffic system

Designers of the ambitious U.S. air traffic control system of the future
neglected to take drones into account, raising questions about whether it can
handle the escalating demand for the unmanned aircraft and predicted congestion
in the sky.

"We didn't understand the magnitude to which [drones] would be an oncoming tidal
wave, something that must be dealt with, and quickly," said Ed Bolton, the
Federal Aviation Administration's assistant administrator for what is known as
NextGen.

Congress passed legislation creating NextGen in 2003, and directed the FAA to
accommodate all types of aircraft, including drones.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


