                             417 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday
                                Regional Edition

The fight against the Islamic State

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 459 words


Regarding Gen. Robert H. Scales's Sept. 7 op-ed, "The only way to defeat the
Islamic State":

It is quite clear that the best way to defeat the Islamic State is to use
special fighters and that support for Gen. Stanley McChrystal's tactics in the
form of more Navy and Air Force drone fleets would be welcome.

Some generals are reluctant to expand drone fleets, citing worries that drones
can be easily shot down by enemy forces, either through superior technology or
more powerful fighter jets. But there are almost no better options; ground
troops, for example, would only increase the casualties, and conventional
airstrikes are far less precise. The intelligence that these unmanned aircraft
could provide our forces would be invaluable. Extra drones, coupled with
specially trained fighters, could be just the extra advantage we need.

Sophia Liu , Bethesda

l

I pray Gen. Robert H. Scales's beautifully written op-ed is noted by those at
the Pentagon. Unfortunately, the Defense Department, like most large
organizations, moves like a large tortoise: deliberately, slowly and seemingly
randomly. Yet occasionally someone like Gen. Scales, who realizes how the world
and warfare have changed, pops up. He borrowed war-fighting methods brilliantly
employed by Gen. Stanley McChrystal in Afghanistan and described in short order
what needs to be done to defeat the Islamic State and how the United States
should configure its armed forces to meet - or, better yet, deter - today's, and
perhaps tomorrow's, threats to us and our allies.

Bill Little , Fairfax Station

l

Gen. Robert H. Scales described the "how" of dealing with the latest incarnation
of "terrorists," but no one has answered "why." We need that answer before we
throw more national energy and treasure down another hole.

Why do we care about the Islamic State, al-Qaeda, the Taliban or any other
threat du jour? The Sept. 11, 2001, attacks were the most destructive attack on
the U.S. mainland, yet the attack fundamentally did not harm the nation. After
9/11, did we toss out our Constitution? Cancel elections? Close our courts?
Shutter our churches, universities, charitable organizations? Did al-Qaeda
destroy our housing market? Did the Taliban create the Rust Belt? Is the Islamic
State destroying our middle class? It's not terrorists who are causing our
national infrastructure to wear out. Why do we need to engage every band of
thugs that emerges?

When I was a young Army officer, the best and the brightest told us we had to
stop the communists in Vietnam or we'd be fighting them in Hawaii. After nearly
60,000  service members died, we regained our senses - and now we buy our Nikes
from the Vietnamese.

The best and the brightest are at it again.

Joseph A. Schlatter , Heathsville, Va.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


