                             413 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 15, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

Unmanned sub to deploy in search for jetliner

BYLINE: Chico Harlan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 910 words


Teams searching for a missing Malaysian airliner are planning for the first time
to send an unmanned submarine into the depths of the Indian Ocean to look for
wreckage, the Australian official leading the multination search said Monday.

The deployment of the submersible drone opens a new phase in the five-week-old
search , one focusing on a pitch-black, silt-covered patch of the ocean floor.
The drone moves at walking speed, and searching with it will be painstaking. But
it allows investigators to follow up on their best lead to date: deep-sea
acoustic signals that may have come from the Boeing 777's black box.

The submersible drone, known as the Bluefin-21, will use sonar to provide search
crews with a three-dimensional map of the Indian Ocean floor, an area so
unexplored that it is practically "new to man," said Angus Houston, the
Australian official in charge of the search. The Bluefin-21 was expected to
begin its mission Monday evening.

Thirty-eight days into the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, which
vanished with 239 passengers and crew members aboard, there have been no
confirmed sightings of debris. The best hint of the plane's location comes from
four acoustic signals - potential black-box transmissions  - that were detected
by an Australian naval vessel equipped with specialized listening equipment. The
last transmission, though, came six days ago, and the black-box batteries are
well past their 30-day shelf life. The batteries could have died by now, Houston
said.

"I would caution against raising hopes that the deployment of the autonomous
underwater vehicle will result in the detection of aircraft wreckage," he said.
"It may not. However, this is the best lead we have.

"We've got to find wreckage before we can finally say we've solved this
mystery."

The Bluefin-21 - 16 feet long, yellow, shaped like a submarine - is on board the
Australian vessel, the Ocean Shield, operating roughly 1,050 miles northwest of
the city of Perth. For more than a week, the Ocean Shield has been towing a ping
locator through the water to listen for possible black-box signals from Flight
370.

Separately, Houston said Monday, the Ocean Shield came across an oil slick about
31 / 2 miles downwind from the area where it picked up the signals. Although the
oil slick could be unrelated to the plane, about half a gallon is being sampled
in an analysis that will take several days, Houston said.

The Ocean Shield doesn't have the capability to use the towed pinger locator -
connected to miles of cables - and the Bluefin-21 at the same time. The four
pings were detected in a loose oval about 20 to 25 miles apart, which translates
into an underwater search zone of about 500 square miles. Search officials had
been hoping that additional detections could help narrow the ocean floor area
where the submersible will scan for evidence of the plane. The U.S. Navy said
the submersible will need anywhere from six weeks to two months to scan the
search area.

Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said last week that authorities were
"confident" that the deep-sea pings were coming from the missing plane's flight
data recorder and cockpit voice recorder.

The underwater operation will be a slow one, moving in 24-hour cycles. The
submersible will spend 20 hours at a time underwater: two hours to make the
dive, 16 hours scanning the depths and two hours for the ascent. Crew members on
the Ocean Shield will then take four hours to download the data. The Bluefin-21
does not transmit information about what it is seeing in real time.

The Bluefin-21 will be operating in depths approaching its technical limits, but
U.S. naval officials say they think the drone will be effective.

Houston said the submersible would begin its search "in the most likely spot"
for the wreckage, but he gave no specifics about the location. He added that a
search for any debris bobbing on the ocean surface could wind down later this
week after consultation with the other countries involved.

"The chances of any floating material being recovered have greatly diminished,"
Houston said.

For now, the disappearance of Flight 370 - a red-eye from Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, bound for Beijing - remains a dismaying mystery. Malaysian authorities
say the flight was steered off course deliberately, though they have not
indicated a culprit or provided any suggestion of a motive.

Investigators determined, based on communication between the plane and a
satellite, that Flight 370 almost certainly crashed in the southern Indian
Ocean, presumably after running out of fuel. The search field has narrowed
significantly in recent weeks, but 12 aircraft and 15 ships were still scouring
an area of more than 18,000 square miles on Monday.

Countries involved in the search, including the United States, are running up
"big costs," Houston said, and he warned that the hunt may continue much longer.
The only comparable operation, he said, occurred after Air France Flight 447
vanished in 2009 over the Atlantic Ocean. The aircraft's black box was not
recovered until two years later. And the ocean where Malaysia Airlines Flight
370 is thought to have crashed is nearly a mile deeper.

"I think that gives you some idea of how challenging this should be," Houston
said. "And that's why I say we've got to be realistic about this. It may be very
difficult to find something, and you don't know how good any lead is until you
get your eyes on the wreckage."

chico.harlan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


