                             420 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                              THU REGIONAL Edition

Short Takes

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 341 words


Short Takes

DRONE WARFARE MADE PERSONAL

From Washington, the drone warfare program looks almost aseptic: Remote
controlled aircraft fire with precision on targets half a world away. But on
Tuesday, this anonymous form of warfare assumed a name and a face: that of 9
year old Nibila ur Rehman, who, along with her father and older brother, came
all the way from Pakistan's tribal region to talk about the drone strike that
killed her grandmother a year ago.

Dana Milbank, Washington Post Writers Group

Twitter spat embarrassing. The Twitter fight between Carl Icahn and Pacific
Investment Management Co.'s Bill Gross has sunk to a new low. Now both
billionaires have brandished philanthropy as a weapon in their public exchange
of insults. ... Here's hoping we never see another nasty tweet from these two
about each other again. They both need to get out of each other's faces.

Jonathan Weil, Bloomberg

Hispanic leader not needed. The Pew Research Hispanic Trends Project recently
released the results of its survey on views of national Latino leadership. Sixty
two percent of respondents say they "don't know" who the most important national
Hispanic leader is. Another 9 percent say "no one." ... The introduction to the
report says that three quarters of Latinos living in the U.S. say that their
community "needs" a national leader. I'm going to quibble with this assertion.

Esther J. Cepeda, Washington Post Writers Group

"12 Years" worth seeing. Please go see "12 Years a Slave." It's a film that
makes no apologies for the institution of slavery or the brutality of the
"peculiar institution."

Starita Smith, Progressive Media Project

The downside of China's schools. The emphasis on rote learning may ultimately
even impede the development of real skills and creativity. Indeed, in China,
it's not unusual to meet high school and college students who have, say,
mastered the intricacy of the English past participle but can't order in English
at McDonald's.

Adam Minter, Bloomberg

For the full versions of these columns, go to denverpost.com/opinion.

LOAD-DATE: November 03, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Nabila ur Rehman holds a drawing she made depicting a drone strike that
killed her grandmother in the remote tribal region of North Waziristan. Evan
Vucci, AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


