                             422 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            April 23, 2014 Wednesday
                               WED FINAL Edition

FAA investigating case of 4/20 drone

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 281 words


The Federal Aviation Administration is investigating reports of a drone aircraft
that was seen flying over the 4/20 marijuana rally Sunday in Denver.

FAA spokesman Allen Kenitzer said Tuesday people need permission to fly aircraft
over crowded areas.

According to the story first reported by 7News, smaller drones sometimes are
considered model aircraft, which don't require authorization but do have to
follow FAA guidelines. Those guidelines say hobby aircraft fliers must keep
their aircraft below 400 feet above ground level and away from airports and air
traffic.

Denver police say they found two unidentified men flying a drone over the Civic
Center rally.

The men were asked to leave the top of the McNichols Civic Center Building
because they didn't have the proper permission.

MINTURN

Rockslide hits vehicle, shuts U.S. 24 for hours

A rockslide that brought down more than 150 tons of rock onto a roadway early
Tuesday closed U.S. 24 near Minturn for much of the day.

The rockslide occurred about halfway between Minturn and Redcliff and caused
significant damage, including striking a car.

The highway reopened about 7 p.m.

TRINIDAD

Three people arrested in killing of llama

Three people have been arrested in the death of a llama first spotted roaming
the Trinidad State Junior College campus last week, 7News reported Tuesday.

Cody Kissman, 18, and a 17 year old male were arrested Monday. A second 17 year
old turned himself in to the Trinidad Police Department on Tuesday.

Kissman and one 17 year old male are facing a charge of aggravated cruelty to
animals, a felony. The other 17 year old is facing a charge of conspiracy to
commit aggravated cruelty to animals, which is also a felony.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


