                             426 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            October 13, 2014 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

Aurora lessons driving changes

BYLINE: Noelle Phillips

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 978 words


Organization and communication may not be the sexy sides of police work that get
featured in television shows and movies.

But they could be the most important when police officers and firefighters
respond to mass shootings and other disasters.

Throughout a report released Wednesday on Aurora's response to the 2012 movie
theater shooting, a communication breakdown between the city's police and fire
departments is repeatedly mentioned. Police officers and firefighters did not
know how to communicate with each other in the chaos of hundreds of blood soaked
and frightened people running from the Century Aurora 16 theater.

The 168 page report has dozens of recommendations for police and fire
departments, telling them how they should respond and what equipment they need
to deal with a mass shooting. For some departments, the recommendations already
are in place. For others, implementing them would require time and money.

The report raises one question: If two departments in the same city with the
same bosses could not communicate during the largest mass shooting in U.S.
history, then what barriers face the Denver metro area's police and fire
departments who work across multiple jurisdictions?

Take the South Metro Fire Rescue Authority, which covers a territory that
includes five police jurisdictions and two school districts.

Steve Standridge, South Metro's emergency manager, said the Aurora movie theater
shooting followed by the 2013 shooting at Arapahoe High School created a sense
of urgency for developing plans for mass casualty incidents.

"It's more about the planning process and the relationships you develop and
understanding how each other works," Standridge said.

Since then, South Metro has worked with other agencies to create detailed plans
on how they would respond to a crisis at specific businesses, schools and other
public places.

A lot of thought was given to the first and second waves of responders arriving
at the scene and where they would stage. At the Aurora movie theater, ambulances
could not reach shooting victims because police cars blocked access.

"That was part of the challenge we have, was the different priorities,"
Standridge said. "The police are going to go in and neutralize the shooter."

The plans, which could be called up on computers installed in emergency
vehicles, include details on where command posts could be established, staging
areas for backup officers when they arrive, rallying points for specialized
units such as SWAT and bomb squads, and zones for ambulances to pick up
casualties, Standridge said.

"It's coordinated," he said. "Not haphazard."

Since the Aurora response report was released, police, sheriff and fire
departments in Colorado and across the United States have been digesting the
more than 80 recommendations found inside its 168 pages.

"I've seen it on a couple of chief's desks," said Mark Techmeyer, a spokesman
for the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office. "Absolutely, we look at what other
agencies went through. A lot of us assisted Aurora, and we learned a lot as we
went through it."

Representatives from several agencies told The Denver Post they will read the
report and look for practices that would fit with their agencies. Aurora already
has begun making changes.

One recommendation would allow dispatchers to make suggestions to commanders at
the scene.

South Metro's dispatchers already are allowed to do that, and they attend
training exercises with fire and police chiefs, said Paul Smith, the executive
director of communications.

"We highly encourage our dispatchers to think," Smith said. Those who only are
allowed to follow by the book policies "would never be able to respond to an
Aurora like event. They're set up to not be as successful."

In some cases, the recommendations may be too expensive or not suitable for
smaller departments.

"We're a small, suburban police department," said Kelli Narde, a Littleton
spokeswoman. "Comparing Littleton police to Aurora police is hard. We have
different budgets and different issues."

Larger departments already use or are well on their way to meeting some of the
report's recommendations. For example, the response report suggested that Aurora
police expand its officers' emergency medical training.

The Denver Police Department recently received a grant to supply every officer
with a gunshot trauma kit, said Matt Murray, the department's chief of staff.
Denver Health Medical Center will train the officers to use the kits.

The report also recommended buying body armor that can protect officers from
shooters using high powered rifles.

In Denver, each of the police department's six districts has enough gear to
outfit a four person team that would enter a building to take on a shooter,
Murray said.

The Aurora report included at least one recommendation that several departments
said they will not adopt anytime soon drones. A drone could have helped provide
overhead images at the movie theater, especially if the event had lasted longer,
the report said.

"We don't have any drones," Narde said. "That's for sure."

Narde said the Littleton Police Department does not have plans to buy drones.
Neither do Denver police or the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office, according to
their spokesmen.

But the biggest takeaway for area first responders will be the importance of
planning and training together. At the movie theater, Aurora police and fire
were first on the scene. But officers from Adams County, Arapahoe County,
Denver, the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives soon
joined them.

That's why multiagency training such as Wednesday's Rocky Vista mass casualty
exercise in Parker is so important, Standridge said.

The purpose? Five agencies want to practice scene safety, victim evacuation and
interagency communication.

Noelle Phillips: 303 954 1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


