                             423 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             April 27, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

U.S. can't have it both ways on drone killings

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 330 words


The decision by a federal appeals court requiring the Obama administration to
release its legal rationale for killing American citizens abroad with drones is
right in both law and principle.

The administration cannot both claim to have national security reasons for
keeping secret the memorandum and the discretion to selectively reveal its
contents.

Furthermore, the people of this country have the right to understand how the
administration constitutionally justifies the killing of one of its citizens,
Anwar al Awlaki, in a 2011 drone strike in Yemen.

The ruling comes out of a New York Times Freedom of Information Act lawsuit in
which the newspaper and two of its reporters sought the legal justification for
the targeted killing.

The document at the heart of the case was written by the Justice Department's
Office of Legal Counsel. Though the document has not been released, The Times
published a story about it in 2011 based on accounts from people who had read
it.

The memorandum said the killing of the radical Muslim cleric would be legal only
if it weren't feasible to take al Awlaki alive, according to the Times story.

The killing was further justified because al Awlaki seemingly was participating
in the war between the U.S. and al Qaeda and was a threat to Americans.

Protections against the killing of a citizen without judicial due process are
found in the Bill of Rights as well as federal law and an executive order that
prohibits assassinations.

A three judge panel for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit was right
to order the administration to reveal the exact rationale it employed in killing
al Awlaki.

It is unclear at this point when the memorandum will be released since the
government could appeal the ruling to the full appeals court or ultimately the
U.S. Supreme Court.

But it should. U.S. citizens have a right to understand and perhaps challenge
the rationale their government employs in deciding when it's appropriate to take
one of their lives.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The U.S. killed Anwar al-Awlaki in a 2011 drone strike in Yemen. Site
Intelligence Group

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


