                             421 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                          November 13, 2013 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

State: Drones shouldn't aid wildlife hunts

BYLINE: Ryan Budnick

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 355 words


LAMAR Colorado is looking to prevent the unmanned aircraft from being used for
hunting.

The Colorado Parks and Wildlife Commission is set to begin discussion on making
it illegal to use drones to help hunters spot potential game. The topic is one
of many the commission will take up during two days of meetings in Lamar
starting Thursday.

"There is a ton of technology available to people that would make it very, very
easy for people to hunt," Colorado Parks and Wildlife spokesman Randy Hampton
said. "We try to hold the line to make sure that hunting is done in an ethical
manner."

The use of aircraft to aid in hunting is explicitly illegal under a federal law
called the Airborne Hunting Act. That law prohibits people from hunting for at
least 48 hours after you fly over an area.

However, the law was created years before the private use of unmanned drone
aircraft.

"It was not something that most people were engaged in, and it wasn't needed in
a regulatory model," Hampton said. "Because it has become more prevalent, we
want to make sure people understand it is still outside the bounds of what is
allowed."

The commission, which is expected to pass the rule, will be presented with the
topic Thursday morning.

It would need to be passed through two readings.

If adopted, it would take effect for the 2014 big game season, which begins in
the end of August.

Also on the agenda for the commission's meetings is to give final approval to
increase the price for tags to hunt cow elk by out of state hunters.

Colorado lowered the price of the hunting tags years ago when the Division of
Wildlife was looking at decreasing the state's elk population.

The state had an estimated 305,000 elk in 2001. That number has dropped to
260,000 a figure the commission says is a reasonable number.

A cow elk tag is $350, compared with $585 for a bull.

It has not been determined how much the cost would increase, but it could be a
similar price as that for a bull tag, Hampton said.

The price for elk tags for Colorado residents will remain the same. The price of
tags for residents is controlled by the state legislature, not the wildlife
commission.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colorado seeks to reinforce a federal law that bans small drone
aircraft for hunting wildlife. Mesa County Sheriff's Department

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


