                             437 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday

Reading The Times With Ben Cole

BYLINE: SUSAN LEHMAN

LENGTH: 1152 words



HIGHLIGHT: Mr. Cole, the mobile product lead for Google.org, shares his thoughts
on articles in The Times about tech news, world affairs and Lena Dunham.


 Ben Cole is the mobile product lead at Google.org. He was a  "technology
pioneer" in Ghana and worked on Google Docs in Mountain View, Calif.   Now he
heads One Today, a  mobile app that connects Google users with causes to create
a more socially aware and engaged world.  He read today's Times on his mobile
phone.

Q.

There's a lot of tech news in the paper today. Let's start there. A drone
strikes a satellite tower in Raqqa, the Syrian state that is the de facto
capital of the Islamic State.  Drones seem like a natural subject of interest at
Google.

A.

Drones are definitely of interest here. We recently unveiled Project Wing, a
prototype delivery system using drones. The technology could be game-changing in
many arenas. Deliveries are an obvious first avenue, not just in the Western
world, but also in many parts of the globe where there aren't reliable roads. In
much of the world, most people don't have addresses, let alone comprehensive
supply chains.

Q.

Apple's new software lets you use your fingerprint instead of a password?
That's cool. What do you think?

A.

It's definitely cool, though I'd be careful to evaluate the feature before using
it myself. Also it's felt to me recently that Apple has been chasing after
features that are more gimmicky than game-changing. When Apple launched the
iPod, the iPhone, the iPad, those were game-changing. Apple's recent
announcements like the fingerprint password and the Apple watch's ability to
read your heart rate feel more like gimmicks.

Q.

Tech aside, what story in today's paper struck you most?

A.

I spent a lot of time today reading about the strikes against the Islamic State.
It's been a dramatic few weeks for the Obama administration, going from "no
strategy" to a concerted global effort, complete with Obama's forceful speech at
the United Nations today, laying out his blueprint for global action. It's
heartening to see the U.S. collaborating with regional players, a philosophical
departure from the Bush years, to make clear that this is not a Western war on
the Sunni world.

Q.

U.S. strikes groups said to be plotting against U.S. targets. Did you find the
implied threat convincing or scary?

A.

I have no doubt that there continue to be hostile groups plotting attacks on
Western targets. Our involvement in the Middle East has been too extensive for
us not to have any enemies there. I also found it interesting to hear more about
the connection between recent T.S.A. [Transportation Security Administration]
rules for electronic equipment and specific terrorist plans. It's always nice to
know the T.S.A. isn't just looking for another reason to hassle us.

Q.

On Page 1, we find  Obama telling the Chinese to curb global warming activities.
I'm sure there are many who question the president's readiness or promptness in
curbing Americans' warming activities, to say nothing of our oil consumption.
Thoughts?

A.

I've been really encouraged by the recent spout of news on climate change.
(There's a statement I never thought I'd make!) Pressure is coming from all
angles on this one. For the first time I can remember, the business world is
taking a concerted stance, with big names like Kellogg, L'Oréal and Nestlé
pledging to help address environmental issues.

Obama is promising to do what he can in the U.S. and pressuring the
international community to do more. There's even been bipartisan support from
Treasury secretaries dating back to the Nixon years that something has to be
done. But even more than that, I was encouraged to read today about how
democratized this issue has become.

In the news about last weekend's march, it was clear climate change is no longer
just for environmentalists. It's for people who care about our children's
future, for people who believe in social justice, for economists and for
scientists alike.

Q.

People care more about security than marriage and the marriage rate falls. Do
these findings, reported in Wednesday's Times, strike you as good news or bad?

A.

By all accounts, my generation is a weird one. From my perspective, I'm all for
people chasing their dreams before settling down. On the other hand, there are
also some troubling dynamics at play. Youth unemployment is unacceptably high,
and many studies have suggested that my generation will be the first in a long
American tradition that will not be left on better footing than their parents.
As some friends have pointed out, weddings are expensive, and married life can
seem like a luxury for people struggling to make ends meet.

Q.

Californians can't afford more than a one-bedroom home. Is this story consistent
with your experience when you worked for Google in Mountain View?

A.

Absolutely. In both New York and Silicon Valley, it's incredible to see how
rapid urbanization and the glacial pace of policy-making have created cities
that are unaffordable for people across the economic spectrum. What I'd like to
see is more focused policy to create the market conditions for affordable
housing, something that the San Francisco government in particular seems very
slow to do.

Q.

Any section you like best or reach for first?

A.

I generally go through the day's top news and then gravitate towards the opinion
section. Roger Cohen and Frank Bruni are immediate go-to's for me, though I'd be
hard pressed to name a columnist whose work I don't really enjoy at least some
of the time. I thought Charles Blow's recent piece about his struggle with
sexual identity was the height of courage, and I found Tom Friedman's analysis
on the situation with the Islamic State today particularly thoughtful.

Q.

Lean Dunham's book got an interesting review.Do you care about Lena Dunham or
her new book?

A.

All right, I admit it: I live in Williamsburg, I wear thick-rimmed glasses, and
I recently grew a beard. All of that's to say, it's impossible for me to escape
Lena Dunham's work, not that I'd want to. I've been a fan of "Girls" since its
early days, and as soon as I got over the fact that it was trying to make me
uncomfortable, I really enjoyed it. (Lena Dunham is one of those people I would
love to bump into and chat with on the street one day.) I've been happy to read
that Lena Dunham the writer seems to be much more self-aware and thoughtful than
her character, Hannah Horvath, on "Girls." I'm not sure if I'll read the book
itself - it seems predominantly geared towards young women - but I'm glad it's
out there.

Q.

Do you ever tweet links to Times pieces? Do you get links from others? Any
today?

A.

Yeah, I probably post a piece from The Times to Facebook every few days.
Sometimes I even get kudos from friends for posting particularly
thought-provoking articles. Today I posted Thomas Edsall's column about the
continuing trend of income and wealth disparity in the U.S. because it raises
important existential issues for our society and backs up many of the points
with data.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


