                             436 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             June 28, 2014 Saturday

Goodbye, for Now, San Francisco

BYLINE: NICK BILTON and MIKE ISAAC

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 1074 words



HIGHLIGHT: Nick Bilton and Mike Isaac both covered technology in San Francisco
and moved away from the city this month. The two reflect on their time living in
a land of driverless cars, drones and a phenomenon known as &#8220;The Running
of the Nerds.&#8221;


Living in San Francisco is a predictable affair. Each day you awake to layers of
fog, the temperature is always the same, and as you travel the city, you bump
into one tech-related thing after another.

Twenty-somethings working on MacBook laptops jockeying for power outlets in a
crowded cafe. Entrepreneurs on street corners pitching venture capitalists about
their new photo-filter apps. And people talking about tech everywhere: at
breakfast, lunch and dinner, and even in bathrooms.

Nick Bilton and Mike Isaac, who both left the Bay Area this month - Mr. Bilton
moving to Los Angeles and Mr. Isaac to New York - reflect on their time living
in a land of driverless cars, drones and billionaire entrepreneurs:

Nick Bilton: So how long did you live in the Bay Area?

Mike Isaac: For a while! About 10 years, give or take.

Nick: Wow. That's a long time. I lasted three years to the day before I escaped
via a driverless car (I'm kidding).

Mike: Driverless car; nice. I bounced via Segway. So, have you started getting
nostalgic yet?

Nick: Not really. I always felt that San Francisco was a bit too techie, even
for me.

So, over the past 10 years, what was the strangest tech-related thing you
experienced?

Mike: Hmm. I think when I first started to cover tech, it was mind-blowing to
experience an Apple or a Google developer conference.

You have these throngs of unshowered, stereotypically nerdy people lined up
outside Moscone Center in the heart of San Francisco. Then all of a sudden, the
clock strikes 10 a.m., and they stampede into the auditorium, all vying for the
best seat to see guys like Sundar Pichai and Larry Page talk about A.P.I.s or
something like that.

It's nuts.

Nick: Oh, yes. "The Running of the Nerds," as we call it. I agree, to me that is
still incredibly bizarre. I think the strangest thing I witnessed was the way
technology pervades every part of the city. I recently went to meet a friend who
is a venture capitalist for a coffee at Sightglass, the local coffee shop, and
he came barreling out of the cafe before I even had a chance to walk inside.

"What's up?" I asked him, as he told me, sternly, we weren't having coffee
there.

"I was just standing in line behind two entrepreneurs that couldn't be more than
19 years old and they were giving each other advice on how to fire people and
run a company," he said in a defeated tone.

Mike: Wow. At 19, I could barely balance a checkbook. Now I don't even know if
checkbooks exist anymore.

I think what strikes me is just how many things I find completely normalized
that others just visiting are struck by.

Remember driving down the 101 freeway and looking at all the billboards? It
seemed like every other advertisement was a recruiting pitch to young engineers.
I got used to it, but my friends from out of town were baffled.

Nick: It's interesting because I was in San Francisco last week and I walked
past a driverless car. Then, a few minutes later, at the New York Times bureau,
a drone hovered outside, taking pictures. In most cities in America, this would
make it onto the 7 o'clock news, but in San Francisco, it's just normal.

Mike: It's like "Blade Runner" lite.

So let's be fair for a second. What will you actually miss about the place? I'm
already missing the weather. New York is disgustingly hot.

Nick: You know, for all the bizarreness and overly tech-drenched culture, it
really is amazing to see the future being invented right before your eyes. I
remember seeing Uber for the first time, when it was just a few black sedans.
Now it's changing the entire global taxi industry. I remember my jaw dropping
open in the offices of Planet Labs, a San Francisco aerospace start-up, which is
launching 100 small satellites into orbit this year, where they will photograph
the Earth every single day. And I remember being in the room when Steve Jobs
announced the iPad.

Mike: That's cool. And even though you didn't know how big it was going to be at
the time, you can say, "I was there when tablets really started to go
mainstream."

Plus, where else can I walk into a cafe or something and see the creator behind
the next big app?

I ran into Instagram co-founders Kevin Systrom and Mikey Krieger at the movie
theater on the opening day of "The Dark Knight Rises." It was a trip.

Nick: All that being said, and for all the good tech has done for San Francisco,
it was difficult to watch the way the wealth has hurt the city, too. For
example, I was told by a Google executive that the woman who protested during
Google I/O this week had actually been evicted from her home. After the
protester stormed the event, causing an excitable stir, she sat outside crying,
explaining that she couldn't afford to find a new home in the city.

Mike: That's awful. And I agree, all the change hasn't come without cost or
pushback.

Remember the Google Glass bar fight thing that blew up a few months ago? It's
this weird culture clash; on the one hand, we have people who want to build
things that defy convention. And on the other, we've got regular San Francisco
natives, fearful of people with face computers and other sorts of experimental
products. It's fertile ground for conflict.

Nick: Absolutely right. So of all the companies and all the people or companies
you've covered in the valley, which one were you most impressed by? For me, I
think it's been Mark Zuckerberg. I've watched him grow up over the past several
years and become an adept chief executive who makes decisions and doesn't care
about what other people think. Too many people here are worried about the press
backlash. He just goes with his gut.

Mike: For me, it has to be Twitter.

I remember when it was a group of a few dozen people working on keeping the
wheels on the whole thing from falling off. And when we both started writing
about Twitter, it seemed like every other day greeted me with another "fail
whale" of downtime.

Now, despite all of its faults - and as you know, there are many - it's a
publicly traded company with a quarter of a billion people using it. And
honestly, I can't remember the last time it went down. (Maybe the Ellen selfie?)

Nick: So, any parting words for San Francisco?

Mike: I will never forget your beautiful fog. And layers. Always dress in
layers.

Any parting words for you?

Nick: Yeah, a few weeks ago I was flying a drone over the bay and it
accidentally dropped into the water. If anyone finds it, please send it to me in
Los Angeles. Kthxbye!

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


