                             430 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            December 16, 2013 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

Diplomat fights off kidnappers in Yemen

BYLINE: Ahmed al-Haj

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: SANAA, YEMEN


SANAA, Yemen - Assailants stabbed a Japanese diplomat stationed in Yemen's
capital Sunday when he fought back during a kidnapping attempt, officials said,
the latest unrest in a country beset by al-Qaeda militants.

The would-be kidnappers attacked the diplomat not far from the Japanese Embassy
in Sanaa, later fleeing with the man's car.

Masaru Sato, a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman, confirmed that an embassy
official had been attacked by an unspecified number of armed men.

"We are still in the process of confirming and gathering information about the
attack," Sato said. He declined to give further details, though he noted that
Japan's Foreign Ministry has issued a warning to Japanese tourists and residents
in the area, citing the increasing danger of attack.

Yemeni media identified the diplomat as Katsusuke Sotomini, as did an official
at the embassy in Sanaa, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of
regulations. An Associated Press journalist found bloodstains about 220 yards
away from the embassy, at the spot where the attack apparently took place.

Atiq al-Maori, a doctor at the Saudi German Hospital in Sanaa, said the diplomat
suffered "multiple injuries" to his forearm and shoulder in the attack.

Abductions are frequent in Yemen, an impoverished nation where armed tribesmen
and al-Qaeda-linked militants take hostages to swap for prisoners or cash. Yemen
has been engaged in a rocky political transition since longtime autocrat Ali
Abdullah Saleh stepped down in 2012 following mass protests.

The political turmoil has created a security vacuum, and al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula has taken advantage, seizing large swaths of territory across the
restive south. The United States regularly carries out drone strikes in the
country, targeting alleged militants belonging to the group.

On Sunday, Yemen's parliament blamed the United States for an airstrike in the
central city of Radda on Thursday that killed at least 15 people, and it asked
the government to end the use of Yemeni airspace by U.S. drones to pursue
al-Qaeda operatives.

The Yemeni government acknowledged the death of civilians in the attack, saying
an al-Qaeda van had hidden in a convoy of civilian cars. It did not say whether
government aircraft or U.S. drones were behind the attack.

Although the United States acknowledges its drone program in Yemen, it does not
usually talk about individual strikes.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


