                             438 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 6:29 PM EST

Next Day's News: Insurgency in Iraq, Drones investigation, USA vs. Portugal and
more;
A look at some of tomorrow's top talkers from The Washington Post.

BYLINE: WashPostPR

LENGTH: 302 words


A look at some of tomorrow's top talkers from The Washington Post...

INSURGENCY IN IRAQ: Liz Sly and Loveday Morris report that Islamic insurgents
continue their advance, having seized a former chemical weapons facility and
battling for control of Iraq's largest oil refinery. With the U.S. continuing to
hold back more substantive support for Iraqi forces, U.S. officials tell Karen
DeYoung they are actively seeking alternatives to Maliki. In that same vein, the
spiritual leader of Iraq's Shiite Muslim majority called for the formation of a
new "effective" government with broad support.

DRONES INVESTIGATION: A Washington Post investigation finds that military drones
have slammed into homes, highways, and, in one case, an Air Force plane in
midair. Casualties often have been averted only by a few feet or pure luck. This
interactive illustrates that nearly one-quarter of the crashes happened in the
U.S.  Watch as a drone films its own demise.

WORLD CUP PREVIEW: Rick Maese captures how the U.S./Portugal match in the Amazon
is both a unique proposition and a logistical headache. Steven Goff examined the
physical issues of Portugal's players, nonetheless, the Americans say they will
not play conservatively. Sarah Kauffman, The Post's dance critic, considers the
moves of Colombian left back Pablo Armero, whose furious hip-shake has brought a
little Beyonce into the World Cup.

TIGER WOODS: Next week, Tiger Woods hosts the Quicken Loans National at
Congressional Country Club. Barry Svrluga reports that there remains a chance
the 14-time major winner will play for the first time in more than three months.

 The next major on the calendar for Woods, who has missed the Masters and last
week's U.S. Open as he recovers, is the British Open in five weeks.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


