                             435 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              May 16, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: 'Let's Take This Offline'

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 575 words



HIGHLIGHT: Meet the Drone Dudes. Even your happy employees are job hunting. A
McDonald&#8217;s worker in Denmark makes $21 an hour.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The head of the Federal Reserve says small businesses deserve "considerable
credit" for the economic recovery.

Both the New York and Philadelphia regions report growth.

Jobless claims hit a seven-year low, and inflation ticks up.

Industrial production fell 0.6 percent in April, and housing starts were up 13.2
percent.

Entrepreneurship

Meet the Drone Dudes: Technically, commercial use of drones in the United States
is illegal - but that's not stopping this company.

The owner of an environmental company is named Maryland's Small Business Person
of the Year (and five other entrepreneurs are also recognized).

A group of experts discuss whether entrepreneurship is declining outside of
Silicon Valley.

This is how Dell's entrepreneur-in-residence wants to empower a billion women.

Management

This is how an information technology project almost brought a bank to its
knees.

Chipotle shareholders reject the sky-high pay of their two chief executives.

These phrases are the 19 worst examples of management jargon, including: "Let's
take this offline."

Marketing

Amazon puts a mysterious giant orange locker in San Francisco.

This is the psychological role color plays in marketing and branding.

Intuit gives three small businesses their own national ads.

Here is how small businesses get caught up in accusations of false advertising.

Finance

Pinterest is valued at $5 billion and Uber may be worth $10 billion.

Washington

The Obama administration is introducing an initiative to help small- and
medium-sized businesses sell overseas.

The chief executive of the National Federation of Independent Business suggests
five ways Washington can help small businesses.

Online

The Federal Communications Commission moves forward on its net neutrality plan.

Here's how to get Google to remove embarrassing search links about you.

Here are two web metrics you should be watching.

A study shows small businesses are increasingly adopting do-it-yourself websites
and Facebook for marketing.

Social Media

A service that helps consumers shop through Facebook and Instagram comments
raises $4 million.

This is how to manage your social media in 34 minutes (or less) a day.

Tara the Hero Cat goes viral.

Employees

Hiring perks in Silicon Valley are getting increasingly lavish.

A luxury hotel fires the employee who was paid $250,000, allegedly, for leaking
a video of Solange Knowles attacking Jay Z.

Even your happy employees are job hunting.

Fast food workers across the world protest their pay, but a McDonald's worker in
Denmark is making $21 an hour.

Around the Country

Philadelphia is reversing its "brain drain."

Pot start-ups now have their own co-working space in Denver.

These leaders in Orlando are spending $300,000 to grow their city's tech
industry.

Ideas

A toothpaste builds enamel in just three days.

Finding that parking space may soon get easier, thanks to Xerox.

Technology

Google confirms its Gmail Android app has passed 1 billion installations.

Microsoft's Office For iPad gains traction.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Why Entrepreneurship Is Like Breeding a Pig
     ·    When the Boss Calls After Hours
     ·    Today in Small Business: Birth of a Food Fad
     ·    Today in Small Business: 288,000 Jobs
     ·    Today in Small Business: $100 Billion in Lending


LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


