                             446 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 11, 2014 Thursday 7:51 PM EST

U.S. authorized to target individual Islamic State leaders, officials say;
Shift in rules of engagement is key component of President Obama's plan to go on
"offense" in Iraq, Syria.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 609 words


President Obama has authorized the Pentagon for the first time to target and
kill individual leaders of Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, a key component of
his plan to go on the offense against the Sunni extremist group, according to
U.S. military officials.

At the top of the list is Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the movement's self-declared
leader, according to two U.S. military officials who spoke on condition of
anonymity to discuss operations.

Baghdadi has rarely appeared in public even as his group has raised its global
profile by rapidly seizing territory across Syria and Iraq. The Islamic State
released a video two months ago that showed him preaching in a mosque in the
northern Iraqi city of Mosul; it was the first time he has appeared in a
propaganda production.

Prior to this week, Obama had imposed restrictions that prevented the U.S.
military from targeting Islamic State leaders even if it knew their whereabouts.
U.S. forces could only launch airstrikes against the group to protect U.S.
personnel or property in Iraq, to protect refugees or to secure key
installations, such as two large dams on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers that
Islamic State has tried to capture.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman, declined to comment Thursday about
Obama's directive but acknowledged that there would be a shift in military
operations.

"One of the ways you get at, and you destroy the capabilities of an enemy like
[Islamic State] is to be pretty aggressive against them," he said. "And that
does include disrupting their ability to command and control and to lead their
own forces."

On Wednesday, Obama said he had ordered 475 more U.S. troops to Iraq, bringing
the total there to about 1,600. The new troops will arrive in Iraq "over the
next week or so," Kirby said.

Among them is a detachment of about 125 personnel who will fly armed U.S.
surveillance aircraft from inside Iraq for the first time since Obama authorized
the start of the air campaign against Islamic State last month. The aircraft
will be based in northern Iraq in the city of Irbil. U.S. officials are still
determining which types of planes will be sent, but the detachment will not
include drones, Kirby said.

The U.S. military has carried out more than 150 airstrikes in Iraq since last
month. About two-thirds have been launched by drones and fighter airplanes based
at U.S. installations in the Persian Gulf. The remainder have been conducted by
Navy warplanes operating from an aircraft carrier strike group in the Gulf.

The military has been conducting enhanced surveillance over Iraq since June, but
officials acknowledged that they still have only a hazy idea of the Islamic
State's overall military strength and how many fighters it has in its ranks.

Hunting down the group's leaders is expected to be an especially difficult task
that would involve dedicated drone missions for weeks or months, as well as
solid leads from sources on the ground.

"Doing that type of really precise targeting that you've seen us do in
Afghanistan and Iraq previously takes a substantial amount of . . . resources,"
said James O. Poss, a retired Air Force major general who oversaw drone
operations and intelligence collection. "That takes time to build up that
intelligence picture. It takes more than just sending an aircraft there to look
around."

The U.S. government publicly identified Baghdadi as the leader of al-Qaeda in
Iraq in 2011 and offered a $10 million reward for information that would bring
him "to justice." The group has since changed its name to the Islamic State and
distanced itself from al-Qaeda, although its root ideology is similar.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


