                             447 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       October 6, 2014 Monday 7:17 PM EST

Video: The Navy wants drone boats to overwhelm the enemy

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 290 words


The bombing of the USS Cole in October 2000 by al-Qaeda fighters killed 17
American sailors and underscored the difficulty of protecting U.S. Navy vessels
from terrorist attacks. The service is now working on new technology that may
help, however: drone boats that can swarm an incoming craft and destroy it if it
doesn't turn away.

The Office of Naval Research released information about the technology over the
weekend, saying the Navy is "unleashing a new era in ship protection." The
swarms are designed to give extra protection to Marines and sailors who are on
board larger ships. The drone boats are enabled by advanced sensors and software
that was initially developed by NASA for use on the Mars rover, Navy officials
said.

"When we look at autonomous swarm, we're not talking about a single vessel.
We're talking about multiple, multiple vessels that can be in a defensive
posture and then - when called upon - can become offensive, surround an
adversary and let them know that you are coming no closer to our ship," Rear
Adm. Matthew Klunder said in a new video outlining the technology. "But of
course, if an adversary then decides to come closer we can give them another
warning, or potentially we can say, 'You've come to close. We're now going to
destroy your vessel.' "

The computers on board can be added to nearly any boat, allowing the system to
operate autonomously, Navy officials said. Here's a .gif showing a computer
model of a swarm:

The Navy demonstrated the swarm boats in a project on the James River, near Fort
Eustis in Virginia, in August. Drone boats escorted a vessel, with some of them
breaking off to stop another ship.

Navy officials hope to be able to begin operational testing for the program
within a year.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


