                             449 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

Drone kills Pakistani Taliban chief Hakimullah Mehsud

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 244 words


ISLAMABAD - A U.S. drone strike was said to have killed the chief of the
Pakistani Taliban on Friday, potentially crippling the group while also
undermining an effort by Pakistan's government to engage militants in peace
talks.

If verified, the death of Hakimullah Mehsud would be a victory for U.S.
officials who have spent years hunting down a leader implicated in a 2009 attack
that killed seven Americans at a CIA outpost in eastern Afghanistan.

But the drone strike also threatened to add to strains between the United States
and Pakistan, whose new prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, had announced earlier in
the day that his government would begin talks aimed at reaching a negotiated
settlement with the group.

With that plan called off after the strike, Pakistan's Interior Minister,
Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, issued a statement accusing the United States of
attempting to "sabotage" Sharif's government.

Intelligence officials in northwestern Pakistan said Mehsud had been killed
after he met with other senior Taliban leaders to discuss the peace initiative,
one aimed at ending years of violence that have claimed more than 45,000 lives.
A local Taliban commander confirmed Mehsud's death. The U.S. government,
including the CIA, which oversees the  drone program, declined to comment.

The attack came  just eight days after a White House meeting in which Sharif and
President Obama pledged closer cooperation between the two countries.

- Tim Craig

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


