                             444 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 25, 2014 Friday 2:11 PM EST

Robotic helicopter completes Afghanistan mission, back in U.S.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 426 words


The Marines turned this spring to an awkward-looking helicopter with a needle
nose to help perform a complicated mission: closing down bases in violent
sections of Helmand province, Afghanistan, while Taliban insurgents launched
repeated attacks on Afghan troops charged with maintaining security.

It was one of the "K-Max" helicopter drone's last major missions, as it turns
out. Lockheed Martin and Kaman Aerospace Corporation announced Thursday that the
revolutionary aircraft has returned to the United States following a three-year
deployment.

The K-Max first deployed to Afghanistan in 2011, one year after the Navy
Department awarded a $45.8 million contract to the two companies to provide a
pair of unmanned helicopters and three ground control stations. The Navy
Department wanted the helos to try unmanned cargo resupply missions in a combat
zone. Doing so, the logic went, would allow the Marines to cut back on the size
and number of vehicle convoys needed over Afghanistan's treacherous,
explosive-riddled roads.

The Marines eventually deployed a third K-Max. The experimental aircraft had its
hiccups - one of the helicopters was destroyed in a crash in June 2013 - but
generally the Marines raved about its utility and dependability.

The K-Max can lift about 6,000 pounds at sea level. Loads in Afghanistan's heat
and higher elevations probably cut that back some, but the aircraft was still in
heavy demand. It performed thousands of missions between late 2011 and now,
carrying over 4.5 million pounds of supplies, Lockheed officials said Thursday.

The K-Max already is getting a look for other missions. The U.S. Army plans to
test it in coming months at Fort Benning, Ga., in part to see how well it
operates with a drone vehicle built by Lockheed and called the Squad Mission
Support System, Aviation Today reported last week from the Farnborough Air Show
in London. The idea is to show that unmanned equipment is capable of moving
other unmanned equipment, potentially allowing U.S. troops to deliver the drone
vehicle to U.S. troops in a war zone.

The K-Max also has been used in the United States to help squelch wildfires.
Check out this 2012 video recorded in Durango, Colo.:

In a conference call with reporters Thursday, Marine Maj. Kyle O'Connor, who led
the first K-Max detachment in Afghanistan, said the Marines were less concerned
with the drone helos being hacked, than with them getting hit by small-arms
fire. To avoid that, they mostly flew it at night "using altitude as our
friend," O'Connor said, according to Seapower magazine.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


