                              45 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                       July 15, 2014 Tuesday 11:12 AM EST

Americans are fine with drone strikes. Everyone else in the world? Not so much.

BYLINE: Jaime Fuller

LENGTH: 694 words


Despite plenty of debate in Congress, a majority of the American people (52
percent) remain in favor of using drones against extremists on foreign soil.

On that count, though, the United States is in the distinct minority on the
Planet Earth.

While a slight majority in the United States approve of drone strikes, only two
other countries- Kenya and Israel - approve of them. (Kenya has had success in
using drones to reduce poaching by 96 percent - perhaps explaining their pro-
drone posture.)

Meanwhile, Israel is the world's biggest exporter of drones, and has used drones

 against Palestinian militants - which would explain why Palestinians only give
U.S. drone strikes a 7 percent approval rating.

Just about everywhere else in the world, opposition to drone strikes is
sweeping. And the global distaste has only grown more resounding in the past
year.

Here's last year. While 11 countries back then had at least 40 percent approval
of U.S drone strikes, today there are only four such countries.

Support for drones in the United States has also dropped by nine percentage
points in the past year, but Americans still stand as some of the strikes'
strongest supporters -- and have for awhile. In 2011, a Pew poll found that 68
percent of the public approved of drone strikes.

Similarly, a Gallup poll in March 2013 found that 65 percent of Americans
thought the United States should use drones against suspected terrorists in
other countries. And a February 2012 Washington Post/ABC News poll found that 83
percent of Americans approved of using of un-manned, "drone" aircraft against
terrorism suspects overseas.

Why the humongous gulf in approval between the United States and the rest of the
world? Drone airstrikes look a lot different when you are exporting the strikes
instead of expecting them.

For Americans, drone airstrikes are something that protects citizens at home -
and prevent them from getting killed in warfare abroad. It's the least-bad
solution for how to stay out of international politics as much as possible -
which is what Americans increasingly say they want, according to a Pew survey
from April.

With drone strikes, the United States is still very much involved in world
politics - and in a way that many countries disapprove of. For American
citizens, though, it doesn't feel that way. Soldiers are coming home. War fronts
- ones that many at home considered to be a mistake - are closing.

And drones are protecting Americans at home - Americans' biggest foreign policy
concern - while keeping us out of the stuff that Americans don't care much
about.

We're not kidding. Americans really, really don't care about foreign policy
right now - especially when they don't have to worry about losing American lives
abroad.

In fact, Americans think drones have made America safer than most other
high-profile foreign policy efforts, like the war in Afghanistan or the National
Security Agency's surveillance tactics.

However, disapproval of drone strikes in the United States has grown over the
past few years. The factors that have left Americans uninterested in most
foreign policy is bleeding over into opinions on drones. Libertarians have
railed against drones domestically for privacy concerns - one Colorado town
debated whether they should begin shooting down invasive aircraft - or for fear
they will be used against American citizens.

But that's not enough for drones to become an electoral issue, or to push the
government to change policies on drone strikes. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), one of
the leading figures cautious of drone strikes, has quieted on the issue as the
2016 presidential primaries grow nearer. It's not an issue Americans care about
enough to want to disturb the status quo.

And, weirdly enough, it's not an issue that most of the world cares about enough
to raise a stink over either.

Despite the widespread opposition to drone strikes, most countries trust Obama
to "do the right thing"...

...and most regions like the United States, too.

Americans are fine with drones, and the world is fine with Americans - at least
right now. Which means this is one area of foreign policy the government is
unlikely to change anytime soon.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


