                             451 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 23, 2013 Saturday 8:13 PM EST

World Digest: Nov. 22, 2013

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 732 words


PHILIPPINES          Typhoon death toll rises above 5,000

The death toll from one of the strongest typhoons on record has risen above
5,000 and is likely to climb further, although recovery efforts are beginning to
take hold, Philippine officials said Friday.

Interior Secretary Mar Roxas said 4,919 people were killed on Leyte, Samar and
nearby islands in the Eastern Visayas region. Civil defense chief Eduardo del
Rosario said 290 others died elsewhere in the central and southern Philippines.

The regions were battered two weeks ago by fierce winds and tsunami-like storm
surges from Typhoon Haiyan, know locally as Yolanda. Del Rosario said 1,611
people are missing.

Most of the bodies, many of them unidentified, have been buried in mass graves,
Roxas said. Journalists in Leyte's hard-hit capital, Tacloban, say the stench
from piles of debris and remnants of homes indicates that bodies remain
underneath.

- Associated Press

PAKISTAN          Doctor who aided CIA charged with murder

A Pakistani doctor who helped the CIA find Osama bin Laden has been charged with
murder over a 2006 surgery he performed, his attorney said Friday, raising new
doubts about whether the physician will regain his freedom.

Shakil Afridi is in prison pending retrial on a separate charge, despite demands
by U.S. officials that he be released. The case has caused friction between
Pakistan and the United States, complicating a relationship that Washington
views as vital to fighting the Taliban and al-Qaeda as well as negotiating an
end to the war in neighboring Afghanistan.

The murder charge stems from a complaint over a teenage boy who died after
Afridi performed surgery on him for appendicitis in 2006 in Pakistan's remote
Khyber tribal area.

Afridi was convicted in May 2012 of "conspiring against the state" and sentenced
to 33 years in prison. His conviction was related to allegations that he
provided money and medical treatment to Islamist militants in Khyber, not for
helping the CIA track down bin Laden. The doctor's family and the militants
denied the allegations. Afridi has been granted a retrial on a legal issue.

- Associated Press

LATVIA          Scores reported dead in store roof collapse

Crowds of shoppers were picking up food after work at a supermarket in the
Latvian capital Thursday when an enormous section of the roof caved in.
Firefighters rushed to save them, only to be crushed themselves when a second
part of the roof collapsed.

The death toll at the Maxima supermarket in Riga rose to 47 Friday, including
three firefighters, police said. Thirty-five people were reported injured,
including 10 firefighters.

- Associated Press

Russia rejects court order to release Greenpeace ship and crew:Russia said an
international maritime tribunal that ruled against it in a case brought by the
Netherlands had no jurisdiction over its criminal prosecution of 30 people
arrested for a Greenpeace protest over Arctic oil drilling. The Russian Foreign
Ministry issued the statement after the Hamburg-based International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea said it had accepted a Dutch request to order the provisional
release of the Dutch-registered ship Arctic Sunrise and its crew.

Chinese media report test of stealth drone:China's first unmanned stealth drone
made its first test flight, state media reported, showing photos and video. The
tailless delta-wing drone was identified as the Lijian, or "Sharp Sword," an
aircraft similar to the X-47B drone being tested by the U.S. Navy for aircraft
carrier operations, as well as France's experimental Neuron project. Potential
uses range from conducting electronic surveillance to launching missile strikes.

Two killed amid Islamist protests in Egypt:Clashes erupted Friday as thousands
of supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood held protests in Cairo and other
Egyptian cities to mark the passage of 100 days since the start of a bloody
crackdown against the group after the ouster of Islamist President Mohamed
Morsi. The violence left two dead, including a 10-year-old boy.

Norwegian clinches chess title:The world of chess has a new king: a 22-year-old
who is as comfortable posing for fashion shoots as he is pushing pawns. Magnus
Carlsen of Norway won the world championship by defeating defending champion
Viswanathan Anand, 43, in Chennai, India.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


