                             453 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 2, 2014 Thursday 8:14 PM EST

Tech in 2014: Getting back in gear

BYLINE: Hayley Tsukayama

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1221 words


Tech enthusiasts didn't have much to cheer about in 2013.

Not a lot of jaw-dropping or game-changing technology was introduced. Instead,
it was a year in which old guard companies, such as BlackBerry, Microsoft and
Intel, struggled to remain relevant, set new goals and looked for new
leadership. Newer companies, such as Facebook and Twitter, matured - at least
enough to make some money - but still haven't proved they have a long-term
business plan.

And it was a year that brought questions about consumer privacy and security to
the forefront, with high-profile data breaches and revelations about
surveillance programs at the National Security Agency.

In short, 2013 was a year that raised a lot of questions but provided few
answers. Analysts say 2014 could be when the rough sketches about the future of
technology, and how it affects our lives, get fleshed out.

Here are the areas of tech to watch in 2014:

Wearables

Technology has become a part of our daily lives, but 2013 showed the promise of
what could happen if it becomes part of our bodies.

From our socks to our glasses, tech companies have found ways to add sensors to
everyday items, turning them into mini computers. Fitness trackers and Samsung's
Galaxy Gear smartwatch, which can take photos and answer phone calls, showed
consumers the potential of wearables. cbk Companies are "increasingly putting
consumers at the center of a host of digital technologies, devices and
services," said John Curran, a managing director at  Accenture.cbk

And there's far more expected in the pipeline. The Google Glass headset, which
pushes users' smartphone alerts to a screen hovering just above a user's eye, is
expected to see a wide consumer release in 2014.

Analysts also expect Apple, which has yet to offer even a whisper about a
wearable device, to release a smartwatch of its own sometime this year.

Analysts say the market is already a billion-dollar industry and is on pace to
hit $6 billion to $8 billion by 2018.

But tech developers' ability to collect a range of personal data about users -
your heartbeat, eating habits and location - has some privacy advocates
concerned. cbk The Federal Trade Commission has scheduled a February workshop to
examine how companies and consumers can deal with the influx of data being held
by these companies. cbk

Different forms

Consumers can also expect some of their high-end devices to change form in 2014
with the wider introduction of curved screens for smartphones and televisions.

Tech companies have been studying how to make a curved screen for years and now
appear ready to introduce it more widely to the public, said Raymond Soneira,
president of DisplayMate Technologies, which tests and calibrates screens.

Samsung and LG have announced that their largest TVs will have a bit of a bend
in them, and some firms are considering curved or flexible screens for
smartphones that would fit more naturally against a users face. Screens also can
be curved so that they perform better in direct light, Soneira said.

But manufacturing these new screens is a costly process, Soneira said. Although
consumers will see more of them in 2014, they'll probably stay confined to
high-end or specialty products, he said. "They'll make a major technical
statement in 2014, but not a major consumer statement," he said.

Flying above

Drones and advanced robots will generate a lot of buzz in 2014, but probably
won't be in every home by the end of the year.

Google and Amazon.com invested heavily in the development of unmanned aircraft
and robots this year, raising expectations for 2014. (Amazon chief executive
Jeffrey P. Bezos owns The Washington Post.)

Google's purchase of Boston Dynamics, best known for making robots for the
Defense Department, raised expectations that the tech giant would develop robots
for a mainstream audience. Their robots can carry heavy loads even on bumpy
terrain.

Amazon says it is planning to use drones to deliver some packages within 30
minutes of being ordered online.

But commercially produced drones will face a few more roadblocks before they
take to the skies. The Federal Aviation Administration announced Monday that it
selected sites in a handful of states, including Virginia, to test unmanned
aircraft systems, but it's unclear when drones will have easy access to the
nation's airspace.

Companies to watch

Microsoft endured a tumultuous 2013, including the continued deterioration of
the PC market and the retirement of longtime chief executive Steve Ballmer. Now
all eyes are on the company as it attempts to find its footing.

"Their successes are overwhelmed by their failures," said Rob Enderle,
technology analyst for the Enderle Group. "They do need to simplify the company.
They're fighting too many battles and they need to bring it back to something
that can be managed."

Twitter, on the other hand, has the opposite problem - the social media company
needs to grow, and grow quickly. Fresh off its 2013 market debut, the
six-year-old company can boast that 18 percent of all Americans have an account
on the service, according to data from the Pew Research Center's Project for
Internet & American Life.

And though Twitter must focus on aggressive growth to satisfy investors, it also
has to be careful not to lose its scrappy start-up vibe, particularly as it
faces competition from an ever-growing wave of new messaging services such as
Snapchat, which lets users send private messages that erase themselves after 10
seconds.

Watch your back

Cybercrime is expected to become even more common in 2014, posing a tricky
challenge for tech companies and retailers encouraging consumers to share
information online.

Most recently, hackers gained access to as many as 40 million credit and debit
cards used by customers of Target during the height of the holiday shopping
season, and analysts say that breach was only the tip of the iceberg.

The number of data breaches jumped from about 1,700 incidents in 2012 to 2,200
in 2013, according to an end-of-the-year report from financial information
services firm Experian. The firm forecast that at least two-thirds of companies
will buy cyber-breach insurance by the end of 2014. Many of those, the report
said, will be in the health-care sector as more doctors and hospitals put their
data in online databases.

One in four Americans has received at least one notice of a data breach, said
Michael Bruemmer, vice president of data breach resolution at Experian's
consumer services unit.  That's led to apathy from some consumers who are tired
of changing their passwords and canceling their credit cards - a trend that
Bruemmer calls "data breach fatigue."

But not all consumers are taking the growing number of breaches lying down;
Bruemmer said that there's also been a spike in lawsuits against companies whose
systems are cracked into by cybercriminals.

"There's been a corresponding increase in class-action lawsuits, and I think
you'll see that into 2014," he said.

hayley.tsukayama@washpost.com

Follow The Post's new tech blog, The Switch, where technology and policy
connect.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


