                             455 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     February 20, 2014 Thursday 8:14 PM EST

Report: Drone strike didn't comply with rules set by Obama

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 790 words


A U.S. drone strike in December that killed at least a dozen people in Yemen
failed to comply with rules imposed by President Obama last year to protect
civilians, according to an investigation by a human rights organization released
Thursday.

The report by Human Rights Watch concluded that the strike, which was carried
out by the U.S. military's Joint Special Operations Command, targeted a line of
vehicles that were part of a wedding procession, and that evidence indicates
"some, if not all those killed and wounded were civilians."

The findings contradict assertions by U.S. officials that only militants were
killed in the operation, although the report acknowledged that members of
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the terrorist network's affiliate in Yemen,
may have been among the dead.

Overall, Human Rights Watch "found that the operations did not comply with the
targeted killing policies that President Obama outlined" in a speech in May, the
report said, citing in particular Obama's requirement of "near-certainty" that
no civilians would be harmed.

The report represents the most detailed independent examination to date of a
strike that has focused attention on the administration's struggles to tighten
the rules for targeted killing, provide more information about such operations
to the public and gradually shift full control of the drone campaign from the
CIA to the Pentagon.

Caitlin Hayden, a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, declined to
comment on the report or the Dec. 12 strike but said the United States takes
"extraordinary care" in its counterterrorism operations to avoid civilian
casualties and noted that Yemeni officials described the targets as "dangerous
senior al-Qaeda militants."

The investigation by Human Rights Watch, a group that has been consistently
critical of the targeted killing program, concluded that the attack killed 12
men, ages 20 to 65, and wounded 15 others, citing accounts from survivors,
relatives of the dead, local officials and news media reports.

The attack targeted a convoy of 11 vehicles traveling from the site of a wedding
near the city of Rad'a to the groom's village, according to the report, which
said that the bride was among a small number of female travelers and that
"shrapnel grazed the bride under one eye, and blew her trousseau to pieces."

Investigators said they spoke with senior Yemeni officials including President
Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi, as well as U.S. officials in Washington. The report
also includes photos of metal shards identified as shrapnel from four Hellfire
missiles that were fired.

U.S. officials have said that the main target of the strike was Shawqi Ali Ahmed
al-Badani, an alleged al-Qaeda operative accused of leading a plot that prompted
the United States to close dozens of diplomatic facilities in the Middle East
last year.

Neither Badani's name nor that of any other senior al-Qaeda operative appears on
a list of those killed or wounded that is included in the report. But Letta
Tayler, the lead investigator for Human Rights Watch, said she could not rule
out that some of those killed were associated with al-Qaeda.

Accounts from Yemeni officials "have shifted over time," according to the
report, which described a meeting in Rad'a two days after the strike in which a
senior Yemeni military officer and the governor of the province publicly
apologized and called the attack a "mistake."

Participants in that meeting told Human Rights Watch that Yemeni officials
distributed cash totaling about $159,000 as well as 101 Kalashnikov assault
rifles to relatives of those killed or wounded, payments described in the report
as "a tribal gesture of apology."

Although the CIA also operates armed drones in Yemen, U.S. officials have said
that the Dec. 12 strike was carried out by the JSOC. Obama's plan to shift the
operation to the Pentagon has drawn opposition on Capitol Hill, where senior
lawmakers - including Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), the chairman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee - have questioned whether the military can match
the CIA's effectiveness and avoid civilian casualties.

Because of the high casualty count and number of vehicles involved, the U.S.
military launched an internal investigation of the December strike. U.S.
officials briefed on that investigation said it supports the U.S. contention
that the targets were al-Qaeda militants, but they declined to elaborate. A
Pentagon spokesman declined to comment.

Human Rights Watch said its efforts to get access to the military's findings or
other U.S. information on the attack were rebuffed. "The U.S. government has
provided no information as to its legal basis for attacking the wedding
procession," the report said.

greg.miller@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


