                             458 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 6, 2014 Tuesday 2:58 AM EST

Deal keeps U.S. base in Djibouti

BYLINE: Zachary A. Goldfarb

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 441 words


The United States has reached agreement with the government of Djibouti to
preserve a key military base in the Horn of Africa that has been central to U.S.
counterterrorism efforts in East Africa - and previously served as a key
launching point for drone strikes throughout the region.

President Obama announced the agreement Monday at the White House during a
meeting with Djibouti's president, Ismail Omar Guelleh. An administration
official said the U.S. government would pay $630 million over the next decade to
Djibouti to lease the base, called Camp Lemonnier. At $63 million per year, the
fee is almost double the $38 million that the United States has been paying.

"Camp Lemonnier is extraordinarily important not only to our work throughout the
Horn of Africa but throughout the region," Obama said.

The military base, which houses 4,000 personnel, had been the launching site for
key elements of the Obama administration's counterterrorism strategy in East
Africa and Yemen. U.S. military forces have spent years trying to counter the
presence of al-Qaeda in Yemen and al-Shabab in Somalia.

Since its establishment in 2001, the base - which shares an airstrip with
Djibouti's commercial airport - was secretly transformed into one of the most
active sites for launching drone strikes outside the Afghanistan-Pakistan
region.

Last year, the military was forced to relocate drones after a series of crashes
led to intense fears that civilians could be killed at the airport. The military
now uses airstrips in more remote parts of the country for drone operations.

Obama and Guelleh also discussed economic development, health care and
education.

Obama credited Djibouti with aiding the fight against terrorism in Somalia,
where an alliance of African nations is working to counter the presence of
al-Shabab.

"There's a significant presence of soldiers from Djibouti who are participating
in the multinational force that has been able to push back al-Shabab's control
over large portions of Somalia," Obama said.

According to the terms of the base agreement, the United States and Djibouti can
renew the lease for another 10 years at the same rate of $63 million a year.
They can then renew the lease for another 10 years at a renegotiated rate.

"The fact that we welcome the U.S. forces in our country show our support for
international peace and for peace in our region as well," Guelleh said. "We do
that all for peace in the world and for peace in Africa."

At the meeting, Obama also pledged to boost financial aid to Djibouti outside of
the base agreement, including helping to expand skills training and foreign aid.

zachary.goldfarb@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


