                             450 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 8, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

FAA offers plan to put drones in U.S. skies

BYLINE: Ashley Halsey III

SECTION: A section; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 736 words


The complicated business of integrating unmanned aircraft into U.S. skies full
of small planes and airliners will begin at six test sites and require several
years of testing, the Federal Aviation Administration said Thursday.

Twenty-four states - including Virginia and Maryland - have applied to host test
sites, but the FAA has yet to determine where they will be located. In
presenting what it called a "road map" for the introduction of unmanned planes
into the system, the FAA acknowledged that it will take longer than Congress had
hoped when it set a September 2015 deadline for granting drones general access
to the skies.

"Government and industry face significant challenges as unmanned aircraft move
into the aviation mainstream," Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said in a
statement. "This road map is an important step forward that will help
stakeholders understand the operational goals and safety issues we need to
consider when planning for the future of our airspace."

Until the testing is complete, the FAA said, it will grant flight privileges to
unmanned aircraft operators on a case-by-case basis.

Unmanned aircraft come in many shapes and sizes. Military drones used for
surveillance or missile strikes in Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Middle East
have received the greatest measure of public attention, and similar aircraft
could be used domestically to monitor traffic conditions, weather patterns and
assorted other things.

"From advancing scientific research and responding to natural disasters to
locating missing persons and helping to fight wildfires, [unmanned aircraft] can
save time, save money, and, most importantly, save lives," Michael Toscano,
president of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, said in
applauding the FAA road map.

The same technology that allows pilots to fly those relatively small aircraft
from afar can be used to fly larger planes. Although public reaction would
probably prevent airlines from replacing pilots on passenger planes, it's
possible that similarly sized planes carrying packages and other freight could
be flown by ground-based pilots.

Public fear of a spy in the sky, peering down like the drones that hunt Taliban
and al-Qaeda members in Pakistan, has called attention to privacy issues as
unmanned aircraft take flight in the United States.

The FAA said Thursday that it will require that the operators of the six test
sites establish and follow practices to prevent encroachment on the privacy of
those below.

"In requiring test sites to have a written plan for data use and retention, the
FAA also appropriately focuses on the real issue when it comes to privacy - the
use, storage and sharing of data, or whether data collected must be deleted,"
Toscano said. "Privacy laws must be platform-neutral, treating manned and
unmanned platforms the same. "

The road map also deals with policies, regulations and procedures required to
integrate the coming flock of unmanned aircraft into a revolutionary new
aviation-control system known as NextGen.

The goal of NextGen - often described as based on the Global Positioning System
but actually far more complex than that - is to replace a 60-year-old
radar-based system that directs landings and takeoffs and keeps planes from
colliding in midair.

The new system should result in significant fuel savings, less pollution,
more-direct routing of flights and a general expansion of air traffic to
accommodate projected demand. Tossing an as-yet-unknown number of unmanned
aircraft into that mix complicates the equation.

The road map pointed to areas that require resolution or regulation, such as
training for pilots who handle unmanned aircraft as new technology emerges for
their operation. Certain systems used in piloted planes - such as an automatic
collision-avoidance system known as TCAS - must be refined for use in unmanned
aircraft, the road map said.

"In that airspace of the future, we will have new users," FAA Administrator
Michael Huerta said in presenting the road map. "We will have more commercial
space launches, and we'll have more unmanned aircraft systems. As you know, it
requires significant consensus of how we can safely integrate game-changing
technologies such as these, and I'm pleased to say we've made very solid
progress. We are dedicated to moving this exciting new technology along as
quickly and safely as possible."

ashley.halsey@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


