                             466 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 4, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Google Puts Money on Robots, Using the Man Behind Android

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1175 words


PALO ALTO, Calif. -- In an out-of-the-way Google office, two life-size humanoid
robots hang suspended in a corner.

If Amazon can imagine delivering books by drones, is it too much to think that
Google might be planning to one day have one of the robots hop off an automated
Google Car and race to your doorstep to deliver a package?

Google executives acknowledge that robotic vision is a ''moonshot.'' But it
appears to be more realistic than Amazon's proposed drone delivery service,
which Jeff Bezos, Amazon's chief executive, revealed in a television interview
the evening before one of the biggest online shopping days of the year.

Over the last half-year, Google has quietly acquired seven technology companies
in an effort to create a new generation of robots. And the engineer heading the
effort is Andy Rubin, the man who built Google's Android software into the
world's dominant force in smartphones.

The company is tight-lipped about its specific plans, but the scale of the
investment, which has not been previously disclosed, indicates that this is no
cute science project.

At least for now, Google's robotics effort is not something aimed at consumers.
Instead, the company's expected targets are in manufacturing -- like electronics
assembly, which is now largely manual -- and competing with companies like
Amazon in retailing, according to several people with specific knowledge of the
project.

A realistic case, according to several specialists, would be automating portions
of an existing supply chain that stretches from a factory floor to the companies
that ship and deliver goods to a consumer's doorstep.

''The opportunity is massive,'' said Andrew McAfee, a principal research
scientist at the M.I.T. Center for Digital Business. ''There are still people
who walk around in factories and pick things up in distribution centers and work
in the back rooms of grocery stores.''

Google has recently started experimenting with package delivery in urban areas
with its Google Shopping service, and it could try to automate portions of that
system. The shopping service, available in a few locations like San Francisco,
is already making home deliveries for companies like Target, Walgreens and
American Eagle Outfitters.

Perhaps someday, there will be automated delivery to the doorstep, which for now
is dependent on humans.

''Like any moonshot, you have to think of time as a factor,'' Mr. Rubin said.
''We need enough runway and a 10-year vision.''

Mr. Rubin, the 50-year-old Google executive in charge of the new effort, began
his engineering career in robotics and has long had a well-known passion for
building intelligent machines. Before joining Apple Computer, where he initially
worked as a manufacturing engineer in the 1990s, he worked for the German
manufacturing company Carl Zeiss as a robotics engineer.

''I have a history of making my hobbies into a career,'' Mr. Rubin said in a
telephone interview. ''This is the world's greatest job. Being an engineer and a
tinkerer, you start thinking about what you would want to build for yourself.''

He used the example of a windshield wiper that has enough ''intelligence'' to
operate when it rains, without human intervention, as a model for the kind of
systems he is trying to create. That is consistent with a vision put forward by
the Google co-founder Larry Page, who has argued that technology should be
deployed wherever possible to free humans from drudgery and repetitive tasks.

The veteran of a number of previous Silicon Valley start-up efforts and twice a
chief executive, Mr. Rubin said he had pondered the possibility of a commercial
effort in robotics for more than a decade. He has only recently come to think
that a range of technologies have matured to the point where new kinds of
automated systems can be commercialized.

Earlier this year, Mr. Rubin stepped down as head of the company's Android
smartphone division. Since then he has convinced Google's founders, Sergey Brin
and Mr. Page, that the time is now right for such a venture, and they have
opened Google's checkbook to back him. He declined to say how much the company
would spend.

Mr. Rubin compared the effort with the company's self-driving car project, which
was started in 2009. ''The automated car project was science fiction when it
started,'' he said. ''Now it is coming within reach.''

He acknowledged that breakthroughs would still be necessary in areas like
software and sensors, but said that hardware issues like mobility and moving
hands and arms had been resolved.

Mr. Rubin has secretly acquired an array of robotics and artificial intelligence
start-up companies in the United States and Japan.

Among the companies are Schaft, a small team of Japanese roboticists who
recently left Tokyo University to develop a humanoid robot, and Industrial
Perception, a start-up here that has developed computer vision systems and robot
arms for loading and unloading trucks. Also acquired were Meka and Redwood
Robotics, makers of humanoid robots and robot arms in San Francisco, and Bot &
Dolly, a maker of robotic camera systems that were recently used to create
special effects in the movie ''Gravity.'' A related firm, Autofuss, which
focuses on advertising and design, and Holomni, a small design firm that makes
high-tech wheels, were acquired as well.

The seven companies are capable of creating technologies needed to build a
mobile, dexterous robot. Mr. Rubin said he was pursuing additional acquisitions.

Unlike Google's futuristic X lab, which does research on things like driverless
cars and the wearable Google Glass device, the robotics effort -- moonshots
aside -- is meant to sell products sooner rather than later. It has not yet been
decided whether the effort will be a new product group inside Google or a
separate subsidiary, Mr. Rubin said.

The Google robotics group will initially be based here in Palo Alto, with an
office in Japan. In addition to his acquisitions, Mr. Rubin has begun hiring
roboticists and is bringing in other Google programmers to assist in the
project.

While Google has not detailed its long-term robotics plans, Mr. Rubin said that
there were both manufacturing and logistics markets that were not being served
by today's robotic technologies, and that they were clear opportunities.

This is not the first time that Google has strayed beyond the typical confines
of a tech company. It has already shaken up the world's automobile companies
with its robot car project. Google has not yet publicly stated whether it
intends to sell its own vehicles or become a supplier to other manufacturers.
Speculation about Google's intentions has stretched from fleets of robotic taxis
moving people in urban areas to automated delivery systems.

Mr. Rubin said that one of his frustrations about today's consumer electronics
industry was its complexity. He is hoping robotics will be different.

''I feel with robotics it's a green field,'' he said. ''We're building hardware,
we're building software. We're building systems, so one team will be able to
understand the whole stack.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/04/technology/google-puts-money-on-robots-using-t
he-man-behind-android.html

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Andy Rubin is the engineer heading Google's robotics effort. He
is the man who built the Android software for smartphones. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM
WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


