                             467 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Joint Venture

BYLINE: By NEIL GOUGH

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; DEALBOOK; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 602 words


HONG KONG -- In a major push into the logistics business, the Chinese e-commerce
giant Alibaba Group said on Monday that it would invest around $360 million in
the Haier Group, one of China's biggest manufacturers and distributors of
household appliances.

The deal calls for the two companies to set up a joint-venture logistics
business, bringing together Alibaba's huge online retailing platform and client
network with Haier's logistics unit, Goodaymart, which has an especially strong
presence in China's smaller inland cities and provinces.

Shares in Haier's Hong Kong-listed unit, the Haier Electronics Group, rose as
much as 20 percent in early trading on Monday on news of the deal before giving
up some of the gains to close up 13 percent.

''Alibaba Group is honored to join with Haier Group to create this platform that
will equip China's manufacturing industry with enhanced nationwide and global
access,'' Jack Ma, Alibaba's founder and executive chairman, said in a
statement.

Companies around the world are responding to the rapid growth of Internet retail
by seeking ways to deliver goods more quickly to buyers.

Last week, Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com, proposed using drones to
deliver packages to customers in the United States.

Other companies, including United Parcel Service and Google, are considering
using drones for delivery, too, but are also working on ways to provide so
called on-demand delivery.

For Alibaba, which is considering an initial public offering in New York that
analysts say could make it one of the world's most valuable Internet companies,
one of the strongest selling points to the deal with Haier is a stronger
distribution network for the goods that are sold on Tmall.com, its popular
business-to-consumer platform.

Alibaba says more than 70,000 international and Chinese brands have already set
up digital storefronts on Tmall.com, where transaction volumes in 2012 surpassed
200 billion renminbi, or about $33 billion, and hit a single-day global record
of 35 billion renminbi on Nov. 11 this year -- a day celebrated in China as
''Singles' Day,'' which is now a nationwide shopping event.

The deal gives Tmall.com access to Goodaymart's extensive network in China,
which includes nine shipping bases and more than 21 million square feet of
warehouse space.

Haier says Goodaymart runs logistics and distribution sites in more than 2,800
counties across China and operates more than 17,000 service points.

Haier, which in September sold a 10 percent stake in itself to the private
equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, is best known for selling white
goods, like a washing machine that also washes potatoes.

But it is Haier's logistics and distribution business, which handles both its
own products and those of competitors, that today accounts for most of its
sales.

This business line, which Haier Electronics refers to as integrated channel
services, reported revenue of 26.6 billion renminbi in the first six months of
this year, up 11 percent from the period a year earlier.

Alibaba's total investment in Haier is worth 2.82 billion Hong Kong dollars, or
$364 million, and consists of several transactions. The company will pay 965
million dollars for new shares, representing a 2 percent stake in Haier
Electronics.

Alibaba will also pay 541 million dollars for a 9.9 percent stake in Goodaymart,
and 1.32 billion dollars for convertible bonds issued by Goodaymart that will
lift its total stake in the logistics business to 24.1 percent once the notes
are converted into shares.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2013/12/09/alibaba-invests-360-million-in-logistics-
deal-with-haier/

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


