                             465 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 8, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Taliban Pick Hard-Liner as Leader, Imperiling Proposed Peace Talks

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 944 words


LONDON -- In a surprise choice that bodes poorly for proposed peace talks, the
Pakistani Taliban on Thursday appointed as their new leader the hard-line
commander responsible for last year's attack on Malala Yousafzai, the teenage
Pakistani education activist.

The Taliban's governing council chose Mullah Fazlullah, the head of a militant
faction in the northwestern Swat Valley, after six days of deliberations,
Taliban officials told reporters. Mr. Fazlullah is best known for ordering
public beatings, executions and beheadings, and delivering thunderous radio
broadcasts -- in which he denounced polio vaccinations, among other topics --
that earned him the nickname ''Mullah Radio'' in some circles.

Celebratory gunfire erupted in North Waziristan, the tribal district that is
Pakistan's main militant hub, after Mr. Fazlullah's accession was announced. But
the news was likely to be received with less enthusiasm by Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif's government.

Furious officials criticized the United States' killing of the previous Taliban
leader, Hakimullah Mehsud, in a drone strike last Friday, claiming that the Mr.
Mehsud had been on the verge of starting peace talks with the government.

But few believed those talks had much chance of success, and Mr. Fazlullah, who
reneged on a previous peace deal in 2009, offers even dimmer hopes. On Thursday,
his spokesman, Shahidullah Shahid, said there would be ''no more talks as Mullah
Fazlullah is already against negotiations.''

Instead, Mr. Shahid said, the Taliban were planning retaliatory attacks against
the federal government in Punjab, Pakistan's most populous province. Mr. Sharif
''bargained and sold out Hakimullah to the Americans,'' he said.

For the Pakistani military, Mr. Fazlullah is a cherished enemy. He escaped the
army's toughest anti-Taliban offensive of recent years in 2009 when, as
thousands of soldiers swept through Swat, after the collapse of a peace deal, he
fled across the border into Afghanistan.

Since then he is believed to have been hiding in Kunar and Nuristan Provinces in
eastern Afghanistan, using the mountains as a base to stage attacks inside
Pakistan, including the attack on Ms. Yousafzai, who was shot in the head by a
Taliban gunman in October 2012.

Mr. Fazlullah claimed a major military target this year when his fighters killed
a two-star army general in Dir district, near the Afghan border, in September.

Mr. Fazlullah was not the favored candidate to succeed Mr. Mehsud because he did
not hail from the Mehsud tribe, which has dominated the leadership of the
Pakistani Taliban since the group was founded in 2007.

The ranks of the Mehsud leadership, however, have been thinned by the C.I.A.
drone campaign. Strikes in North and South Waziristan killed both Hakimullah and
his predecessor, Baitullah Mehsud, who died in 2009.

A former security official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Fazlullah had been chosen to avert a rift between rival Mehsud factions inside
the Taliban.

The Taliban also appointed Khalid Haqqani, a little-known commander from a rural
district near Peshawar, as the deputy commander, effectively signaling a shift
in the Taliban leadership from the tribal belt to neighboring Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa
Province.

''This changes the entire equation,'' said one senior government official in
Peshawar.

Mr. Fazlullah, believed to be in his late 30s, offers the Taliban the
opportunity of a possible new direction, led by a figure with a reputation for
being charismatic, ruthless and publicity-savvy.

From a poor family, Mr. Fazlullah started his adult life as the operator of a
chairlift that spanned the river Swat. He rose to public prominence in 2007 by
riding on a white horse into Swat, a picturesque area once popular with
honeymooning couples.

He set up a pirate radio station that broadcast jihadist propaganda across the
valley, at one point urging women not to sleep with their husbands if they
refused to join his jihad. Soon afterward, armed fighters displaced the civil
government, instituting an authoritarian and often cruel rule that mandated
public floggings, executions and the closing of girls' schools.

The provincial and federal governments struggled to respond to Mr. Fazlullah's
swagger, signing two peace deals with his father-in-law, Sufi Muhammad, in a bid
to re-establish calm in the valley. But those compromises quickly foundered --
there was public outrage across Pakistan over a video that showed Taliban
fighters flogging a teenage girl in Swat -- and by the summer of 2009, the army
had moved in.

Since then, the Swat Taliban have been reduced to hit-and-run attacks, while the
army has been accused by human rights groups of carrying out summary executions
of people suspected of being militants.

The Taliban's most infamous operation of recent years was the attack on Ms.
Yousafzai, then 15. At the time, Mr. Fazlullah's spokesman said she had been
shot for her advocacy, and vowed to shoot her again if she returned to Swat. Ms.
Yousafzai was flown to Britain for emergency treatment, where she recovered from
her injuries, and has gone on to become a global celebrity.

Mr. Fazlullah's rise now presents potential difficulties for Imran Khan, the
former cricket star whose party governs Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, of which
Swat is one district. Mr. Khan has threatened to block NATO military supply
lines into Afghanistan after Nov. 20 if the United States does not halt drone
attacks in the tribal belt.

But Mr. Khan's aggressive anti-American stance could be complicated by a new
wave of Taliban violence -- particularly if it is engineered by a Taliban leader
who hails from the province that Mr. Khan controls.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/08/world/asia/pakistani-taliban-appoints-mullah-f
azlullah-new-leader.html

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mullah  Fazlullah

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


