                             468 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 10, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Visiting Pakistan, Hagel Seeks to Shore Up Alliance

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER and SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 943 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel cautioned Pakistan's prime
minister on Monday that if Pakistani regional officials followed through on
their threats to block NATO supply lines for the war in Afghanistan, it could
jeopardize hundreds of millions of dollars in assistance to the military here,
Pentagon officials said.

In response, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif offered assurances that his government
would take action to guarantee the safe passage of American and alliance
shipments through the Torkham border crossing between Pakistan and Afghanistan,
the officials said.

Mr. Hagel arrived in the Pakistani capital for meetings to shore up one of
Washington's most complicated alliances, meeting with civilian and military
officials in an effort to improve a relationship that has often broken down over
differences on how to fight terrorist groups within Pakistan.

It was the first visit to Pakistan by an American defense secretary in almost
four years. The American officials, who described the session with Mr. Sharif as
amicable and constructive, said the talks focused equally on supply lines,
counterterrorism, regional security and economic development.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Sharif had expressed his nation's outrage over
continued American drone strikes on suspected terrorist and militant targets
inside Pakistan, some of which have killed civilians.

American and NATO officials have postponed some shipments through Torkham, out
of fears over security for truck drivers and their cargo during protests against
the drone strikes. Imran Khan, a former cricket star and political power broker
whose PTI party governs the surrounding Pakistani province, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa,
has threatened to use protests to close the crossing in retaliation over the
drone strikes.

For his part, Mr. Hagel raised Washington's concerns over havens inside Pakistan
for militant organizations that have killed American and allied troops in
Afghanistan. The defense secretary specifically cited the Haqqani network, which
is believed to be abetted covertly by some Pakistani intelligence officials in
an effort to assert influence in Afghanistan.

''The Haqqani network is a major concern for the United States,'' another senior
Pentagon official said. ''The security of our forces is paramount. The Haqqanis
pose a threat.''

Senior Pentagon officials, speaking on diplomatic ground rules of anonymity,
said there were no breakthroughs, and no concessions by either side on
counterterrorism issues, except for a shared concern on the threat and agreement
on the need to continue discussions.

Washington froze Pakistan's financial aid in 2011, as the countries'
relationship reached a low point with the Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin
Laden inside Pakistan and an errant American airstrike that killed 24 Pakistani
border patrol troops. The United States recently restored funding to underwrite
Pakistani counterterrorism efforts, including operations against militants in
the regions along the Afghan border.

Pakistan has received more than $10 billion in Coalition Support Funds since
2001, making it the largest recipient under the program. In October, the United
States disbursed $322 million for the period of July through September 2012,
which was frozen when relations soured. The current request for October through
December of 2012 is being processed but has not yet been paid.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Hagel did not issue a threat that the Defense
Department would cut off the next round of payments. Instead, the officials
said, Mr. Hagel indicated that because the funds are subject to congressional
oversight, inaction by the Pakistani government to guarantee safe transit for
American and allied shipments could again result in a freeze.

''This is obviously a critical issue for the Department of Defense and to the
United States,'' a Pentagon official said. ''And one of the issues that is
critical to the Pakistanis is the continuation of Coalition Support Funds.''

Rasul Baksh Rais, the director general of the Institute of Strategic Studies
Islamabad, a policy research center here, reiterated the importance of
Afghanistan as an issue between Pakistan and the United States.

''The focus is on understanding which way Pakistan wants to go about Afghanistan
and on regional issues, especially negotiations with the Taliban,'' Mr. Rais
said, ''and what role Pakistan will play in 2014 and beyond in stabilizing
Afghanistan and protecting international interests there.''

Despite often-strained ties, the Obama administration has continued to seek
Pakistani military and intelligence cooperation on counterterrorism issues,
illuminating the realpolitik basis of the relationship. Pentagon officials said
that strengthening military-to-military relations could act as ballast to steady
a relationship with a nuclear-armed nation in a turbulent corner of the world.

Mr. Hagel's visit came amid changes at the top of Pakistan's powerful military.
The prime minister chose Lt. Gen. Raheel Sharif last month as army chief of
staff, the most powerful military position in Pakistan. Because General Sharif
(who is not related to the prime minister) had not been viewed as the military
leadership's preferred candidate, his selection was seen as an assertion of
independence by the prime minister.

Mr. Hagel met with General Sharif at the General Headquarters compound in
Rawalpindi, the garrison city adjacent to the capital.

The talks covered ''mutual and common interests,'' Mr. Hagel said after the
meeting, and underlined that the militaries of both nations were trying to
strengthen a relationship that General Sharif described as ''long-lasting.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/10/world/asia/hagel-in-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and Lt. Gen. Raheel Sharif, the
army chief, second from right, on Monday in Rawalpindi, Pakistan. (POOL PHOTO BY
MARK WILSON)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


