                             464 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 1, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Security Deteriorates at Home, Iraqi Leader Arrives in U.S. Seeking Aid

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1294 words


WASHINGTON -- When Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq last visited the
White House, he and his host painted a glowing picture of the situation in Iraq
after the withdrawal of American forces.

''The prime minister leads Iraq's most inclusive government yet,'' President
Obama said in a joint news conference with Mr. Maliki in December 2011.
''Violence remains at record lows.''

Nearly two years later, however, many of the political and security gains that
Mr. Obama acclaimed have been reversed. Bombings in Iraq have drastically
increased. Al Qaeda in Iraq has been rejuvenated, and the terrorist group in
Iraq has expanded into Syria to fuel the civil war there.

As Mr. Maliki prepares to meet with Mr. Obama on Friday he is appealing for
military aid -- Apache helicopter gunships, more American intelligence and other
forms of counterterrorism support like reconnaissance drones that would be
operated by Americans.

And to win over a Congress and an American public reluctant to revisit the past
in Iraq, he is being helped by a prominent Washington lobbying firm: the Podesta
Group, which the Iraqi government is paying $960,000 a year. An Iraqi embassy
official said that the group has provided advice on how to get Iraq's message
across to American lawmakers as well as ''feedback'' on a recent Op-Ed article
Mr. Maliki wrote for The New York Times.

In their public comments, Mr. Maliki and senior American officials have
portrayed Iraq largely as a victim of circumstances -- mainly the disorder that
is spilling over from neighboring Syria. To be sure, many jihadists who have
come to Syria to wage war against the government of President Bashar al-Assad
have been repurposed by Al Qaeda's regional affiliates to serve as suicide
bombers in Iraq. But experts say that ambivalent policies in Washington and
Baghdad have also contributed to the rapidly deteriorating security situation.

Until now, Mr. Maliki was reluctant to openly ask for United States support. A
former American official said that in 2012 Mr. Maliki was on the verge of asking
the United States to fly reconnaissance drones over Iraq to help pinpoint the
growing terrorist threat but backed off at the last moment when the request
became public.

Mr. Maliki's reluctance to share power with a Sunni minority and his
authoritarian bent, critics say, have also made fertile ground for Al Qaeda's
appeals.

''He has not done enough to rein in efforts by other Shiite politicians and by
certain state organs to freeze out many Sunnis,'' said James Jeffrey, a former
American ambassador to Iraq in the Obama administration.

Another factor, according to a classified C.I.A. analysis, is corruption with
Iraq's security forces and Justice Ministry. That has helped Qaeda operatives
bribe their way their checkpoints and carry out prison breaks.

But the Obama administration's ambivalence about being drawn deeply into Iraq's
affairs has also been a factor, experts say. Administration officials insist
that the State and Defense Departments as well as Vice President Joseph R. Biden
Jr., who is Mr. Obama's point man on Iraq, have not lost their focus on the
country. But some former officials said the administration's involvement has
been episodic at best.

''We just haven't been engaged with Iraq at a high level,'' said Ryan C.
Crocker, the former American ambassador to Iraq from March 2007 to February
2009. ''Kerry made the one visit, and that was the first secretary of state
visit in four years and there hasn't been another one.''

Since the withdrawal of American forces, the United States Embassy in Baghdad
has maintained an office of security cooperation, which has had the mission of
facilitating arms sales and, significantly, mentoring Iraqi officers. But under
budgetary pressure, it is shrinking its staff size to 59 by fiscal year 2015
from its original 260.

A September report by the Defense Department's inspector general said the office
has been plagued by disagreements between the State and Defense Departments on
its mission and questioned whether security cooperation could be adequately
carried out with a staff of 59.

Michael Knights, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy who
recently returned from a trip to Iraq, said security there had seriously
deteriorated. In 2010, he said, there was a multicity synchronized bombing
attack about every four months; now, he said one occurs about every 10 days.

The growing presence of Qaeda affiliates in Iraq's western province, he said,
makes them an inviting target for American drone strikes. But any serious
consideration of that option has been precluded by the administration's
reluctance to re-engage militarily, though some Iraqi officials have indicated
they would not be opposed.

However, the White House is weighing Mr. Maliki's requests for additional
counterterrorism and military aid at time when a resurgent Al Qaeda affiliate is
building new camps, training facilities and staging areas in western Iraq,
administration officials said.

American intelligence and counterterrorism officials say they have effectively
mapped the locations and origins of these new Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant networks, and are sharing that information with Iraqis.

''As this threat has really accelerated over the last, say, six to eight months,
we've tried to work even more closely with the Iraqis to develop their sight
picture in a better way,'' a senior administration official said without
elaborating.

With terrorist violence rising in the country, Iraq has also stepped up its
request for a range of weapons from the United States, including Apache
helicopters and the Hellfire missiles they fire -- weapons that American
officials say are not effective against insurgents without detailed intelligence
of the enemy's location.

Mr. Maliki has urged Congress to expedite the sale of many of the weapons,
include the Apaches. But in meetings on Capitol Hill this week, influential
senators sharply questioned the Iraqi prime minister over what they said was his
failure to adequately incorporate Sunnis and Kurds into the country's
Shiite-dominated government, as well as acquiescing to Iran's use of Iraqi
airspace to fly weapons and supplies to the Syrian government.

An hourlong meeting on Wednesday with the two top senators on the Foreign
Relations Committee went badly, and the lawmakers refrained from endorsing the
Apache sale.

''It felt like we were talking past each other,'' said Senator Bob Corker of
Tennessee, the senior Republican on the panel. ''I did not feel like he seemed
to internalize at all the concerns that we had, and was somewhat dismissive.''

Senator Robert Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat who heads the committee, said he
was ''extremely disappointed'' in the meeting, adding, ''I got a sense there was
no acknowledgment of any of the challenges facing Iraqi society today.''

Mr. Maliki's speech at the United States Institute of Peace on Thursday did
little to assuage his critics.

The prime minister expressed alarm about the growth of terrorism in Iraq but did
not acknowledge that political tensions in Iraq or that his own autocratic
governing style had contributed to the problem.

''There is no problem between Sunnis and Shiites,'' he said. ''The Constitution
is ruling in Iraq.''

Among many Iraq analysts, it is a foregone conclusion that Mr. Maliki is seeking
to consolidate power and continue as prime minister. In fact, some saw his visit
to Washington as an attempt to secure American political support before he
campaigns.

During a question-and-answer session after his speech, the prime minister said
he would seek a third term if the public wanted him to stay on the job.

''This is something that is up to the Iraqi people,'' he said. ''It is a very,
very difficult job.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/01/world/middleeast/iraqi-leader-on-fighting-terr
orism.html

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq, right, with the
president of the United States Institute of Peace, Jim Marshall. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
YURI GRIPAS/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


