                             476 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Qaeda Militants Seek Syria Base, U.S. Officials Say

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Amman, Jordan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1304 words


WASHINGTON -- Dozens of seasoned militant fighters, including some midlevel
planners, have traveled to Syria from Pakistan in recent months in what American
intelligence and counterterrorism officials fear is an effort to lay the
foundation for future strikes against Europe and the United States.

''We are concerned about the use of Syrian territory by the Al Qaeda
organization to recruit individuals and develop the capability to be able not
just to carry out attacks inside of Syria, but also to use Syria as a launching
pad,'' John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director, told a House panel recently.

The extremists who concern Mr. Brennan are part of a group of Qaeda operatives
in Pakistan that has been severely depleted in recent years by a decade of
American drone strikes. But the fighters still bring a wide range of skills to
the battlefield, such as bomb-building, small-arms tactics, logistics, religious
indoctrination and planning, though they are not believed to have experience in
launching attacks in the West.

Syria is an appealing base for these operatives because it offers them the
relative sanctuary of extremist-held havens -- away from drone strikes in
Afghanistan and Pakistan -- as well as ready access to about 1,200 American and
European Muslims who have gone there to fight and could be potential recruits to
carry out attacks when they return home. Senior counterterrorism officials have
voiced fears in recent months that these Western fighters could be radicalized
by the country's civil war.

New classified intelligence assessments based on information from electronic
intercepts, informers and social media posts conclude that Al Qaeda's senior
leadership in Pakistan, including Ayman al-Zawahri, is developing a much more
systematic, long-term plan than was previously known to create specific cells in
Syria that would identify, recruit and train these Westerners.

Al Qaeda has in the past blessed the creation of local branches in places like
Yemen, where an affiliate has tried to strike the United States. But the effort
in Syria would signify the first time that senior Qaeda leaders had set up a
wing of their own outside Pakistan dedicated to conducting attacks against the
West, counterterrorism officials said. It also has the potential to rejuvenate
Al Qaeda's central command, which President Obama has described as being greatly
diminished.

The assessment by the United States, however, has some detractors among even its
staunchest counterterrorism partners, which also see an increase in
Pakistan-based veterans of Al Qaeda among Syrian rebel groups but which disagree
over whether they are involved in a coordinated plan to attack the West.

''At this stage, it's a lot less organized than a directed plan,'' said one
Western security official. ''Some fighters are going to Syria, but they're going
on an ad hoc basis, not at an organized level.''

Most of the operatives identified by intelligence officials are now focused on
attacking Syrian government troops and occasionally rival rebel factions. But
the fact that these kinds of operatives are showing up in Syria indicates to
American officials that Mr. Zawahri is also playing a long game -- counting on
easy access to Iraq and Qaeda support networks there, as well as on the United
States' reluctance to carry out drone strikes or other military operations
against targets in Syria.

''A key question, however, is how using Syria as a launching pad to strike the
West fits into Zawahri's overall strategy, and if he's soft-pedaling now, hoping
to consolidate Al Qaeda's position for the future,'' said one American
counterterrorism official. ''Clearly, there is going to be push and pull between
local operatives and Al Qaeda central on attack planning. How fast the pendulum
will swing toward trying something isn't clear right now.''

The new assessment is not likely to change American policy toward Syria any time
soon, but it puts pressure on the Obama administration and its allies because it
raises the possibility that Syria could become the next Afghanistan.

Top officials at the F.B.I., the National Counterterrorism Center and the
Department of Homeland Security say they are working closely with European
allies to track Westerners returning from Syria.

There are perhaps ''a few dozen'' Qaeda veterans of fighting in Afghanistan and
Pakistan in Syria, two top counterterrorism officials said. ''What we've seen is
a coalescence in Syria of Al Qaeda veterans from Afghanistan and Pakistan, as
well as extremists from other hot spots such as Libya and Iraq,'' Matthew G.
Olsen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, told a Senate panel
in March. ''From a terrorism perspective, the most concerning development is
that Al Qaeda has declared Syria its most critical front.''

In his first speech as secretary of Homeland Security in February, Jeh C.
Johnson put it even more bluntly. ''Syria has become a matter of homeland
security,'' he said.

The Qaeda veterans have multiple missions and motivations, counterterrorism
officials say. Like thousands of other foreign fighters, many have been drawn on
their own to Syria to fight the government of President Bashar al-Assad.

Many others, like Abu Khalid al-Suri, a Syrian-born veteran of Al Qaeda, were
sent by the terrorist group's central command in Pakistan first to fight Mr.
Assad, but also to begin laying the groundwork to use enclaves in Syria to
launch attacks against the West, American officials said.

Mr. Suri, who is believed to have been close to Osama bin Laden and to have
fought against American forces in Afghanistan and Iraq, was sent to mediate
conflicts between Al Qaeda's main affiliate in Syria, the Nusra Front, and
another extremist faction, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, which Al Qaeda
has disavowed. He was killed in a suicide attack in February by the rival group.

Many of the Qaeda planners and operatives from Afghanistan and Pakistan have
clustered in the east and northwest sections of Syria, in territory controlled
or heavily influenced by the Nusra Front, intelligence officials said.

Sanafi al-Nasr, a Saudi-born extremist who is on his country's list of most
wanted terrorists, traveled to Syria from the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region
late last year and emerged as one of the Nusra Front's top strategists. Jihadi
forums reported that he was killed in fighting last week, but American
counterterrorism officials said those reports could not be confirmed.

''Al Qaeda veterans could have a critical impact on recruitment and training,''
said Laith Alkhouri, a senior analyst at Flashpoint Global Partners, a security
consulting firm that tracks militant websites. ''They would be lionized, at
least within the ranks, as experienced mujahedeen.''

While these senior Qaeda envoys have been involved in the immediate fight
against Syrian forces, American counterterrorism officials said they also had
broader, longer-term ambitions.

Without naming Mr. Nasr, James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national
intelligence, told a Senate panel in February that a ''small nucleus'' of Qaeda
veterans from Afghanistan and Pakistan in Syria who are ''separate from al-Nusra
harbor designs on attacks in Europe and the homeland.''

Charles Lister, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar, agreed,
saying, ''The large majority of Al Qaeda-linked commanders now in Syria are
there due to the potential for Syria to be the next jihadist safe haven.''

Hassan Abu Hanieh, a Jordanian expert on Islamist movements, said that launching
attacks on Western targets did not appear to be a priority for the Nusra Front
now. However, the group's ideology, or a belief that it was under direct threat,
could lead it to attack the West eventually, he said.

''As soon as they get targeted, they will move the battle outside,'' Mr. Hanieh
said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/26/world/middleeast/qaeda-militants-seek-syria-ba
se-us-officials-say.html

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Fighters from the Nusra Front, a Qaeda affiliate, last April
near Aleppo. Some say Syria could become a jihadist safe haven. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
GUILLAUME BRIQUET/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 Abu Khalid  al-Suri (A7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


