                             470 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pulled Down From the Sky, Still Lethal

BYLINE: By CHARLES ISHERWOOD

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 825 words


The heroine of ''Grounded,'' a solo play by George Brant, feels most alive when
she's up in the air. A fighter pilot in the Air Force, she loves everything
about her job -- the suit, the speed, the danger, the respect -- but most of all
the ''blue,'' as she calls the wide expanses of sky through which she steers her
plane, searching out the bad guys in sorties over Iraq.

A commanding Hannah Cabell imbues the nameless protagonist with a tough, cocky
self-satisfaction in the play's opening minutes, as she describes the rush she
gets in flight, and the easy camaraderie she shares with her fellow (mostly
male) pilots. Her dark eyes glisten with pride and excitement as she describes
her life. She's a woman who's as happy in her skin as she is in that suit.

So she's a little taken by surprise when she finds herself falling for a man she
meets while out roistering with her colleagues. Crucially, he's one who's not
threatened by being with a woman with a tough-guy job. ''First time I'm sad
leave is over,'' she says tersely. But she's a little pleased by the role
reversal, too: ''Like some '50s movie,'' she says, ''I've got my little woman at
home, know who I'm fighting for. All that true corn, true cheese.''

Unexpectedly, her life changes on a dime when she discovers she's pregnant.
Suddenly, she's zapped out of that comforting sky: Regulations forbid pregnant
women to fly. ''Grounded,'' she says gruffly. ''The pilot's nightmare.''

Mr. Brant's play, produced by Page 73 Productions and crisply directed by Ken
Rus Schmoll (''Middletown,'' ''The Internationalist''), presents a convincing
portrait of his heroine's uneasy adjustment to a life that robs her of the
identity she so cherished. After her baby is born, she returns to work, but with
a crucial difference: Now she will be piloting a drone flying over an unnamed
country (presumably Afghanistan or Pakistan), while she herself sits in a base
outside Las Vegas.

Being grounded was torture enough: Now she's stuck in the ''Chair Force,'' as
she derisively calls it, ''the Bermuda Triangle'' for fighter pilots, because
''no one ever comes back.'' The psychological fallout from this life change
stealthily makes inroads into her life. She's happy enough at home, at least for
a while, but the drudgery of staring for 12 hours a day at a screen full of
shades of gray, instead of cutting through the blue, begins to steal away her
equilibrium.

The play, which won the 2012 Smith Prize for works about American politics,
obliquely ponders how advances in technology are affecting the psychology of men
and women in the armed forces. Does the increased distance from the targets they
are pursuing lead soldiers to dehumanize them, or to minimize the danger of
killing civilians? With a lesser risk of losing American soldiers, safe in their
compounds thousands of miles away, are the strictures on unleashing deadly force
being loosened?

The answers it suggests are not the simple ones you might expect; in fact, while
''Grounded'' is mostly gripping as a portrait of a particular woman facing
particular traumas, it ultimately doesn't provide much fodder for larger
reflections on American foreign policy or the changing mores of a changing
military.

Initially, the heroine gradually regains the swaggering excitement she feels at
hunting down the enemy. ''Poor saps,'' she says with something like relish,
after unleashing artillery on a group of ''military-age males'' by the side of a
road, enemy combatants preparing to ambush American troops -- according to the
voice in her headset giving her orders. ''You don't learn, do you,'' she
continues. ''You can't hide from the eye in the sky, my children.''

But now that the drone can linger above the site of an attack -- as opposed to
zooming away (''I'm long gone before the boom happens,'' she'd said earlier) --
with cameras zeroing in on the carnage, the grim human cost of warfare can also
become more vivid and immediate. Body parts can be seen flying through the air.
''I didn't notice those last time,'' she says.

As the unexpected stress of the character's job begins to grind her down, Ms.
Cabell's fierce eyes and cold demeanor gradually give way, suggesting a
burgeoning emotional fragility beneath the macho armor. This seemingly fearless
fighter pilot finds herself being stalked by an enemy she'd kept at bay while
doing her job from thousands of feet up in the air: an enemy called empathy.

Grounded

By George Brant; directed by Ken Rus Schmoll; sets and costumes by Arnulfo
Maldonado; lighting by Garin Marschall; sound by Jane Shaw; production stage
manager, Megan Schwarz Dickert; production manager, Derek Johnson; general
manager, Brierpatch Productions. Presented by Page 73, Liz Jones and Asher
Richelli, executive directors; Michael Walkup, producing director. At
Walkerspace, 46 Walker Street, TriBeCa; 866-811-4111, page73.org/tickets.
Through Feb. 1. Running time: 1 hour 10 minutes.

WITH: Hannah Cabell (The Pilot).

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/18/theater/grounded-a-fighter-pilots-story.html

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Hannah Cabell in ''Grounded,'' George Brant's play about a
fighter pilot assigned to drone duty. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (C5)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


