                             474 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

For New Age, the Next Generation

BYLINE: By MIKE RUBIN

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1636 words


A sign on the door of the Body Actualized Center in Bushwick, Brooklyn, promised
''Cosmic Yoga,'' but on a recent snowy Monday night, a crowd had gathered for a
concert of electronic music. Slushy boots were politely confiscated in the
lobby, and about 75 shoeless patrons in their 20s and 30s sat cross-legged on
pillows or reclined on blankets on the floor. The space was lit, just barely, by
botanica candles, placed amid potted trees and colorful crystals. The aroma of
incense permeated the room.

In front of the crowd, Mark McGuire, the former guitarist of Emeralds, stood
behind two synthesizers, summoning a pleasant drone. While some concertgoers
closed their eyes and rocked gently to the thrumming, Mr. McGuire added a
crackly recording of a lecture on ''The Universe According to Esoteric
Philosophy'' by the mystic Manly P. Hall. Eventually, Mr. McGuire began to loop
a phrase of Hall's -- ''The only reason for existence is this perpetual
growth''-- until the words were distorted beyond recognition. Then he began to
play guitar over it, first fluid and crystalline, then fiery and molten. The
sound waves buffeted the dream catcher that hung from the ceiling just enough to
make it twirl slowly.

Mr. McGuire, 27, a Cleveland native who lives in Los Angeles, began his career
in the Midwestern hardcore punk and noise scenes. Today, he's one of several
musicians whose music reflects a confluence of psychedelia, electronic music and
those genres' eccentric cousin, new age. A generation of younger musicians with
an affinity for analog electronics have re-examined this long-derided category
with open minds, borrowing liberally from new age's sonic palette: hypnotic
repetition, gauzy textures, spacey guitar noodling and soft, bright synths.

Elements of new age can be found among a diverse range of artists, including
Julianna Barwick, Sun Araw, Bitchin Bajas, Matthewdavid and Greyghost. ''New-age
music now has the contemporary electronic underground and the noise underground
infused in it, as well as the spirit of all the different musics that have
evolved since then, so I think it is something new,'' Mr. McGuire said. ''The
gear has evolved, but the consciousness behind it has, too.''

At the same time, new age pioneers from the late 1970s and early 1980s are being
rediscovered through a series of reissues, including ''Celestial Soul
Portrait,'' a collection on Numero Group showcasing the electric flute
improviser Iasos, and several volumes by the electric zither player Laraaji for
the All Saints label, including ''Essence/Universe'' and the collection
''Celestial Music: 1978-2011.''

Perhaps most audacious is the compilation ''I Am the Center: Private Issue New
Age Music In America, 1950-1990,'' on the reissue label Light in the Attic,
which posits new age as ''great American folk art.'' ''I Am the Center'' was
overseen by Douglas Mcgowan, a 37-year-old record collector and label proprietor
(of Yoga Records in Eugene, Ore.) who has made proselytizing for new age a
personal crusade.

''I saw in new age this way to help people re-establish a sense of wonder,'' Mr.
Mcgowan said. ''That's so pretentious sounding, but that's how I honestly
feel.'' Including Laraaji and Iasos (who Mr. Mcgowan calls ''the Duke Ellington
of new age''), ''I Am the Center'' gathers 20 contemplative recordings, from the
Satie-lite piano tinkling of the G. I. Gurdjieff disciple Thomas de Hartmann to
the echoey guitar of Wilburn Burchette to the synthesizer minimalism of Daniel
Emmanuel. Mr. Mcgowan insisted he was inspired not just by the music itself, but
by the courage and honesty of the misunderstood outsiders who created it. ''At
its best,'' Mr. Mcgowan said, ''I see it as a visionary art form.''

Mr. Mcgowan defines new age as ''the musical sound of contentment and peace.''
On the other hand, Stephen Hill, the producer and host of ''Hearts of Space'' (a
long-running nationally syndicated public radio show devoted to ''Slow Music for
Fast Times''), is more circumspect. ''New age music was a grab-bag category from
Day 2,'' he said. ''Originally, it was every kind of unclassifiable instrumental
music that wasn't jazz, folk or classical, just because it filled a categorical
need in a record store.'' Mr. Hill prefers the term ''spacemusic.''

It's difficult today to separate new age music -- much of it made by early
synthesizer adopters -- from the culture that nurtured it, a post-hippie
hodgepodge of Western self-help and Eastern mysticism. The serene recordings,
often intended as meditation soundtracks, are the opposite of the manic,
beat-heavy tracks of today's producers of electronic dance music. New age bears
more in common with ambient music, the aural atmospheres promulgated by Brian
Eno. Ambient ''was basically new age with the metaphysical spiritual stuff taken
out,'' Mr. Mcgowan said.

''Getting away from the noise of society is such a central idea in that space is
silence and nothingness and emptiness,'' he said. ''Once you wrap your head
around nothingness as being a virtue, it becomes so much easier to appreciate
the music on its own terms.''

New age began as a do-it-yourself movement outside the traditional music
industry, with many recordings released on private labels and distributed to new
age bookstores. Mr. Hill estimates that there were around 3,000 new age
bookstores by 1980 -- more than independent record stores -- and they were
hungry for product. ''It was the first place that I know of where actual indie
artists could start to make a kind of living,'' he said. ''New age was the first
genre to emerge after the 1970s home recording revolution.''

While it was easy and cheap to make your own records, ''a lot of the music was
junk,'' Mr. Hill said, ''typical flute and synthesizer stuff that goes on
forever, devoid of any musical or harmonic interest.'' The commercial glut
ultimately led to the music being maligned as ''yuppie Muzak.'' ''I just stopped
using the term because it was hurting more than it was helping,'' Mr. Hill said,
referring to new age. ''The perception of the genre had simply polluted the
meaning of the words.''

Given the stigma, new age would seem an unlikely candidate for rediscovery. Matt
Werth, the owner of the New York electronic label RVNG and another private-issue
new age collector, credits the advent of Internet file sharing. ''The
possibility of ripping and sharing prompted people to explore records that they
wouldn't necessarily deem valuable, and in that process, these excellent little
shimmering compositions came to light,'' he said.

Formed in suburban Cleveland in 2006, Emeralds were among the earliest
underground groups to acknowledge new age music as an influence. Self-releasing
dozens of cassettes and CD-Rs of throbbing arpeggiated drone, the band drew
inspiration from German ''kosmiche'' groups like Popol Vuh and Ash Ra Tempel,
whose spacey explorations crossed over into new age. Hearing Iasos's 1975 debut
album, ''Inter-Dimensional Music,'' for the first time, ''you're like 'Where
have you been all my life?' '' Mr. McGuire said. ''It was the same with drone
music. Getting into that would remind me of things I used to Zen out to when I
was a little kid.''

On his new album ''Along the Way'' (released this month on Dead Oceans), his
first official record since leaving Emeralds in 2012, Mr. McGuire went further
into new age philosophies. The album's theme is ''self-exploration and
exploration of the world around you,'' Mr. McGuire said, and he titled one song
''In Search of the Miraculous,'' after the Russian esotericist P. D. Ouspensky's
book about studying with Gurdjieff. ''I just felt that title, in a nutshell, was
everything I'm talking about with the record.''

Immediately recognizable by his all-orange attire, which represents ''fire, sun,
and transformation,'' is the 70-year-old Harlem musician Laraaji (the name
refers to the Egyptian sun god Ra). Born in Philadelphia as Edward Larry Gordon
and raised in Perth Amboy, N.J., Laraaji studied piano, music theory and
composition at Howard University before moving to New York, where he initially
worked as a stand-up comedian and actor. His booming laugh is still a hallmark
of his performances, which include conducting ''Laughter Meditation Workshops''
that promote ''the healing therapeutic benefits of heavy laughter.''

In the mid-70s, while meditating, he said, he had a ''deep religious hearing
experience'' in which he heard ''layers of brass instruments, weaving this
timeless glorious melodic symphony.'' Having swapped his guitar for a zither at
a Queens pawnshop at the direction of a ''strong intuitive voice,'' he began
processing the zither with electronics. Busking one evening in Washington Square
Park in 1979, he opened his eyes to discover a note from Brian Eno, asking to
meet. The two later collaborated on ''Ambient 3: Day of Radiance.''

''We all really liked that record,'' recalled John Elliott, one of Mr. McGuire's
former band mates in Emeralds and now a member of the electronic duo Outer
Space. ''The music is so vibrant and beautiful and joyful. There's nothing quite
like it.''

Laraaji is an evangelist for new age's transcendent qualities. While ''most
young people are still at the level of getting their career together or haven't
quite figured out their relationship agendas in life,'' he said, ''I feel that
one of the services I can do through my music is provide soundscapes that
provide escape into a deeper, relaxing, soothing place.''

Mr. Hill sees new age's appeal as even more timeless. ''It's been really
essential in religious, sacred and contemplative music for thousands of years,
so I think the value of it is in the psychological payoff that people who are
receptive to it experience,'' he said. ''If for some reason it was lost, it
would have to be recreated because we need it.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/16/arts/music/for-new-age-the-next-generation.htm
l

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The music of Mark McGuire, above, has evolved from punk to a
mix that draws deeply on new age, which fell into disfavor. Laraaji, left, is
one of the pioneering musicians who developed the genre in the late 1970s.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRISTOPHER GABELLO
KARSTEN MORAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (AR22)
 New age pioneers including Iasos, above, are being rediscovered through  a
series of reissues. (AR25)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


