                             488 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hive Mentality

BYLINE: By EMMA STRAUB.

Emma Straub's second novel, ''The Vacationers,'' will be published this week.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1109 words


THE BEESBy Laline Paull

340 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $25.99.

Laline Paull's ambitious and bold first novel, ''The Bees,'' follows Flora 717,
a sanitation worker doomed by her birth to the lowest caste of her community.
She is large and ugly and -- oh, yes -- a bee. What could feel gimmicky or cute
never does; Flora 717 is a brave and spirited soul, and it is a pleasure to
follow her through the hive and the air. The brief prologue and epilogue are the
only sections of the book with humans, aside from a single scene halfway through
in which a man harvesting honey comes off something like Godzilla. Truly, who
needs people when bees provide this much pathos?

At first, the reader questions everything. Is this really how bees are born? Is
this how they communicate? By the middle of the book, I stopped wondering which
tasks Paull had imagined and which were real, because they all seemed equally
plausible. By the end, I began passing off every detail of the book as fact --
''Wax seeps out of the bands in a bee's abdomen, you know'' -- as if I had a
Ph.D. in apiology.

One of the most satisfying aspects of ''The Bees'' is Paull's architectural
awareness. We are in a beehive, after all, that beautiful feat of engineering,
and it is great fun to see the antechambers and halls from the inside. Flora
becomes something of a Zelig, which I felt grateful for, if only because the
day-to-day life of a sanitation worker wouldn't grant access to some of the more
glorious rooms in the hive.

It is the job of the Floras to collect the bodies of dead bees and dispose of
them, to sweep the gutters. Like her thousands of sisters, Flora 717 understands
what her fellow bees are thinking through scent and vibration and touch. Unlike
her Flora sisters, however, Flora 717 is prone to speech and action, and through
these attributes as well as her ugliness and size, she is singled out for duty.

The Sages, a high-ranking order of priestess bees, see something in Flora 717,
and they are proven correct -- she can produce Flow, royal jelly, the
descriptions of which are among the most accurate descriptions of breast-feeding
in fiction. ''As it opened its tiny mouth to cry,'' Paull writes, ''two pulses
began flickering in Flora's cheeks and her mouth began to fill with sweet
liquid.'' Flora thrives at her new job, despite being looked down upon by the
other nurses. They need her there -- we know that supplies have been low because
of cold and rain and lack of food -- and so she remains. The first commandment
of the hive is to ''Accept, Obey and Serve,'' and Flora is nothing if not
dutiful. The dogma of the hive is paramount.

One day, when Flora 717 is lost in the transmission of the Queen's Love (a daily
communal prayer), she feels a strange sensation in her body, and the reader
identifies the likely culprit before Flora does -- she is carrying an egg, a
blasphemous offense. This is where the book turns from a buzzy version of
''Animal Farm'' toward a story more inspired by Margaret Atwood's dystopian
novel ''The Handmaid's Tale.'' Flora 717's feelings for her offspring are wholly
separate from her love for the queen. The novel examines what members of each
class are permitted to say, think and know. Even as Flora 717 feels intense
guilt about her own body, she wants to do what she knows she should not.

Despite the honor of being asked to make Flow, Flora 717 is restless, and she
quickly moves up the ranks, reinventing herself yet again as a skilled forager.
Flora's first few flights are remarkably vivid. ''Below her spread the great
plain of different greens,'' Paull writes, ''pushed together in crude four-sided
shapes as if by some primitive insect ignorant of the beauty of the hexagon.''

Some of my favorite scenes are of Flora in the dance hall, the room where the
foragers explain where they've been and where to find food, all communicated
through rapturous dance. There is also humor here: The male bees -- preening,
strutting drones -- are hilarious sex fiends. ''Think now of those foreign
princesses waiting for us. How fatigued, how impatient for love must they be?
Would you bind them in chastity a single moment longer? Or shall we fill our
bellies with the strength of this hive, then free them with our swords?'' This
is accompanied by a suitably lewd gesture.

Through all of her flights and dances, however, Flora's thoughts are with her
egg, which she has delivered and hidden in the nursery, alongside the queen's.
She is so busy foraging that she cannot visit it. When she finally makes it to
the nursery, the fertility police have killed her child -- a beautiful boy, a
drone. It is hard not to read the plight of the working mother in Flora 717's
heartbreak. Soon, Flora produces another egg, and she vows to care for it.
Before she delivers the egg, she crafts herself a rough crib out of wax and
hides the baby away in a secret chamber, one of many parts of the book that feel
like a fairy tale. That egg is also lost, when the Godzilla man dismantles the
hive to harvest the honey.

Winter arrives, and the hive suffers. Day after day, bees die, their bodies
exhausted from luckless foraging. In a scene like something out of a horror
film, the remaining drones are murdered. (Another important piece of my
forthcoming apiology dissertation: A bloody massacre is always great fun!) A
cadre of spiders appears next to the hive, wise, truth-telling villains. They
exchange bees for information, and one whispers to Flora that she will have one
more egg.

Though the book's ending -- the fate of Flora 717's third and final egg -- is
visible halfway through, the brazenness and strength of the conceit is enough to
make that a minor infraction. When a story is told with such rapturously
attentive imagination, it feels very small indeed to quibble. Some aspects
didn't always work (the six ''scent panels'' in the queen's library that narrate
the life of the hive, the political schemings of the Sage sisters and the
spiders), but the tale zooms along with such propulsive and addictive prose that
I didn't mind.

Forward-thinking teachers of high school environmental science and biology will
add ''The Bees'' to their syllabuses in a flash. Not only is this novel a
gripping story of a single bee's life, it is also an impossibly well-observed
guide to the important role bees play in our human lives. When I finished the
book, I stepped outside my door and into a spring day, full of buzzing and
pollen, and I wanted to thank each and every bee for its service. Few novels
create such a singular reading experience. The buzz you will hear surrounding
this book and its astonishing author is utterly deserved.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/25/books/review/the-bees-by-laline-paull.html

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ERIC NYQUIST)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


