                             483 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civilians Killed by U.S. in Yemen Are Tied to Qaeda

BYLINE: By SHUAIB ALMOSAWA and ERIC SCHMITT; Shuaib Almosawa reported from Sana,
and Eric Schmitt from Washington. Saeed Al Batati contributed reporting from
Mukalla, Yemen, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1245 words


SANA, Yemen -- The kidnappers pulled up in a pickup truck outside the Taj
barbershop in an upscale neighborhood here in the Yemeni capital. One held an
AK-47 assault rifle and the other carried a stun gun. As the men went inside,
nearby shopkeepers heard shots.

Then a foreigner -- tall, with the physique of a body builder, and holding a
black gun -- was seen standing over one of the mortally wounded attackers in the
doorway of the barbershop, witnesses said. The foreigner kicked an automatic
weapon out of the man's hands, looked right and left down the street, jumped
into a nearby sport utility vehicle and drove away.

Those new details emerged Saturday about a shooting last month in which the
Obama administration said two Americans from the United States Embassy killed
two armed Yemenis who were trying to kidnap them from the barbershop.

While much about the encounter remains unclear, a Yemeni official said Saturday
that the two Yemeni assailants were part of a cell linked to Al Qaeda that had
planned and executed several attacks on foreigners in the country. Whether by
design or chance, the official said, the Americans had apparently disrupted a
kidnapping ring that government officials blame for killing a Frenchman last
week, kidnapping a Dutch couple last year, trying to assassinate a German
diplomat last month, and attacking the central prison here in February, freeing
19 inmates.

The shooting at the barbershop led Yemeni authorities to the group's leader,
Wael Abdullah al-Waeli, said an Interior Ministry spokesman, Col. Mohamed
al-Qaidi. Yemeni officials said that they killed Mr. Waeli last Wednesday during
a shootout in the capital. The State Department announced Wednesday that it had
closed its embassy here to the public because of security concerns.

The shooting on April 24 has opened a rare window into American clandestine
operations in Yemen, a major battleground against what counterterrorism
officials say is Al Qaeda's most dangerous regional affiliate. And it has
emerged as a potential source of embarrassment for Yemen's president, Abdu Rabbu
Mansour Hadi, whose government helped conceal the American role in the shooting,
allowing the two officers to leave Yemen quietly a few days after the shooting.

Yemeni officials have not yet publicly acknowledged that Americans were
responsible for killing the attackers, referring only to ''foreigners.''

In Washington, spokesmen for the State Department, Pentagon and C.I.A. declined
on Saturday to provide any details about the shooting. American officials,
however, said they strongly suspected that the Qaeda branch in Yemen was behind
the attempted kidnapping, and that embassy personnel were targets of other
planned kidnappings.

The State Department acknowledged Friday only that two embassy officers had shot
and killed two assailants who tried to kidnap them, and that the shooting was
under investigation. Two American officials identified the men as a Special
Operations commando and a C.I.A. officer.

The killings have an echo of a 2011 case in which a C.I.A. security officer,
Raymond A. Davis, was jailed for weeks after killing two Pakistanis on a crowded
street in Lahore.

On Saturday, witnesses and Yemeni officials gave a slightly different account of
the shooting, saying that only one of the foreigners had actually fired his
weapon, striking each of the attackers at least twice.

Colonel Qaidi said the kidnappers had pretended to be police officers. The
foreigner who fired at them was carrying a licensed weapon, he said, and first
shot the Yemeni man carrying the AK-47 before shooting his partner.

Shopkeepers and witnesses said the police questioned the barbershop staff for a
few hours, and took away the owner, but he was later released. Individuals who
witnesses believed were relatives of the gunmen came to collect their bodies,
argued with the police, and were arrested.

Later that night, officers returned, and took a copy of a recording made by a
video camera at the barbershop, shopkeepers and witnesses said, and then
destroyed the equipment. The shop has been closed since the shooting, though it
was opened briefly so the employees could clean it, other shopkeepers said.

Many other questions remain unanswered about what exactly the two Americans were
doing at a barbershop on a street frequented by Westerners in the Yemeni
capital, apparently with no security detail. ''They just went out for haircut?
It seems a little strange to me,'' said Gregory D. Johnsen, a Yemen scholar and
author of ''The Last Refuge: Yemen, Al Qaeda and America's War in Arabia'' who
visited Sana five weeks ago.

A former United States Embassy official said the barbershop had been popular
with embassy staff members when many lived outside the embassy compound. ''But
most folks have gotten their hair cut at the embassy for quite some time now,''
the former official said, ''as the requirements to move into town are just too
onerous to warrant that level of effort to get a haircut.''

Mr. Johnsen said security was so tight in the capital that embassy personnel he
met had to get permission from Washington to leave the walled compound. But the
armed American officers may have been operating under different rules.

In the past two years, since Mr. Hadi's election, the Pentagon has gradually
increased its presence in Yemen, sending about 50 Special Operations troops to
train Yemeni counterterrorism and security forces, and a like number of
commandos to help identify and target Qaeda suspects for drone strikes,
according to American officials.

While strikes carried out by C.I.A. drones operating from a secret base in
southern Saudi Arabia illustrate the best-known covert program in Yemen, the
C.I.A. also has a significant number of personnel in Yemen conducting
counterterrorism missions and some training, the officials said.

The C.I.A. has stepped up its cooperation not only with Yemen's spy agencies,
but also with Saudi intelligence, which has deep contacts in its southern
neighbor.

It was Saudi intelligence, for instance, that helped thwart a plot by Al Qaeda's
regional affiliate here, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, in October 2010 to
pack explosives in printer cartridges and load them on cargo planes bound for
Chicago. And it was a Saudi double agent who infiltrated the Qaeda offshoot to
foil a plot in 2012 to blow up a United States-bound airliner.

The Obama administration's counterterrorism strategy in Yemen aims to help
President Hadi overhaul his nation's military to combat the Qaeda franchise in
its strongholds in large parts of the country's south. And it calls for the
United States and Yemen to work together to kill or capture about two dozen of
Al Qaeda's most dangerous operatives, who are focused on attacking America and
its interests.

This approach adheres to the White House's global counterterrorism strategy in
the wake of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan: to employ small numbers of Special
Operations troops, C.I.A. paramilitary teams and drones against elements of Al
Qaeda that are committed to striking the United States, while arming and
advising indigenous security forces to tackle costlier long-term
counterinsurgency campaigns.

Whether the strategy will work in Yemen is still unclear. ''In Yemen, there are
a variety of different factions, each with enough weapons and men, but none have
enough guns or men to impose their will on everyone else,'' said Mr. Johnsen.
''So there is lots of maneuvering behind the scenes.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/11/world/middleeast/yemen-silent-on-disclosure-of
-shooting-by-americans.html

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


