                             486 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Release Rationale in Drone Killing of Citizen

BYLINE: By ASHLEY PARKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 724 words


WASHINGTON -- Facing the potential defeat of an appeals court nominee, the Obama
administration decided Tuesday to publicly release much of a classified memo
written by the nominee that signed off on the targeted killing an American
accused of being a terrorist.

The solicitor general, Donald B. Verrilli Jr., made the call to release the
secret memo -- and not appeal a court order requiring its disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act -- and informed Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.
of his decision this week, according to two administration officials.

The White House was informed Tuesday. But the memo will not be released right
away because officials said they needed time to redact it and to prepare an
appeal asking the court not to reveal classified sections of a federal appeals
court ruling last month requiring that most of the memo be made public.

The New York Times was a plaintiff in the case, and a parallel case was brought
by the American Civil Liberties Union. The ruling told the government precisely
which sections of the memo to release and which to redact.

The memo was written by David J. Barron, a Harvard Law professor and former
acting chief of the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, who is Mr.
Obama's choice to fill a vacancy on the United States Court of Appeals for the
First Circuit in Boston.

As a Justice Department lawyer, Mr. Barron wrote two memos concluding that it
would be lawful to kill Anwar al-Awlaki, a United States citizen living in
Yemen, based on intelligence agencies' conclusion that he was a senior
operational terrorist plotting attacks against the United States and that his
capture was not feasible. The lawsuit focused on the second and longer of those
memos. Mr. Awlaki was killed by an American drone strike in September 2011.

Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, had promised to slow down Mr.
Barron's confirmation if the administration did not allow senators to view all
of Mr. Barron's memos or release redacted versions to the public.

The Senate was expected to take a procedural vote on Mr. Barron's nomination on
Wednesday, with a final confirmation vote tentatively scheduled for Thursday.
Libertarian-leaning senators in both parties had expressed reservations about
the nomination, and some conservatives also argued that he was too liberal on
other issues.

A spokesman for Mr. Paul said the senator would still take the Senate floor on
Wednesday for a filibuster-style protest of Mr. Barron's nomination. In a
statement released Tuesday night, Mr. Paul said, ''There is no legal precedent
for killing American citizens not directly involved in combat and any nominee
who rubber stamps and grants such power to a president is not worthy of being
placed one step away from the Supreme Court.''

Last year, Mr. Paul used the nomination of John O. Brennan to lead the Central
Intelligence Agency to stage a nearly 13-hour filibuster. In that case, he was
protesting the administration's refusal to rule out the use of drone strikes on
American soil in ''extraordinary circumstances,'' like the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks.

The White House is hoping that its promise to release a redacted version of the
main Awlaki memo may help Mr. Barron secure the 51 Democratic votes he needs to
secure confirmation.

Senator Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado, who is locked in a close re-election
fight, had said he could not support the nomination if the White House did not
release some of his legal opinions. After the administration's announcement on
Tuesday, he said he was ''now able to support the nomination of David Barron.''

''This is a welcome development for government transparency and affirms that
although the government does have the right to keep national security secrets,
it does not get to have secret law,'' Mr. Udall said. Senator Ron Wyden,
Democrat of Oregon, called the decision ''a very constructive step.''

Jameel Jaffer, an A.C.L.U. lawyer, said, ''The government claims authority to
carry out targeted killings of Americans deemed to threaten national security --
the public surely has a right to know the breadth of the authority the
government is claiming as well as the legal basis for that authority.''

''We're hopeful that the decision to release the memo signals a broader shift in
the government's approach to transparency about this program,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/21/us/politics/memo-approving-targeted-killing-of
-us-citizen-to-be-released.html

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


