                             480 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yemen Strikes Target Qaeda Camps

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 303 words


ADEN, Yemen -- Airstrikes in southern Yemen on Sunday killed about 25 people
suspected of being members of Al Qaeda, local tribal representatives said, in
the second operation of its kind within two days.

On Saturday, an airstrike killed 10 militants and three civilians in central
Yemen, a country that is home to Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, one of the
group's most lethal wings.

Yemen's Defense Ministry said that Sunday's strikes were in a remote mountainous
region of the south. The ministry's website quoted an official on the High
Security Committee as saying that the strikes were carried out because of
information that ''terrorist elements were planning to target vital civilian and
military installations.''

Similar wording was used in the announcement about Saturday's strike.

The ministry did not specify the nature of the airstrikes, but in both cases
local residents said remotely piloted drone aircraft had been circulating the
target areas before the attacks.

The United States acknowledges using drone strikes against Qaeda fighters in
Yemen, but it does not comment on the practice.

Local tribal representatives said that about 25 bodies had been transferred to
nearby towns from the sites of Sunday's attacks. They said at least three
separate strikes had taken place after dawn prayers, all targeting Qaeda camps.
One official said the militants targeted were among the ''leading and
dangerous'' elements of Al Qaeda and were of different nationalities.

Witnesses said they had seen Qaeda militants dragging bodies and some wounded
people out of the area.

American drone attacks have killed several people suspected of being Qaeda
members, including Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born Islamist cleric accused of
links to plots to bomb a Detroit-bound airliner in 2009 and American cargo
planes in 2010.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/21/world/middleeast/yemen-strikes-target-qaeda-ca
mps.html

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


