                              48 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 8, 2014 Wednesday 11:02 AM EST

America can't lead the world in innovation if the FAA keeps dragging its feet on
drone rules;
America won't continue to lead global innovation if it's illegal to use the
latest technologies.

BYLINE: Larry Downes

LENGTH: 1342 words


As the latest revolutionary digital technology takes off, entrepreneurs are
finding themselves battling federal regulators for permission just to experiment
with new applications.

This time, it's not the FCC (smartphone apps), the FTC (the Internet of Things),
the FDA (genetic testing), the Department of Transportation (driverless cars),
the Federal Reserve (bitcoin), state and local utility commissions (the sharing
economy) or the SEC (crowdfunding).

This time it's the Federal Aviation Administration, which has been struggling
since 2012 to develop rules for safely integrating unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV), aka drones, into U.S. airspace.

To be clear, we're not talking here about the lethal, multi-million dollar
military aircraft that are changing the nature of warfare. We're talking about
small, consumer-friendly devices that sell today to hobbyists and others for
less than $300.

That's about the same as the price of a smartphone, and the similarity is no
coincidence.  Most of the parts used in today's fast-growing drone market come
from smartphone component suppliers. The CPUs, GPS hardware, sensors, cameras,
accelerometers, gyroscopes and even software are the same. And drones often use
phones and tablets as their remote control.  UAVs are basically flying
smartphones.

So as the production of over a billion smartphones relentlessly drives down the
price of these components through economies of scale, drones are set to benefit
from a similar pattern of price/performance improvement, following the same
faster-cheaper-smaller principle that drives all digital products and services.

 Once large-scale adoption begins, the sky's the limit.

What will we do with our drones?  UAVs have already proven themselves ready to
disrupt everything from agriculture and natural resource management to law
enforcement, delivery services, photography and mapping. Amazon, for one, has
already demonstrated the feasibility of local delivery by drone. Widespread use
could revolutionize retail and take-out food distribution, reducing traffic,
pollution and fossil fuel consumption.

The FAA conservatively estimates that, within a decade, private drones will
constitute a $90 billion industry.  Already, according to the Consumer
Electronic Association, 2014 sales of UAVs are forecast at $84 million and
250,000 units. By 2018, CEA predicts consumer drone sales will approach $300
million and about a million units.

Pretty impressive, especially for a technology that is technically illegal.

That's right:  for now, consumers may only operate UAVs below 400 feet, and only
for noncommercial uses.  All other uses are prohibited. (After a small drone
crashed in New York, the FAA has argued inconsistently that drones may not be
operated anywhere near major airports.)

That leaves drone enthusiasts operating in something close to the opposite of
the largely "permissionless" ecosystem that has spawned much of the digital
revolution elsewhere.  Even testing new UAV applications requires a special
exemption from the FAA-hardly the best environment for developing new products
and services.

And the FAA hasn't been shy about enforcing its prohibition. It regularly sends
cease-and-desist letters for uses it deems commercial or dangerous.  A Dutch
tourist was recently fined over $3,000 for crashing a drone at Yellowstone
National Park.

That could soon change.  In 2012, Congress ordered the FAA to develop rules that
would allow commercial UAVs to operate safely in U.S. airspace by 2015. (Safety,
obviously, is key.)

But we're still waiting for the rules. The agency has already missed several
self-imposed deadlines, and in June a government audit concluded the agency will
miss Congress's deadline.  Rules for small drones were promised three years ago,
with the FAA now saying they will come later this year.

That delay could prove disastrous. Typically, the United States is first to
explore the potential for new digital inventions. But with drone-based
agricultural and delivery services already taking off in Europe and elsewhere,
the United States could lose its edge in developing new markets for drones and
their still largely unknown uses.

Though the FAA has yet to set a date for its new rules, there are small signs of
progress.  Late last month, for example, the agency granted the application of
some filmmakers for an exemption to use UAV-mounted cameras on set.

That may be the first step toward freeing up drones for news gathering and
commercial services including delivery.  With the filmmaking exemption granted,
applications for other commercial use exemptions are now increasing.

But even with eventual federal safety rules in place, the drone market will
still face regulatory obstacles.  In the absence of FAA guidelines, state and
even local governments have leapt into the breach, passing confusing and
incompatible regulations - and often prohibitions - on drone use.

Some communities have been motivated by obvious safety concerns, but more often
the proscriptions are motivated by unease about privacy.

So far, the privacy concerns have mostly been speculative. UAVs, like nearly
every other mobile device, have high-definition cameras that continue to improve
exponentially in both quality and capacity.  So, like Google Glass and other new
video technologies, UAVs tend to invoke a visceral "creepy" response in
consumers, who imagine the worst possible uses such technologies might be put to
against unsuspecting victims.  They imagine drones hovering at their windows,
back yards, or public protests.

To be sure, large-scale deployment of increasingly low-visibility drone
technologies will bump up against cultural and even legal restrictions on the
collection and distribution of information.  At the same time, at least in the
United States, some of those concerns will be offset by strong First Amendment
protections for journalists and others.

It may be that existing privacy protections and "Peeping Tom" laws are already
sufficient to bar the most offensive uses of drones.  For law enforcement
applications, likewise, the Fourth Amendment has been interpreted by courts to
adapt to new technologies that challenge personal privacy, and may curb police
practices that most Americans would find unreasonable.

But until the technology matures and the truly disruptive applications emerge,
pre-emptive prohibitions - especially at the local level - could unnecessarily
stunt the development of valuable technology before it has a chance to prove its
worth to society.

That's not a problem unique to drones.  Maintaining the delicate balance between
protecting consumer values and allowing new technologies to develop is a growing
problem for lawmakers.  As the Internet revolution continues its "Big Bang"
expansion to businesses that have long been immune from disruptive innovation,
new products and services increasingly challenge old assumptions about how
industries are best organized and operated.

And that in turn triggers the need to rethink rules that protect consumers from
harmful behaviors, as well as the kind of regulators best-suited to define and
enforce those protections.

With the launch of the drone economy, the FAA has now joined the list of
federal, state, and local agencies whose core markets are or are likely to be
transformed by better and cheaper technologies.

But so far, the agency hasn't displayed much urgency in responding to the
challenge and opportunity.

The fate of a multi-billion dollar industry is hanging in the balance. And as
history has amply demonstrated, regulators who move too slowly often wind up
sidelined or obsolete.

Which would prove especially dangerous here.  There is, after all, quite a
difference between the crash of a smartphone app and a drone.

Larry Downes is co-author with Paul Nunes of "                  Big Bang
Disruption:  Strategy in the Age of Devastating Innovation                  "
(Portfolio 2014).                  He is a Project Director at the Georgetown
Center for Business and Public Policy.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


