                             485 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Electronic Double Bill to Shiver the Timbers

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 485 words


The electronic music double bill on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Masonic
Temple was a superb clash of aesthetic extremes. The Red Bull Music Academy
Festival paired the United States debut of the Haxan Cloak (the English musician
Bobby Krlic) with the German musician Robert Henke and his laser project,
Lumière. Mr. Henke's music and light show were crisp, bright, geometric and
propulsive, a calibrated barrage. The Haxan Cloak performance was amorphous,
ominous and immersive, a transcendent plunge into darkness and overwhelming
pressure. Earplugs were available at the door.

The Haxan Cloak poured on the bass: rumbles, drones, reverberating thwacks, deep
throbs that vibrated the rib cage. Above it were slow-moving whooshes and
buzzing gusts of distortion. Sometimes there were sounds of voices, blurred and
unintelligible, like distant throngs of the damned. A kind of gargantuan
heartbeat would occasionally arrive, moving toward something like a dance-music
beat, only to be swallowed up again, as if the earth had opened up underneath.

It was electronic music -- Mr. Krlic was hunched over a mixer in the smoke and
shadows onstage -- but for much of the set, typical keyboard notes or percussion
timbres were scarce. It was more as if the Haxan Cloak were playing disc jockey
with cataclysms: avalanches, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, tornadoes.

Eventually, the music did grow tonal -- temporarily at first, to be subsumed
again in noise. But Mr. Krlic gradually offered an exit from the abyss, with a
deep drone that was more note than noise, resolving into a sustained, rapturous
major chord that felt like redemption.

Mr. Henke's Lumière connected his laptops and push-button controllers to three
laser projectors generating imagery on a towering overhead screen and beyond it
into the balcony. He, too, started with a drone, while bright dots and vertical
lines pulsed on the screen. Then his music headed toward the techno dance floor,
nearly all of it purely percussive, with syncopated kick drums and ratchety
cross-rhythms and electronic high-hats, in beats that kept evolving.

Meanwhile, the screen imagery exploded: into squares, spirals, circles, curves
and, with some puffs from smoke machines, three-dimensional shapes unfurling
overhead. The lasers were tightly coordinated with the music, with shapes
expanding on each wallop; distorted tones got dotted lines, clearer tones got
straight ones. For much of the set, the on-screen geometries were hard-edged
white or near-white; when the screen suddenly turned blue, the dancing crowd
roared. Later, the screen offered flickering numbers, letters and two words:
''Love Code.''

Mr. Henke's music didn't need the laser show. It was absorbing enough on its
own, never settling for repetition when it could offer permutations or move on.
But the visuals, mapping the music and extrapolating from it, clarified how much
Mr. Henke prized clarity.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/13/arts/music/the-haxan-cloak-and-robert-henke-in
-red-bull-festival.html

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Robert Henke's Lumière: This German musician was joined by Haxan
Cloak on Saturday night at the Brooklyn  Masonic Temple in a night of electronic
music that was part of the Red Bull Music Academy Festival. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MICHAEL NAGLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


