                             487 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

G.O.P.'s Foreign Policy Hawks Wary of Paul's Evolving Views

BYLINE: By JEREMY W. PETERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1415 words


WASHINGTON -- Rand Paul had just finished his opening remarks at a private
gathering of Republican power brokers at the Four Seasons in Georgetown last
fall when Phil Gramm, the former senator from Texas, shot up his hand with the
first question.

''Let's say you knew for certain that by May 1 of next year that Iran would have
generated enough highly refined uranium to build a bomb,'' Mr. Gramm said.
''Would you support attacking?'' Mr. Paul, the Republican junior senator from
Kentucky, had a dodge at the ready. ''Can I give you Romney's answer?'' he
asked, drawing a few laughs from the crowd as he said that he did not answer
hypotheticals.

Mr. Gramm demanded more of a response.

''What would you do?'' the former senator insisted, but Mr. Paul was again
vague.

An awkward silence fell over the room, and the moderator at the gathering
quickly moved on to the next question.

The exchange, a recording of which was provided by someone in the room, showed
how difficult it will be for Mr. Paul to straddle the treacherous fault line
splitting the hawks of the Republican Party from others who favor a less
aggressive foreign policy as he tests the waters for a presidential run in 2016.

As Mr. Paul opens new doors to younger voters and others who have turned away
from Republicans, few issues have proved more persuasive for the
libertarian-minded senator than his wariness of centralized authority and his
skepticism of military intervention. Yet those same positions have alarmed
powerful elements of the Republican base who have undertaken a campaign to
portray Mr. Paul as dangerously misguided.

They include right-leaning supporters of Israel, neoconservative think tanks,
veterans of the George W. Bush administration and the widely read writers of The
Weekly Standard, National Review and the editorial page of The Wall Street
Journal. Underscoring the potential threat to Mr. Paul, these are not just
influential voices but people who hold considerable clout in the moneyed circles
that control the flow of cash into campaigns and ''super PACs.''

And so far, despite an aggressive charm offensive by the senator that has
included dinners with former ambassadors and military brass, a trip to Israel
and an in-person pitch to the board of the Republican Jewish Coalition, a group
heavily financed by the casino billionaire Sheldon G. Adelson, the criticism
still rains down.

In the Journal's opinion pages, he has been accused of ''bark-at-the-moon
lunacy.'' (Mr. Paul's meeting last fall with The Wall Street Journal's editorial
board quickly went sour. People who attended described the meeting as awkwardly
contentious -- until Rupert Murdoch, the newspaper's owner, walked into the room
and brought down the temperature.) The headline on a column last month by Rich
Lowry of National Review asked: ''Rand Paul's Foreign Policy: For the Situation
Room or the Dorm Room?'' The reason the attacks are so personal and so hostile,
Mr. Paul said, is that Republicans who favor more American involvement in the
world fear that his view, not theirs, is gaining support. ''The country is
moving in my direction,'' he said in an interview.

Mr. Paul bristles at an adjective often used to describe his foreign policy:
isolationist. ''Not only am I for being involved, I'm actually for more
involvement than the neocons,'' he said, referring to the branch of conservatism
that supports an interventionist foreign policy.

''The neocons are really neoisolationists,'' he added, ''in the sense that they
are so hardened -- that everybody should behave like us, and everybody in the
world should be in our image -- that they discount the concept of looking at
things realistically and negotiating with people who don't have our point of
view.''

Mr. Paul often complains that his worldview is caricatured by people who are
eager to cast him as a clone of his father, former Representative Ron Paul of
Texas, who is deeply suspicious of American involvement overseas. ''They start
out with a mischaracterization of his point of view, bastardize it, make it
worse,'' the senator said.

Mr. Paul said he believes that war should be fought only when Congress
authorizes it and that President Obama has overstepped his constitutional
authority in using drones as a substitute for traditional military forces.
Though Mr. Paul has been accused of having a weak policy of containment for
dealing with Iran, he has insisted that his reluctance to publicly discuss the
idea of a military strike there stems from his unwillingness to broadcast
options to the nation's enemies.

This less swaggering approach has won him applause as he has toured the country,
visiting places like Berkeley, Calif., recently, and Cambridge, Mass. It
dovetails with his efforts to rein in what he sees as examples of a runaway,
unchecked executive branch that flouts the Constitution by spying on its
citizens and fighting covert wars with drones.

Mr. Paul may not have a long record on foreign policy -- as he often points out,
he was a full-time ophthalmologist until just three and a half years ago -- but
his votes in the Senate on bills dealing with Israel and Iran, along with past
statements dug up and disseminated by his opponents, have raised concern among
those with hawkish tendencies.

He believes that all foreign aid should be eventually cut off. His description
of aid to Israel as ''welfare'' in a 2011 interview alarmed some Jewish
conservatives.

Last month, a video surfaced of him suggesting that Dick Cheney, the former vice
president, was motivated by profit when he advocated invading Iraq because of
his ties Halliburton, the government contractor. To many Bush-era Republicans,
the remark was especially offensive.

''It's crazy. It's vicious. It's personal,'' Paul Wolfowitz, a deputy secretary
of defense during the Iraq war, said of Mr. Paul's suggestion. ''It's entirely
unhelpful.''

Some of the mistrust of Mr. Paul has deeper roots, stemming from newsletters
published in his father's name that promoted hostility toward Israel, which
critics saw as anti-Semitism. The elder Mr. Paul has said he did not write the
newsletters.

''In some ways, it feels terribly unfair to tar a son with his father's brush,''
said Danielle Pletka, a scholar with the American Enterprise Institute, a
neoconservative think tank. On the other hand, she added, ''There's no love lost
between Jewish conservatives and Rand Paul. There just isn't.''

Not all interventionist Republicans are so unsympathetic, and some perceptions
of Mr. Paul among his skeptics have begun to soften since he and his staff began
courting the hawkish wing of the party about a year ago.

Morton Klein, president of the Zionist Organization of America and a close
associate of Mr. Adelson's, said that when he pressed Mr. Paul to explain his
position on aid to Israel in a recent meeting in the senator's Washington
office, Mr. Klein left reassured. ''He said if there was a vote and for any
reason it seemed like it was actually going to be close, he would vote for it,''
Mr. Klein said.

The issue of aid to Israel also came up last year in a meeting with the board of
the Republican Jewish Coalition. Members pressed the senator, and he conceded
that while he would eventually like to terminate all foreign aid, he knew that
would not be realistic now. ''You could see he was a work in progress,'' said
Ari Fleischer, a former press secretary to George W. Bush and a member of the
Jewish coalition's board. ''He's thinking about these issues; he's trying to
learn.''

Part of Mr. Paul's strategy is to appear before audiences that are not
necessarily friendly to him. Last year, he spoke to the Heritage Foundation and
this year, to the Center for the National Interest, a think tank established by
former President Richard M. Nixon, where Mr. Paul said he believed that American
foreign policy was ''too belligerent.'' Later, at a private dinner with military
brass and former diplomats, he left the impression that he knew he must evolve.

''What I did come away with was he is in fact moving away from his father,''
said Charles G. Boyd, a retired four-star general in the Air Force. ''He's
searching for his own footing. He senses he needs to be different.''

Some observers say this is the evolution of a savvy politician with presidential
ambitions. Mr. Paul says it is more like a slow reveal. ''I've been expressing
gradually where my foreign policy is,'' he said. ''Foreign policy isn't set in
stone. It isn't either-or. And it isn't always right or wrong.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/24/us/politics/gops-foreign-policy-hawks-wary-of-
pauls-evolving-views.html

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, outside the Senate
chamber on Wednesday after his speech opposing the judicial  nominee David
Barron over his writings on military drones. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


