                             492 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Airstrikes Could Help in Reversing Insurgent Offensive, Experts Say

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MILITARY ANALYSIS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1051 words


WASHINGTON -- American air power could play an important role in reversing the
Sunni insurgent offensive in Iraq, current and former American military
officials said on Friday, but it would be most effective with improved
intelligence about insurgent targets and if the United States were willing to
deploy small teams of advisers to call in airstrikes.

''We have some experience with this,'' said James M. Dubik, the retired Army
lieutenant general who trained Iraqi forces during the surge. ''If we want to do
it, we know how to do it.''

Despite skeptics, particularly Democrats, who say that American airstrikes are
unlikely to change the course of events in Iraq, President Obama is considering
them among a range of options to help the government of Prime Minister Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki.

Airstrikes could also be a way to project power to help break the momentum of
the advancing Sunni extremists, who are threatening the country's Shiite-led
government in Baghdad, without sending American ground troops back into combat
in Iraq -- a step Mr. Obama ruled out on Friday.

Should the Obama administration go forward with airstrikes, the unstable
situation in Iraq would probably require the aircraft to be based in neighboring
countries like Turkey, Italy, nearby Arab countries or on American aircraft
carriers in the Persian Gulf, former officials said. Armed drones could also be
based in the region, or possibly in Kurdistan.

Militant staging areas, weapons caches, headquarters or convoys crossing into
Iraq from Syria could be struck in areas that are remote from Iraqi forces and
not close to civilians. Such strikes, which could be carried out by piloted
aircraft or drones, would not need to be called in by ground controllers.

But if the Obama administration wanted to use air power to influence battles
closer to Baghdad, where insurgents are operating near civilians and Iraqi
troops, the strikes would be most effective if the United States deployed small
teams of Special Forces or perhaps intelligence agents to identify specific
targets for the pilots to strike. In 2001, similar teams called in airstrikes in
the initial phase of the war in Afghanistan, and they could be used in Iraq if
Mr. Obama did not consider them at odds with his promise not to send ground
troops.

''It's feasible for the U.S. to play a limited role with air power with S.O.F.
combat controllers and limited advisers,'' said Gen. John R. Allen, now retired,
using the acronym for Special Operations forces. General Allen led allied forces
in Afghanistan from 2011 to 2013 and also served in Iraq. Referring to the
militant group Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, he added that: ''The U.S. role
now in this is essential. With every battlefield success, the ISIS elements gain
strength and apparent moral authority and the Iraqi security force elements lose
space and morale.''

The success of insurgents in gaining ground in Iraq has surprised Obama
administration officials, who a month ago assumed that the military situation in
Iraq was relatively static, rebuffed the Iraqi government's repeated request for
airstrikes and are only now having the Pentagon draw up military options.

But while the gains of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria are impressive, the
rebels have their weaknesses. For the most part, they are lightly armed fighters
whose logistical lines stretch back to northeast Syria and who often travel in
vulnerable vehicles. Some of the group's fighters have made their way to Falluja
and Iraq's Anbar Province through the Euphrates River Valley, while others have
moved through northern Iraq to Mosul.

A major question for the Obama administration would be whether to also strike
targets in Syria as the group is moving freely across the Syria-Iraq border.

''We can do a lot of damage to ISIS in Iraq and Syria pretty quickly,'' said
Jack Keane, the retired Army general who served as vice chief of staff of the
Army, and who said that airstrikes could also help restore the confidence of
Iraqi troops.

Military experts cautioned, however, that air power is not a panacea. They said
that the United States needs to provide better intelligence to the Iraqis and
must persuade Mr. Maliki to replace incompetent but politically connected
commanders. The United States, they said, should also send American military
planners to help devise and coordinate military operations.

American Defense officials in the meantime warned that the Maliki government
must include prominent Sunnis and Kurds in the government and take steps to
bridge the sectarian divisions that have brought the country to the edge of
civil war.

A frustrated-sounding Pentagon press secretary, Rear Adm. John Kirby, said at a
briefing on Friday that the United States is ''disappointed with the performance
of some of these units,'' which failed to hold Mosul and a number of other
cities from the advances of the Al Qaeda-inspired Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria group.

During the years that American forces were based in Iraq, they often supplied
air power for Iraqi units that confronted Sunnis extremists or Shiite militants.
When Mr. Maliki ordered his forces to retake Basra from Shiite militants in
2008, Iraqi forces suffered serious setbacks until Gen. David H. Petraeus, who
was then the American commander, sent American warplanes, AC-130 gunships,
Predator drones and American advisers to help the Iraqi military.

Iraqi has ordered F-16 planes, but it still has no air force to speak of and
very limited ability to quickly find and strike targets, particularly in remote
areas where ISIS has set up camps, and near the porous Iraq-Syria border.

As a short-term fix, the United States has sent hundreds of Hellfire missiles,
which the Iraqis have strapped beneath the wings of small Cessna turboprop
planes. Iraq has helicopters but they have proved to be vulnerable against
insurgent fire. From Jan. 1 through May, six helicopters were shot down and 60
were damaged in battle, an American official said.

An American military official said Friday that defense planners would be working
over the weekend on options for Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel to present to Mr.
Obama. The official said that American officials were debating whether to demand
access to Iraqi bases inside the country as a condition of helping the Maliki
government.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/14/us/politics/us-airstrikes-could-help-in-revers
ing-insurgent-offensive-experts-say.html

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Military Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


