                             493 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Sends 3 Attack Planes to Iraqi Government

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1000 words


WASHINGTON -- Deepening its involvement in the crisis in Iraq, Iran has sent
three Russian-made attack planes to the Maliki government that could be deployed
against the Sunni militants who have wreaked havoc on Iraqi military forces,
American and Iraqi officials said Tuesday.

Delivery of the Su-25 aircraft, which American officials said had already
conducted missions in western and northern Iraq, is the latest step Iran has
taken to help Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki battle the forces of the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, and expand its influence as Iraqi
politicians struggle to form a new government.

An American official, who declined to be identified because he was discussing
intelligence reports, said that at least one of the planes had been flown by an
Iranian pilot. A senior Iraqi official, however, insisted that the aircraft were
being piloted only by Iraqis. He said that the planes originally belonged to the
Iraqi Air Force and were flown to Iran during the 1991 Persian Gulf War for
safekeeping.

''Iran, understating the urgency of our situation on the ground, gave us some of
our own planes back,'' said the Iraqi official, who declined to be named because
he was discussing military preparations in Iraq.

The deployment of the Su-25s, which the Iraqi Ministry of Defense showed being
loaded with bombs and ammunition, came amid reports that an Iranian officer had
recently been killed near Samarra where Iraqi forces are trying to defend a Shia
shrine against an ISIS attack. Two American officials said that the Iranian,
whom the Iranian IRNA news agency identified as Col. Shoja'at Alamdari Mourjani,
had been with an Iranian drone unit and was hit by an ISIS mortar attack. The
senior Iraqi official insisted, however, that the dead man was an Iranian
religious tourist who worked in the aviation industry in Iran.

Iraq's need for air power is clear. Its air force has consisted of several
Cessna planes that carry American-supplied Hellfire missiles and an assortment
of American and Russian-supplied helicopters, which the Iraqi military used
during its recent fight with ISIS in Tikrit.

The United States has sold Iraq F-16 warplanes, the first of which was to have
been sent this fall. But the delivery date is now uncertain since the American
contractors who have supported the program were evacuated from the Balad air
base during the ISIS offensive. Iraq recently announced that it was also buying
Su-25s from Russia, but those aircraft are not yet believed to be in operation.
Iran's provision of the Su-25s follows its decision to send a fleet of Ababil
surveillance drones, an intelligence unit to intercept communications and
advisers.

Like the Iranian drone and intelligence units, the aircraft are based at the
Rasheed Air Base in Baghdad. Similar to the American A-10 aircraft, the Su-25 is
designed for ground attacks. It is equipped with a 30-millimeter cannon, and
armed with rockets and bombs, and could be effective against ISIS convoys and
concentrations of ISIS fights, said Joseph Dempsey, a military analyst at the
International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.

An American official said that Su-25s had already carried out missions over
Ramadi, Fallujah in western Iraq and the Baiji refinery in northern Iraq. The
official did not say if the aircraft dropped any bombs, but added that Iran had
sent more Revolutionary Guards ground forces and Air Force personnel to Iraq.

Some influential members of the Senate Armed Services Committee on Tuesday
voiced concerns about Iran's growing presence in Iraq after being briefed by
Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, at a closed meeting of the committee. ''They've got a
heavy involvement at this point,'' said Senator Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, who
is also the senior Republican on the Intelligence Committee. ''I don't trust the
Iranians, so I'm assuming they're there for mischievous purposes and for their
own self-interest.''

The Pentagon press secretary, Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, confirmed on Tuesday that
Iran had sent warplanes, weapons, ammunition and military advisers, but so far
no combat troops.

''We have no indications that there are Iranian ground troops inside Iraq,''
Admiral Kirby told reporters at the Pentagon. ''What I've said before remains
true today: that we know that there are some Iranian operatives -- Quds
operatives inside Iraq that are training and advising some Iraqi security
forces, but more critically, Shia militia.''

''We understand that Iraq, as a sovereign nation has that right to reach out to
a neighbor if they see fit to ask for that support. What we've said -- and
nothing's changed about what we've said -- we're not going to coordinate our
military activities with Tehran,'' Admiral Kirby said.

Mr. Dempsey, the military analyst based in London, said that at least two Su-25
aircraft in Iraq appeared to be from among the seven Iraqi Su-25s that were
flown to Iran during the Persian Gulf War. ''The third aircraft, the lone
two-seat combat capable trainer, may be drawn from a later Iranian order from
Russia,'' he said.

Iraqi officials, however, have insisted that all of the Su-25 aircraft were
among those that have been kept in Iran, raising expectations that the remaining
four Su-25s will also be returned.

The Iraqis' insistence that all of the planes are Iraqi owned is significant
because Iraq would be violating international sanctions if it bought arms,
ammunition or military equipment from Iran, the State Department warned in
February. But the Iraqis' insistence that they alone are operating the planes
leaves unclear how the aircraft, which have not been part of the Iraqi
military's inventory for two decades, were flown to Iraq and are currently being
maintained.

Mr. Dempsey said that the release of the video of the aircraft by the Iraqi
Ministry of Defense might be an attempt ''to support the Iraqi narrative of
their capacity to operate them independently.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/09/world/middleeast/iran-sends-3-attack-planes-to
-iraqi-government.html

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Russian Sukhoi Su-25 planes on the tarmac at Al Muthanna
military base in Baghdad last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


