                             490 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

The Extremist Organizations 'on the Front Lines'

BYLINE: By BEN HUBBARD and SHREEYA SINHA

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 871 words


In outlining his foreign policy priorities at the United States Military Academy
on Wednesday, President Obama called on Congress to authorize up to $5 billion
to support countries ''on the front lines'' in the fight against terrorism.

That approach is intended to address the decentralization of Islamic extremism
over the last decade.

The Al Qaeda organization founded by Osama bin Laden still exists, but it has
been supplanted as the world's foremost jihadist force by a range of new groups
across the Middle East and Africa.

Some of these groups have ties with Al Qaeda's central leadership. Most make
their own decisions, follow their own leaders, maintain independent sources of
funding and focus more on waging local battles than on attacking the West.

Here is where some of the most important of these groups operate:

AFGHANISTAN and PAKISTAN

The remnants of Al Qaeda, led by Ayman al-Zawahri, operate near the
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. Analysts differ on Mr. Zawahri's influence over the
affiliates, and American drone strikes have thinned the Qaeda leadership ranks
and limited its ability to organize, move and communicate.

Qaeda affiliates in Somalia, Syria, Yemen and North and West Africa are exerting
growing influence in their regions, posing new challenges for American
counterterrorism efforts. Their networks receive occasional ideological guidance
from Mr. Zawahri, but they are increasingly focused on local and regional
objectives, financed through activities like kidnapping-for-ransom operations.
Some affiliates -- particularly Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, based in
Yemen -- have sought to attack the United States directly.

SYRIA

The Syrian civil war has turned the country into the world's largest magnet for
international jihadists. Along with many Islamist rebel brigades, the country
hosts two main extremist groups.

The Nusra Front, a Qaeda affiliate, says its priority is to topple President
Bashar al-Assad. It has maintained close ties with other rebel groups, who
respect its battlefield prowess.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, is an expanded version of Al Qaeda
in Iraq that controls a number of cities in northeastern Syria and western Iraq.
Its brutal tactics alienated it from the Syrian rebel movement, as did the fact
it has emphasized the establishment of an Islamic state over the fight against
Mr. Assad. It was officially disowned by Al Qaeda in February.

YEMEN

Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula is believed to maintain the closest ties with
Al Qaeda and has been considered one of its most dangerous affiliates since it
sought to attack Western targets and claimed credit for the failed effort on
Dec. 25, 2009, to blow up an airliner approaching Detroit.

In Yemen, as in Afghanistan and Pakistan, American drone strikes have had a
devastating effect on the group's ability to operate. The American-born cleric
Anwar al-Awlaki and other top leaders in the group have been killed. Still,
American intelligence and military officials warn of increasing operational ties
between the Qaeda franchise in Yemen and the Shabab, a militant group in Africa.

NORTH AFRICA

A range of extremist groups operate across North Africa. Al Qaeda in the Islamic
Maghreb is known for suicide bombings and kidnappings and for its seizure of
towns in Mali before being pushed out by French forces.

In Libya, Ansar al-Shariah led the 2012 attack on the American diplomatic
compound in Benghazi that killed Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens. In Egypt,
Ansar Beit al-Maqdis has carried out bombings and drive-by shootings targeting
Egyptian security forces.

NIGERIA

Boko Haram has waged an insurgency against the state in Nigeria, launching
attacks that have killed thousands in recent years. The group recently gained
international infamy -- and a reprimand from other militant groups -- after it
kidnapped more than 250 schoolgirls, as discussed in the video. It is a cultlike
Islamic extremist group with a reputation for capricious violence against
civilians. Founded in 2002, Boko Haram has received help from Al Qaeda in the
Islamic Maghreb, the group's affiliate in North and West Africa.

SOMALIA

Until recently, the Shabab controlled significant territory in Somalia, but
withdrew from major cities in the face of a military campaign by the African
Union, Kenya and others. It has recently launched attacks aimed at punishing
other states for their military presence in Somalia. These operations include
the attack by Shabab gunmen last year on Westgate mall in Nairobi, the Kenyan
capital.

The group came to prominence as a nationalist movement seeking to combat the
United States-backed Ethiopian invasion of Somalia in 2006. American
counterterrorism officials have said the organization has collaborated with Boko
Haram in Nigeria and Qaeda affiliates in Yemen and North Africa.

The United States Special Operations Command unit that has battled militants in
Yemen has also carried out lethal drone strikes in Somalia against the Shabab.
The Times's Mark Mazzetti and Eric Schmitt reported in July 2011, that such
efforts ''represented an intensification of an American military campaign in a
mostly lawless region where weak governments have allowed groups with links to
Al Qaeda to flourish.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/world/middleeast/the-extremist-organizations-o
n-the-front-lines.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


