                             495 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 17, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Airstrikes Target Haven for Qaeda and Taliban Fighters

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN; Declan Walsh contributed reporting from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 462 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Pakistani fighter jets killed at least 35 people in
attacks on militant bases in a remote part of the North Waziristan tribal
district, the military said Wednesday, hours after local residents reported that
an American drone strike in the same area had killed 20 people.

A Pakistani intelligence official said that fighter jets carried out airstrikes
in the Shawal Valley, a remote forested area that has become a sanctuary for
fighters who are with Al Qaeda and the Taliban, and in several nearby districts.

The strikes targeted fighters who had fled Miram Shah and Mir Ali, the two main
towns in North Waziristan that were largely abandoned by civilians and militants
shortly after the start of the military offensive on June 15.

''It's a mixed bag of local and foreign militants,'' the official said, speaking
on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the
media.

Hours earlier, residents said, an American drone fired four missiles at a
compound and a vehicle in Zoi Saidgai, about 30 miles west of Miram Shah and
close to the Afghan border. Speaking by phone, residents said that 20 people
were killed in the strike: 12 foreigners of Central Asian origin and eight local
militants.

The area where the strike occurred is controlled by Hafiz Gul Bahadur, a
pro-Taliban militant commander who avoided attack for several years under an
agreement with the military, but whose forces have been hit by fighter jets in
recent days as Pakistan ground troops move toward Datta Khel, a center of
militant activity in North Waziristan.

A security official confirmed the drone strike, although there was some
confusion over the timing of it.

The military says that more than 400 militants and at least 30 soldiers,
including two officers, have died in the course of the monthlong military
operation. The figures could not be independently verified as there are few, if
any, journalists left in North Waziristan.

The military drive to wrest control of North Waziristan is now advancing on two
fronts, to the east and west of Miram Shah. The security official in Peshawar
said that three soldiers were killed in a firefight with militants in Boya, 10
miles southwest of the town, on Tuesday. Two others died at the start of a
ground offensive to seize control of Mir Ali.

The official said that earlier reports of the fighting on Tuesday, which
suggested that all five soldiers had died in Mir Ali, were incorrect.

More than 900,000 civilians have fled the fighting, taking refuge in nearby
tribal districts or across the border in Afghanistan.

Separately, an Afghan court jailed a Pakistani journalist for four years on
charges of making contact with Pakistani Taliban fighters based in Afghanistan,
Agence France-Presse reported on Wednesday.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/17/world/asia/pakistani-forces-attack-militant-ba
ses-in-remote-north.html

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


