                             494 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 15, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt Presents Proposal to Israel and Hamas for a Cease-Fire in Air Attacks

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Cairo, Fares
Akram from Gaza, and Michael D. Shear from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1353 words


JERUSALEM -- Israel and its main militant Gaza adversary weighed an Egyptian
cease-fire proposal late Monday, signaling a possible de-escalation of a
week-old aerial battle that has left nearly 200 Palestinians dead from Israeli
bombs and has sent hundreds of Gaza rockets deep into Israeli territory.

A senior government official in Israel, which has been preparing for the
possibility of a ground invasion of Gaza, said it was seriously considering the
Egyptian proposal. The initial reaction of Hamas, the dominant militant group in
Gaza, was less committal, but was not an outright rejection.

The proposal envisioned a cease-fire beginning at 9 a.m. local time on Tuesday.
It called for border crossings to Gaza to ''be opened,'' with the movement of
people and goods to be ''facilitated once the security situation becomes stable
on the ground.'' Within 48 hours of the initial cease-fire taking hold, talks
are to be held in Cairo with the Israelis and the Palestinian militant factions
on conditions for a longer-term truce, according to the text of the proposal.

An Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ambassador Badr Abdelatty, said: ''We
hope it will be acknowledged. We are in close contact with everyone.''

Adding weight to the efforts, Secretary of State John Kerry was expected in
Cairo as early as Tuesday, according to officials in the region.

The senior Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of
the delicate diplomacy, said a meeting of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's
security cabinet had been called for Tuesday morning to discuss the proposal and
that it was ''being considered very seriously.''

Hamas, which had said it was prepared to fire rockets indefinitely, appeared to
want better terms. Sami Abu Zuhri, a Hamas official in Gaza, wrote on his
Facebook page: ''The responses of resistance will continue until the demands of
our people are achieved. Any unilateral Israeli cessation has no value in the
light of the large crimes and the disastrous humanitarian situation.'' Osama
Hamdan, a spokesman for the Islamic group, was more dismissive. He told CNN's
''The Situation Room'' that Hamas did not receive the proposal directly from the
Egyptians. That, he said, meant it was ''an initiative for the media -- it's not
a political initiative.''

One of Hamas's demands has been the opening of the Rafah border crossing between
Gaza and Egypt, but the Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman said the proposal
refers only to crossings ''between Israel and Gaza.''

Egypt is widely considered the natural regional mediator in such conflicts. But
Egypt's relations with Hamas, an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood, have turned
bitter since the military ouster last year of Egypt's elected Islamist
president, Mohamed Morsi, a leader in the Brotherhood. Under the new president,
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, a former general who led the military takeover, Egypt has
shut down most of the tunnels beneath its border with Gaza that were both an
economic lifeline for the Palestinian coastal enclave as well as a major channel
for weapons smuggling.

Tony Blair, the special envoy of the quartet of Middle East peacemakers, which
included the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia,
welcomed the proposal in a statement. He said: ''The hope is that this
cease-fire will allow us to put in place such a long-term strategy for the
future in Gaza and the West Bank. The international community will give its full
backing to such an initiative.''

International entreaties for a cease-fire intensified in recent days amid
growing alarm over the rising death toll in Gaza, but there was no letup in the
hostilities on Monday. At least 14 Palestinians were killed on the seventh day
of Israel's air offensive aimed at quelling the rocket fire, bringing the total
death toll in Gaza to about 180, many of them civilians. An airstrike on a house
in Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip killed a girl, 4, her father and her uncle,
according to Gaza health officials.

In a statement, Pierre Krähenbühl, the commissioner general of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency in Gaza, which assists Palestinian refugees,
called on the Israeli Army to ''put an end to attacks against, or endangering,
civilians and civilian infrastructure,'' and for an end to rocket fire from
Gaza.

On Tuesday, the State Department issued a statement supporting the cease-fire
efffort.

''We welcome Egypt's call for a cease-fire and hope this will lead to the
restoration of calm as soon as possible,'' Jen Psaki, a State Department
spokeswoman, said in the statement.

''Secretary Kerry has been deeply engaged in conversations with Prime Minister
Netanyahu, Egyptian government officials and President Abbas throughout this
difficult period, and the United States remains committed to working with them
and our regional partners to find a resolution to this dangerous and volatile
situation,'' she added.

A senior State Department official said that Mr. Kerry, in trying to facilitate
a cease-fire, had spoken with the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
four times since Saturday. Mr. Kerry also spoke with his Egyptian and Qatari
counterparts twice during that period, and with the Turkish and Jordanian
foreign ministers once since Saturday.

At a White House dinner celebrating Ramadan on Monday night, President Obama
said the administration was encouraged by the Egyptian proposal. He also called
the images of violence in Gaza and Israel ''heart wrenching'' and said the
United States would do ''everything we can to facilitate a return to the 2012
cease-fire.''

The president repeated his criticism of what he called ''inexcusable'' rocket
attacks by Hamas, saying that Israel had the right to defend itself.

But he also noted what he called a longstanding ''humanitarian crisis'' in Gaza
and said further escalation of the violence between Israel and the Palestinians
benefited neither side.

In a telephone interview, the commander of Israel's 107th Squadron, which is
engaged in Gaza using F-16 fighters, said that the air force was working
methodically according to ''a clear policy of minimum harm to civilians,'' but
that everybody knew Gaza, a densely populated sliver of land, was not a
''sterile area.'' Under military rules governing the interview, the commander
could not be identified by name.

Hamas has fired about 1,000 rockets at Israel over the last week, hitting new
targets as far north as Hadera, about 60 miles from Gaza, and keeping millions
of Israelis running for shelter at the wail of the sirens. On Monday a rocket
struck a Bedouin village in the Negev desert and injured two sisters, ages 15
and 10, one of them severely, according to the Israeli police.

Egypt helped broker the last cease-fire between Israel and Hamas that ended
eight days of fierce cross-border fighting in November 2012, but the quiet
lasted only about 19 months.

Israel has said that this time it wanted to achieve quiet for a long period of
time, whether through military means or diplomacy, and ministers had called for
Hamas to be stripped of its weapons. With Israeli forces massed along the Gaza
border prepared for an invasion, some right-wing politicians criticized the
cease-fire contacts, complaining that Israel had not finished the job.

Israeli officials have said that Hamas was looking for some kind of an
achievement, a ''victory image,'' before giving up the fight. That may have come
on Monday when it flew an unmanned aircraft into Israel, apparently for the
first time. The Israeli military said it intercepted the drone, blowing it apart
in midair just offshore from the Israeli port city of Ashdod with a Patriot
surface-to-air missile.

The military wing of Hamas claimed on its website that it had sent ''a number of
drones'' flying into Israel on ''special missions,'' saying that the aircraft
were one of the ''surprises'' it had promised over the last week. It was not
clear whether the drone, intercepted about 14 miles north of the Gaza Strip, was
carrying explosives or surveillance equipment.

''It was shot to smithereens,'' said Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an army spokesman.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/15/world/middleeast/israel-gaza-conflict.html

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A man inspected what was left of an apartment building in Gaza
City on Monday evening after it was struck by Israeli bombs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Israeli police officers on Monday in the port city of Ashdod, which was hit as
about 1,000 rockets were sent into Israel from Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMIR
COHEN/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


