                             491 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2014 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

A Soldier Is Missing. What Comes Next?

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Washington; Pg.

LENGTH: 899 words


When the United States Army in eastern Afghanistan discovered that one of its
soldiers, Pfc. Bowe Bergdahl, was missing in action, it began a frantic search.
As detailed in the classified military logs given to WikiLeaks by Pfc. Bradley
Manning, now Chelsea Manning, the initial hunt for the captured sergeant
included surveillance drones, armed checkpoints and infantry raids on suspected
militant strongholds. Intercepts of Taliban communications included in the
military records reveal that the militants immediately thought to use the
capture for propaganda purposes, and derided American forces for looking in all
the wrong places. Andrew W. Lehren

Here are summaries and excerpts of the military logs:

June 30, 2009

04:30 (U.T.C.): A soldier reported missing after he fails to show up for morning
roll call. ''A full search was ordered.''

05:05: American commanders order that ''all vehicles, latrines, bunkers'' be
searched.

By 06:45: Frantic search escalates for the missing soldier, with search teams,
tracking dogs and surveillance drones. All other soldiers are reported accounted
for. Checkpoints are set up on roads leading in and out of the outpost.

09:45: Second Predator drone ''arrived on station in support.''

10:12: Radio traffic, presumably between Taliban fighters, crackles with the
report ''that an American soldier with a camera is looking for someone who
speaks English.''

13:09: Military receives information confirming that ''a U.S. soldier has been
captured.''

15:43: An ''intercepted radio transmission that the Taliban'' has captured three
civilians and one United States soldier.

Between 17:25 and 18:00: Army troops fan out and conduct raids on suspected
enemy locations. Reinforcements are summoned as the search expands into the
night.

July 1

02:34 a.m.: American officials intercept a communication, presumably between two
Taliban or other extremists (No. 1 and No. 2), discussing the missing soldier:

No. 1 -- Is it true that they captured an American guy?

No. 2 -- Yes, they did. He is alive. There is no where he can go (LOL).

No. 1 -- Is he still alive?

No. 2 -- Yes, he is alive. But I don't have the whole story. Don't know if they
were fighting. All I know is that they capture (sic) him alive and they are with
him right now.

6:10: More intercepts, presumably among two Taliban members (No. 1 and No. 2)
discussing that the Americans are searching in the wrong area for the missing
soldier.

No. 1 -- (LOL). They know where he is but they keep going to the wrong area.

No. 2 -- O.K. Set up the work for them.

No. 1 -- Yes, we have a lot of I.E.D. on the road.

No. 2 -- God willing, we will do it.

No. 1 -- We were attacking the post he was sitting taking (expletive). He had no
gun with him. He was taking (expletive). He has not cleaned his butt yet.

No. 2 -- What a sheam (sic -- ''shame'') for them.

No. 1 -- I don't think he w--

No. 2 -- Yes, look they have all Americans, A.N.A. (Afghan National Army)
helicopters, the planes are looking for him.

No. 1 -- I think he is big shot. That why they are looking for him.

A third Taliban, apparently, asks: Can you guys make a video of him and announce
it all over Afghanistan that we have one of the Americans?

No. 1: -- We already have a video of him.

11:02: The search continues. Military sending troops ''to check out tents in the
area.''

18:02 p.m.: An Afghan commander receives a call ''from Taliban stating that they
want to trade 15 Taliban for the American. Taliban will call back in 10
minutes.''

19:33: Reports that ''soldier may be being held near Shin Cha village where
white station wagon was seen traveling... The liscense (sic) plate number is
7534.''

July 2

2:46 a.m.: The military says it ''detained 25 for tactical questioning.''

5:47: Searchers ''are conducting meeting with local elders attempting to get
info.''

7:08: After American military officer meet with Afghan elders, who said they
were ''asked by the Taliban to a trade between the U.S. and Taliban. The Taliban
trems (sic- ''terms'') are 15 of their Taliban brothers in U.S. jail and some
money in exchange for Pvt. Bergdahl. The elders assured me that Pvt. Bergdahl is
alive and in (sic) not being harmed.''

''The elders are going to have another meeting with themselves to discuss
helping us this afternoon.''

Moreover, the elders ''also assured that they will do everything they can to
take possession of Pvt. Bergdahl. They said they will appeal to the Taliban by
saying that they are white bearded men as elders.''

12:03: Military received in an intelligence report has ''the missing U.S.
soldier'' in a specific location. A subsequent search, however, turns up
nothing.

16:36: A military operations center reports that ''Pfc. Bergdahl ID card is on
his person.''

July 4

12:48 p.m.: Intelligence report indicates that ''missing U.S. soldier was last
seen in a village grid location VB 611 818; A bag was covering his head and he
was wearing dark khaki apparel. He was being transported in a black Toyota
Corrolla (sic) which in addition was being escorted by 3-5 motorcycles.''

July 5

At 21:50 p.m.: Another report of a specific location where the missing soldier
is being held. ''Warrior Alpha is currently searching that grid.''

July 7

1:50: American soldiers searching passengers ''that were stopped in a white van
coming from building 30. Also, the mosque is saying in a speaker put down your
weapons. The Americans are here. There are to (sic) many to fight.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/timeline-how-us-army-finds-missing-soldiers
-bergdahl-pow-wikileaks-documents-details.html

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: List

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


