                             500 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

ISIS Displaying a Deft Command of Varied Media

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE and BEN HUBBARD; Scott Shane reported from Baltimore, and
Ben Hubbard from Baghdad. Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura contributed reporting from
London, and Melissa Eddy from Berlin.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1779 words


The extremists who have seized large parts of Syria and Iraq have riveted the
world's attention with their military prowess and unrestrained brutality. But
Western intelligence services are also worried about their extraordinary command
of seemingly less lethal weapons: state-of-the-art videos, ground images shot
from drones and multilingual Twitter messages.

ISIS, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, is using every contemporary mode of
messaging to recruit fighters, intimidate enemies and promote its claim to have
established a caliphate, a unified Muslim state run according to a strict
interpretation of Islamic law. If its bigotry and beheadings seem to come from a
distant century, its use of media is up to the moment.

A review of its prodigious output in print and online reveals a number of
surprises. ISIS propaganda, for instance, has strikingly few calls for attacks
on the West, even though its most notorious video, among Americans, released 12
days ago, showed the beheading of the American journalist James Foley,
threatened another American hostage, and said that American attacks on ISIS
''would result in the bloodshed'' of Americans. This diverged from nearly all of
ISIS's varied output, which promotes its paramount goal: to secure and expand
the Islamic state. Experts say that could change overnight, but for now it
sharply distinguishes ISIS from Al Qaeda, which has long made attacks on the
West its top priority.

And while ISIS may be built on bloodshed, it seems intent on demonstrating the
bureaucratic acumen of the state that it claims to be building. Its two annual
reports so far are replete with a sort of jihadist-style bookkeeping, tracking
statistics on everything from ''cities taken over'' and ''knife murders''
committed by ISIS forces to ''checkpoints set up'' and even ''apostates
repented.''

ISIS media frames its campaign in epochal terms, mounting a frontal assault on
the national divisions and boundaries in the Middle East drawn by Western powers
after World War I. These ''Crusader partitions'' and their modern Arab leaders,
ISIS argues in its English-language magazine, were a divide-and-conquer strategy
intended to prevent Muslims from unifying ''under one imam carrying the banner
of truth.''

That sense of historical grievance is an old theme for Al Qaeda and more
moderate Islamist groups. The difference is that by capturing expansive
territory and heavy weaponry, and flush with wealth from kidnappings, oil
piracy, bank robbery and extortion, ISIS claims to have taken a major first step
toward righting what it sees as this ancient wrong, creating a unified Muslim
state that will subsume existing nations.

ISIS carefully tailors its recruiting pitch, sending starkly different messages
to Muslims in the West and to those closer to home. But the image of
unstoppable, implacable power animates all of its messaging.

The pitch is effective. The militant rebellion in Syria and Iraq has drawn as
many as 2,000 Westerners, including perhaps 100 Americans, and many thousands
more from the Middle East and elsewhere, though some have returned home. Experts
believe most of those remaining today are fighting with ISIS.

''The overriding point is that success breeds success,'' said Emile Nakhleh, a
former C.I.A. analyst. ''The perception of quick victories and territory and
weapons and bases means they don't need to try hard to recruit.''

For two decades, Mr. Nakhleh said, Osama bin Laden talked about re-establishing
the caliphate, but he never claimed to have done it. ''Young people look at ISIS
and say, 'By gosh, they're doing it!' They see the videos with fighters riding
on big tanks. They see that ISIS has money,'' he said.

Before ISIS captured the Iraqi city of Mosul in June, other factions fighting in
Syria were attracting European recruits, said Thomas Schmidinger, a political
scientist from Vienna University. ''But since the fall of Mosul, nearly everyone
is going to'' ISIS, he said.

In the evolution of modern jihadist propaganda, Bin Laden, addressing a single
static camera with long-winded rhetoric in highly formal Arabic, represented the
first generation. (His videos had to be smuggled to Al Jazeera or another
television network to be aired.) The most prominent figure of the second
generation was the YouTube star Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born cleric killed
in a drone strike in Yemen in 2011, who addressed Westerners in colloquial
English, had a blog and Facebook page and helped produce a full-color,
English-language magazine called Inspire.

ISIS is online jihad 3.0. Dozens of Twitter accounts spread its message, and it
has posted some major speeches in seven languages. Its videos borrow from
Madison Avenue and Hollywood, from combat video games and cable television
dramas, and its sensational dispatches are echoed and amplified on social media.
When its accounts are blocked, new ones appear immediately. It also uses
services like JustPaste to publish battle summaries, SoundCloud to release audio
reports, Instagram to share images and WhatsApp to spread graphics and videos.

''They are very adept at targeting a young audience,'' said John G. Horgan, a
psychologist at the University of Massachusetts at Lowell who has long studied
terrorism. ''There's an urgency: 'Be part of something that's bigger than
yourself and be part of it now.' '' Fawaz A. Gerges, a professor at the London
School of Economics and the author of ''The Far Enemy: Why Jihad Went Global,''
said ISIS had so far consistently focused on what militants call ''the near
enemy'' -- leaders of Muslim countries like Bashar al-Assad of Syria -- and not
''the far enemy'' of the United States and Europe.

''The struggle against the Americans and the Israelis is distant, not a
priority,'' he said. ''It has to await liberation at home.''

Al Qaeda has often stressed the advantage to the terrorist network of supporters
who hold Western passports and can attack in their countries. But a common
public rite of passage for new recruits to ISIS is tearing up or burning their
passports, signifying a no-going-back commitment to the Islamic state.

One polished ISIS video features a Canadian recruit named Andre Poulin urging
North American Muslims to follow him -- and even to bring their families.
''You'd be very well taken care of here,'' he said in the video. ''Your families
would live here in safety, just like how it is back home. You know we have
expanses of territory here in Syria.''

In another English-language video pitch, a British fighter identified as Brother
Abu Bara al-Hindi poses the call to jihad as a test for comfortable Westerners.
''Are you willing to sacrifice the fat job you've got, the big car, the
family?'' he asks. Despite such luxuries, he says, ''Living in the West, I know
how you feel -- in the heart you feel depressed.'' The Prophet Muhammad, he
declares, said, ''The cure for depression is jihad.''

Such appeals provoke curiosity, and British fighters have answered hundreds of
questions about joining ISIS on Ask.fm, a website, including what type of shoes
to bring and whether toothbrushes are available. When asked what to do upon
arriving in Turkey or Syria, the fighters often casually reply, ''Kik me,''
referring to the instant messenger for smartphones, and continue the discussion
in private.

The English-language videos do not soft-pedal the dangers of the fight; the
video of Mr. Poulin, for instance, shows and celebrates his death in battle. But
the message to English speakers is nonetheless far softer than the
Arabic-language videos, which linger on enemy corpses and show handcuffed
prisoners casually machine-gunned.

The message, said Mr. Gerges, is blunt: ''Get out of the way or you will be
crushed; join our caravan and make history.''

Instead of emphasizing jihad as a means of personal fulfillment, the Arabic
media production portrays it as duty for all Muslims. It flaunts violence toward
its foes, especially Shiites and the Iraqi and Syrian security services, while
portraying the killing as just vengeance.

A recent hourlong ISIS documentary opens with video shot from a drone over
Falluja in Iraq and then over a convoy of ISIS gun trucks heading off to battle.
A voice-over says that the Islamic state is expanding and that Jerusalem's Aqsa
mosque is ''only a stone's throw away.''

In a later scene, a fighter holding a rifle and his passport mocks his home
country, Bahrain, for threatening to withdraw citizenship from those who fight
jihad abroad.

''Don't you know that you, your citizenship, your laws, your constitutions and
your threats are under our feet?'' the fighter says. ''Don't you know that we
are the soldiers of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and that our state will
expand until it removes the thrones that you sold your religion for?''

Nowhere in the hourlong production -- full of threats, drive-by shootings,
explosions and gunfights -- does an ISIS fighter mention the United States or
directly mention or threaten Israel, apart from the allusion to the Aqsa mosque.

Hassan Hassan, a Syrian analyst with the Delma Institute in Abu Dhabi, said that
ISIS portrays itself as restoring idealized eras of earlier Islamic history in a
way that resonates with many of the region's Muslims.

''ISIS tries to reflect an image of being the continuation of the system of the
caliphate,'' he said. ''In people's minds, the caliphate is about victory and
dignity of Muslims. A caliph is a defender of Muslims against the enemies from
within and without.''

ISIS' emphasis on strict implementation of Islamic law also draws support, he
said, as does its portrayal of its battle in staunchly sectarian terms.

Many of the region's Sunnis have deep sympathy for any force that can challenge
the Iraqi or Syrian governments, which they feel have oppressed Sunnis.

ISIS ''is the group that is capable of hitting these governments' security
forces and loyalists,'' and that has ''massive appeal,'' Mr. Hassan said.

The State Department's Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications has
stepped up its efforts to counter ISIS propaganda, publishing a steady stream of
ISIS horror tales on Facebook and Twitter, using the hashtag
#ThinkAgainTurnAway.

For now, it seems an uphill climb. Last week, an ISIS fighter calling himself
Abu Turaab wrote on Twitter, ''For those who want to come but are facing
obstacles, be patient and keep the desire for Jihad alive within you always.''

The State Department account replied, ''ISIS recruits' 2 choices: commit
atrocities & die as criminals, get nabbed and waste lives in prison.'' As of
Friday, Abu Turaab's comment had been named as a ''favorite'' 32 times. The
count for the State Department's response: Zero.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/world/middleeast/isis-displaying-a-deft-comman
d-of-varied-media.html

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Above, a still image from an ISIS video attempting to recruit
Canadians. The video features a Canadian man who was killed  last year. From
left, the most recent cover of an ISIS magazine  and a graphic from an ISIS
annual report that details its military  attacks by type, part of the group's
varied media strategy. (A12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
﻿
