                              50 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 23, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Little Trepidation in Europe as Civilian Drones Take to Its Skies

BYLINE: By NICOLA CLARK

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1892 words


GROSSMITTEL, Austria -- Deep within a secluded Austrian military training ground
here, an odd, shark-shaped machine hovered just above a stand of windswept
pines.

Guided by the keystrokes and joystick commands of a pair of pilots in a nearby
trailer, the unmanned helicopter, about the size of a large motorcycle, traced a
precise path, aiming its high-definition camera over an expanse of grassland.
The throbbing of its main rotor seemed to go unnoticed by the wild deer that
roam the site, where the Austro-Hungarian army first experimented with missiles
two centuries ago.

Despite the military setting for the demonstration flight, this flying drone --
called a Camcopter S-100 -- is not meant for monitoring combat zones or tracking
terrorists. Instead, its Austrian maker, Schiebel Aircraft, is finding a market
among civilian customers in industries like oil and gas, electric utilities,
mining, shipping and agriculture. Schiebel is one of more than 400 small and
midsize European companies developing new types of unmanned aerial vehicles, or
U.A.V.'s, most of them for civilian uses. It has sold more than 150 of its
drones to customers worldwide.

Perhaps surprisingly, given the stigma of military drones and European
sensitivities to electronic surveillance -- not to mention serious safety
concerns -- European aviation officials so far seem less likely to impede
development of the civilian drone industry than regulators in the United States.

In Washington, the Federal Aviation Administration has effectively grounded
development of commercial drones, pending the planned publication of rules
expected early next year for licensing them and integrating them into civilian
airspace starting in 2015.

While the European Union is also trying to map out such rules, individual
countries are taking their own approaches to civilian U.A.V.'s, in many cases
even encouraging their development. That is a reason that nearly 1,000 unmanned
vehicles are currently authorized to fly commercially in and around a dozen
European countries. They are led by Britain, France and Germany, which have also
provided funding for research and have, as in the case of Austria and Schiebel,
made military facilities available to companies for flight testing.

''Five years ago, everybody was convinced that defense was going to be 80
percent or more of the market'' for remotely piloted aerial systems, said Chris
Day, a top engineer at Schiebel, which will produce about three dozen Camcopter
drones this year at a factory in nearby Wiener Neustadt. ''I have a fair amount
of confidence today that within the next five years, civil will overtake the
military in terms of new users.''

The rush to develop the technology, however, has also raised safety concerns,
particularly in light of some recent, well-publicized accidents. Last spring, a
U.A.V. being used to film parts of an episode of the British television show
''The X Factor'' lost control while flying over central London and tumbled into
the Thames. Two years ago, a surveillance drone used by the police in
Merseyside, in northwest England, crashed during a training mission and was not
replaced.

Schiebel's drones, for example, sell for $3 million to $4 million, depending on
the type of cameras or sensors they carry, a lot less than the $10 million or
more for weaponized drones for the military. And some of the new civilian drones
being developed by others are designed to sell for $100,000 or less.

The declining cost and widening availability of sophisticated components like
high-definition cameras and infrared sensors continues to lower the business
barriers for smaller companies looking to break into an international market --
a field that analysts and industry groups say could reach more than $11 billion
a year by 2025 and might create as many as 100,000 highly skilled jobs worldwide
over the next decade.

An estimated one-third of all new U.A.V. systems in development are being made
in Europe. Of those, about 80 percent are being developed either exclusively or
primarily for civilian purposes, according to UVS International, an independent
consulting firm in Paris.

''The whole thing is being driven by the nonmilitary applications,'' said Peter
van Blyenburgh, president of UVS International. ''There's been a huge profusion
of small companies coming out of the woodwork.''

The burst of activity in Europe comes as a similar-size crop of American
start-ups -- equally eager to market their remote-controlled wares -- face new
regulatory hurdles at home.

As American aviation officials review proposals to create as many as a
half-dozen commercial U.A.V. test sites in the country, their decision has been
delayed by privacy groups, who worry about the potential for drones to eavesdrop
on the public in all sorts of new ways, not to mention the safety hazards posed
by new swarms of flying hardware.

European regulators, too, are devising a uniform set of guidelines for the safe
operation of unmanned systems in their skies, as well as rules governing the use
of the data they collect. In June, the European Commission, the Brussels-based
administrative arm of the European Union, published a ''road map'' that aims to
gradually open the skies of the 28-member bloc to remotely piloted aircraft
starting in 2016.

But unlike the United States, where Congress and the F.A.A. are the ultimate
arbiters of what types of vehicles are allowed to fly and where, the reach of
Brussels has been limited. Drones weighing less than 150 kilograms, or about 330
pounds, are not subject to oversight by the European Aviation Safety Agency;
individual member states have been free to set their own rules and authorization
procedures. Most of the U.A.V.'s now flying in Europe weigh less than 70 pounds
-- no bigger than a large microwave oven -- and fly at altitudes below 1,000
feet, well away from urban areas and airports used by conventional aircraft.

Schiebel, founded 60 years ago as a maker of mine and metal detectors, began
experimenting with U.A.V. technology in the mid-1990s but did not sell its first
Camcopter, which weighs 242 pounds, until 2005. The company now employs 200
people.

Mr. Day, 54, joined the company a year ago, after three decades in the British
military and later at the Thales Group of France, working on large unmanned
systems like the Watchkeeper, which is used by the British military for
surveillance and intelligence gathering.

Schiebel's first paying customers were governments and militaries in the Middle
East, which use the drones for surveillance and patrolling borders, harbors and
territorial waters. Schiebel has since diversified, with just 30 percent of new
business coming from such clients. Schiebel's civilian customers include large
farmers in Brazil, the Russian Coast Guard, and Transpower, the state-owned
operator of New Zealand's electricity grid.

The company is still trying to find buyers in Europe, though. Mr. Day conceded
that the relatively high cost of its machines still put such technology out of
reach for many smaller users.

''For them, the cost has to be significantly lower than a manned aircraft
alternative,'' he said. ''Otherwise, there's no market.''

Seeking to develop that low-cost niche, Cyberhawk Innovations, based in
Livingston, Scotland, started in 2008 as an aerial inspection and surveying
company specializing in the oil and gas industries.

The company uses a souped-up version of the same multirotor drones favored by
hobbyist fliers, selling them for $15,000 to $30,000 each to perform scheduled
monitoring of offshore oil and gas platforms for leaks and structural problems
-- work that has typically been done by human inspectors rappelling by rope from
towering derricks. About 50 percent of the company's clients are in Europe,
including energy giants like BP, Shell, Statoil and Total.

Malcolm Connolly, Cyberhawk's 34-year-old founder and a former rope-access rig
inspector, said he had been inspired by seeing remote-controlled submarines used
to inspect the underwater platform structures. ''It is a natural idea after you
see that,'' he said. ''The biggest driver is industrial safety. The other is
saving money.''

Because certain parts of an oil or gas platform must be shut down during
inspections, any time spent offline involves lost revenue.

By deploying a U.A.V., Cyberhawk can reduce a weeklong shutdown to just three or
four days, Mr. Connolly said, potentially saving his clients tens of millions of
dollars.

Industry executives and analysts said the applications offered by companies like
Schiebel and Cyberhawk represent the easy, early targets for up-and-coming
U.A.V. companies. But a recent European Commission study said the technology had
the potential to create new markets ''in the same way the iPad created an
entirely new and unpredicted market for mobile data services.''

Of course, mobile devices do not fly around overhead the way drones do, which is
why critics are less enthusiastic.

Chris Cole, an activist who runs the website Drone Wars UK, said the reliability
of even the most mature U.A.V. systems operating in war zones was unacceptably
low for use in Europe's crowded civilian skies. He said Drone Wars had verified
more than 100 crashes since 2008 of large combat and reconnaissance drones, like
the General Atomics Predator or the Northrop Grumman Global Hawk, from an active
military fleet of about 6,000 U.A.V.'s.

''The smaller ones crash so often it's even harder to track,'' Mr. Cole said.

European officials also acknowledged that so far there has been little public
debate about the effects on privacy and civil liberties of so many new platforms
for aerial data and image gathering. But it may still be ahead.

''It's vital to gain public support and indeed the support of politicians,''
Frank Brenner, the head of Eurocontrol, the Brussels-based agency that
coordinates air traffic management across the region, told an industry
conference in Cologne, Germany, last month. ''I receive letters from the public
that make me believe there will be a big wave of public concern ahead of us.''

Sophie in't Veld, a Dutch member of the European Parliament and vice chairwoman
of its committee on civil liberties, justice and home affairs, said new civilian
drone applications were developing so quickly that legislators were struggling
to keep up.

''Data protection rules are meant to be technology neutral and context neutral,
so in that sense normal, existing rules should apply,'' Ms. in't Veld said.
''The unanswered question is, can they be properly applied and enforced across
these new platforms?''

Mr. Day at Schiebel said he understood Europeans' unease. The region's civilian
drone industry is partly to blame for its ''quiescence,'' he said, in the face
of opposition from ''a small community that are growing ever more vocal.''

But the bigger worry might be market demand. He looked out at Schiebel's
gleaming hangar, filled with a half-dozen Camcopters in various stages of
completion, all destined for customers abroad.

Despite the flurry of new European players in the civilian drone market, Mr. Day
said he was doubtful there would be sufficient domestic demand in the coming
years to sustain them all.

''We still have to earn our spurs,'' Mr. Day said. ''But for now, we'll have to
earn them overseas.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/23/business/international/europe-at-ease-with-eye
s-in-the-sky.html

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A pilot on the ground commands the Camcopter S-100, a drone
made by the Austrian company Schiebel. At left, a worker in  the Camcopter
plant. The craft is finding buyers in sectors like  oil and gas, utilities,
mining, shipping and agriculture. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AKOS STILLER FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


