                             503 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 26, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Security

BYLINE: By LOUISE RICHARDSON.

Louise Richardson is the principal of the University of St. Andrews in Scotland
and the author of ''What Terrorists Want.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1154 words


PAY ANY PRICEGreed, Power, and Endless War

By James Risen285 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $28.

In ''Pay Any Price: Greed, Power, and Endless War,'' James Risen holds up a
mirror to the United States in the 13 years since 9/11, and what it reveals is
not a pretty sight. Risen, a Pulitzer Prize-­winning reporter at The New York
Times, documents the emergence of a ''homeland ­security-industrial complex''
more pervasive and more pernicious than the ''military-industrial complex''
Dwight Eisenhower warned against. With the power and passion of Zola's
''J'Accuse,'' he chronicles the abandonment of America's cherished open society
in a never-satiated search for security from an ill-defined threat.

Risen is not the first to comment on the wanton excesses of the war on terror.
John Mueller of Ohio State University has repeatedly written about the
extraordinary sums expended in America's overreaction to the threat posed by Al
Qaeda. Risen, however, brings home the costs by providing detailed accounts of
specific operations and the individuals caught up in the counterterror gold
rush. His focus is not on the ravages of war wrought in the countries invaded by
the United States and its allies, but on the United States itself. This is a
story of war profiteering, personal ambition, bureaucratic turf wars, absence of
accountability and, always, secrecy.

With the well-honed skills of an investigative reporter, Risen takes us through
the way $20 billion was sent to Iraq with little or no oversight and without any
clear direction on how it should be spent. Most of this money was flown from
East Rutherford, N.J., in bricks of $100 bills. Pallets of cash were distributed
at will. Today $11.7 billion remains unaccounted for. Much of it made its way
into private bank accounts; apparently about $2 billion is hidden in Lebanon. (I
can't help thinking what $20 billion, or even the missing $11.7 billion, would
do for homelessness and for schools in America's most blighted urban areas.)

We see how, in the post-9/11 era, a panic-stricken Congress threw cash at the
Pentagon, the C.I.A. and the F.B.I., at a rate so fast they had trouble spending
it. Of course there were many volunteers eager to help them. A Pentagon report
found that in the decade after 9/11, the Defense Department gave more than $400
billion to contractors who had been sanctioned in actions involving $1 million
or more in fraud. One of the most extraordinary stories is that of a failed
gambler, Dennis Montgomery, who managed to fool the C.I.A. into believing that
he had devised a means for decoding Qaeda messages. The C.I.A. proved itself
more gullible than the executives of both Hollywood and Las Vegas, who declined
to invest in his technology. The combination of the code of secrecy, turf
warfare among bureaucrats and personal ambition ensured that Montgomery's claims
went untested and made their way up through the intelligence ranks to the Oval
Office. Even after he was exposed, the C.I.A. pretended it had never been
involved, the Pentagon kept working with him and the Justice Department tried to
prevent any information about the scheme from becoming public.

Risen's fast-paced, accessible prose and his finely drawn detail make the book
read like an implausible thriller. The tragedy is that, however implausible, it
all appears to be true. There is much to generate righteous indignation in ''Pay
Any Price,'' like the $39.5 billion that went to the private contractor KBR,
notwithstanding its apparently casual accounting and seemingly shoddy
workmanship, which may have endangered the health or cost the lives of American
servicemen and -women. With 50,000 personnel and subcontractors on the ground,
it was too big to fail.

Then there is the role of the psychologists James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen in
justifying torture, as well as the pusillanimity of the American Psychological
Association in providing cover. Not to mention the wholesale violation of the
right to privacy by the N.S.A. But there are uplifting stories of tenacious
heroes too, ordinary people like Diane Roark and Steven Coughlin, who tried, and
generally failed, to get others to do the right thing.

While this is an enormously impressive book, it does have some weaknesses. I'll
mention three. Risen makes clear at the outset that he has relied upon many
anonymous sources. Fair enough. But he has also relied on many open sources
while rarely naming them. He says, for example: ''One 2012 estimate concluded
that the decade of war had cost Americans nearly $4 trillion.'' Why not provide
the source for this estimate, and for others mentioned throughout the book?
Doing so would enable readers to evaluate the reliability of the source, and to
conduct further research on their own.

Another weakness is that Risen, whose moral indignation is kept in check but
rarely far below the surface, does not make distinctions that might be drawn
between those he labels kleptocrats, oligarchs and the simply greedy. He rightly
points out that the corporate leaders of the security industry are the true
winners of the war on terror. He names them ''the New Oligarchs.'' It is
certainly true that General Atomics, which produces drones and in 2012 received
$1.8 billion in government contracts, has benefited financially. But it can
hardly be blamed for that. President Obama's policy of aggressively using drones
is open to criticism on many grounds, but the argument should be with the
government policy, not with the company that makes the drones.

Finally, while Risen is devastating in his criticism of the profligacy of
government agencies and the ''oversight-free zone'' they operated, he
acknowledges that this was because they were overwhelmed, that Congress was
panicking and that the public was whipped up into an unwarranted fear of
terrorism. He points to the role of self-appointed terrorism experts in
promoting this fear while drawing lucrative consulting contracts for themselves.
But he makes no mention of the press. I would argue that many in the news media
were at least as guilty as others in his book of stirring up public anxiety for
private gain. Risen himself, and the paper for which he works, are notable
exceptions. Still, an account of the corruption engendered by endless war that
doesn't include the role of a complicit media is incomplete.

This is an important and powerful book that should be read by anyone who
believes it is time to take stock after 13 years and re-evaluate the nature of
the threat the country faces and its response to the atrocity of 9/11. I would
also make it required reading for policy makers. As they plan the response to
the next terrorist attack, they should put in place mechanisms to ensure that
longstanding principles of oversight and accountability are not jettisoned, and
that the need for security is not deployed as a pretext for casually abandoning
the openness on which American society thrives.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/books/review/james-risens-pay-any-price.html

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY MATT CHASE)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


