                             501 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 27, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Curses, Fooled Again!

BYLINE: By PETER FUNT.

Peter Funt is a writer and television host. ''Candid Camera'' appears on TV
Land.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 912 words


I SPENT the summer producing new ''Candid Camera'' shows, and among the many
things I observed after a 10-year hiatus was that people are more easily fooled
than ever.

That may seem counterintuitive, but I'm certain it's true. Much has to do with
multitasking. When my dad, Allen Funt, introduced the show over six decades ago,
he had to work at distracting people. Nowadays they do it to themselves.

Many people we now encounter are fiddling with cellphones and other devices,
tackling routine activities with less-than-full focus. That makes them easier
targets for our little experiments, but also more vulnerable to personal mishaps
and genuine scams.

I worried briefly that people are now so tech-savvy that some of our props and
fake setups wouldn't be believed. Instead, we found that the omnipresence of
technology has reached a point where people will now accept almost anything.

We showed customers at a salon an ''un-tanning machine'' that ostensibly sucked
off dark pigment in seconds. We told residents in a Denver suburb that they
would be getting mail delivery via drone. We gave patients at a dentist's office
an iPad and said they'd now have to conduct their own ''online dental exam.'' In
each case, just about everyone bought in. At the dental office, several people
were even prepared to give themselves a shot of Novocain before we intervened.

[Video: Candid Camera: Drone Mail Watch on YouTube.]

I don't necessarily believe 21st-century Americans are more gullible, but they
tend to give that impression by protesting life's little insults without taking
time to fully digest the situation.

For instance, we told shoppers in Seaside, Calif., they would be charged a ''$10
in-store fee'' for not buying online. We told customers at a New York food store
that to pay with a credit card they would need ''three forms of photo ID.'' We
hired a cop in Scottsdale, Ariz., to enforce a ''2 m.p.h. pedestrian speed
limit.''

[Video: Candid Camera: 2 MPH Watch on YouTube.]

Virtually everyone took these propositions to be true. They shot back quickly at
big government, big business or any other entity that seemed to have too big a
role in managing their lives.

We tried a few political experiments and the results were all too predictable.
We showed New Yorkers petitions to recall state officials, but the names were
all fictitious. Most people supported the effort, among them a lawyer who
carefully explained that one should never sign anything without complete
knowledge of the facts, and then signed anyway. In California, our actress
posing as a candidate obtained dozens of campaign signatures without ever
stating a position, a party or even her last name.

[Video: Candid Camera: Recall Petition Watch on YouTube.]

In Arizona, we hired two actors to portray ''illegal immigrants.'' One played a
well-dressed gentleman from England, the other a blue-collar worker from Mexico.
The British fellow got plenty of signatures to ''vouch for good character,''
while the Mexican guy had difficulty just getting people to stop and listen to
his plea.

One thing that surprised us is the frequency with which people now whip out
phones to record whatever strange situation we create. When we rigged a
self-serve yogurt machine to start but never stop, one young customer took video
for two full minutes. When we arranged to have a store in Arizona institute a
''gays- only'' policy, one startled patron conducted (and recorded) his own
interview with our actor -- essentially producing the ''Candid Camera'' show
without realizing he was on it.

[Video: Candid Camera: Yogurt Watch on YouTube.]

I don't mind the smartphone obsession in our scenes; it's rather funny. It is a
shame, though, that so many people now interrupt real life -- in effect
hollering ''cut'' -- to record what could be called Act One. In doing so they
spoil their own Act Two.

Much hasn't changed over the years. For example, I expected to encounter more
profanity in everyday conversation, but it's really not there. I also wondered
whether young people would be less spontaneous and engaged when caught in our
scenarios, yet there's no hint of that whatsoever. I thought in these litigious
times fewer people would sign a waiver to appear on our show, but the
percentages have stayed about the same over the years.

I do note that today more people step out in public looking a bit disheveled and
unkempt and are then hesitant to sign because they're not happy with their
appearance.

Fortunately for our show, people are still, for the most part, willing to engage
a stranger and to smile when a little joke is revealed. That said, many folks
are feeling the weight of the world's problems, perhaps more than before.

It seems the less able we are to control the macro aspects of our lives, the
more we dwell on minutiae. That might explain why strangers stood on a street
corner for many minutes to help our actress select the best cellphone picture of
her dog. Folks listened with surprising curiosity as our actor explained why he
needed change for a dime.

Posing as a sanitation worker, I told residents in Queens, N.Y., that they would
now be required to separate household trash into eight different color-coded
bins. I can't imagine someone being more passionate about any world controversy
than the gentleman who was incensed about a bin devoted to ''poultry waste.''
''How,'' he asked, ''am I going to eat enough chicken in two weeks to fill that
up?''

[Video: Candid Camera: Trash Bins Watch on YouTube.]

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/27/opinion/curses-fooled-again.html

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY GOLDEN COSMOS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


