                             506 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 4, 2014 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

In case you missed it

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 250 words


A bottleneck ahead in Germany's infrastructure?

Flawless autobahns and punctual trains are as much a part of Germany's image as
Beethoven and Goethe. But the country's famed infrastructure is starting to
crumble. The once-soaring bridges are sagging. Some railroad switching
equipment, once top-of-the-line, has not been updated since the time of the
kaisers. Well-engineered canal locks are succumbing to silt and neglect.

washingtonpost.com/world

Md. 14-year-old raises

the barin weight lifting

Jake Schellenschlager, of Pasadena, Md., is 118 pounds but can lift more than
twice his weight - a feat that impresses powerlifting aficionados and worries
pediatricians who believe the sport poses risks to developing bodies.

washingtonpost.com/local

FAA picks sites in states

where drones will be tested

The Federal Aviation Administration has selected sites in a handful of states,
including Virginia and New York, to test unmanned aircraft systems, a crucial
step in the integration of drones into the national airspace. Each test site
will be responsible for testing drones in a different context.

washingtonpost.com/national

JPMorgan chief executive pushes for worker training

The chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, in an interview, says that skills gap may
be holding back economic growth and keeping unemployment a percentage point or
two higher than it could be. Jamie Dimon was in Washington to unveil a
five-year, $250 million effort to boost worker training around the world.

washingtonpost.com/business

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


