                             516 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. must release 'targeted killing' memos on drone strikes, court rules

BYLINE: Larry Neumeister

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


NEW YORK - The U.S. government must publicly disclose in redacted form secret
papers describing its legal justification for using drones to kill citizens
suspected of terrorism overseas, because President Obama and senior government
officials have commented on the subject, a federal appeals court ruled Monday.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit, based in New York, ruled in a
Freedom of Information Act case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union
and two reporters for the New York Times. In 2011, they sought any documents in
which Justice Department lawyers had discussed the highly classified "targeted
killing" program.

The requests came after a September 2011 drone strike in Yemen killed Anwar
al-Awlaki, an al-Qaeda leader who was born in the United States, and another
U.S. citizen, Samir Khan, and after an October 2011 strike killed Abdulrahman
al-Awlaki, al-Awlaki's teenage son and also a U.S. citizen. Some legal scholars
and human rights activists complained that it was illegal for the United States
to kill American citizens away from the battlefield without a trial.

The Justice Department did not immediately respond to phone and e-mail message
requests for comment.

In January 2013, U.S. District Judge Colleen McMahon ruled that she had no
authority to order the documents disclosed, although she chided the Obama
administration for not releasing them.

In an opinion written by 2nd Circuit Judge Jon O. Newman, a three-judge panel
noted that after McMahon ruled, senior government officials spoke about the
subject. The panel rejected the government's claim that the court could not
consider official disclosures made after McMahon's ruling, including a 16-page
Justice Department white paper on the subject and public comments by Obama in
May in which he acknowledged his role in the al-Awlaki killing, saying he had
"authorized the strike that took him out."

Jameel Jaffer, deputy legal director of the ACLU, said in an e-mail that "the
government can't pretend that everything about its targeted killing program is a
classified secret while senior officials selectively disclose information meant
to paint the program in the most favorable light."

David E. McCraw, vice president and assistant general counsel of the New York
Times Co., said in an e-mail that the 2nd Circuit "reaffirmed a bedrock
principle of democracy: The people do not have to accept blindly the
government's assurances that it is operating within the bounds of the law. They
get to see for themselves the legal justification that the government is working
from."

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


