                             512 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          February 26, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Pakistan plans military push in tribal area

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1086 words


The Pakistani government is on the verge of launching a major military offensive
in the North Waziristan tribal region after brutal Taliban attacks in recent
weeks and the apparent failure of peace talks with the militants, according to a
senior Pakistani official.

"It could be any day," said the official, adding that military plans have been
shared with top U.S. officials, who have long urged an offensive.

Planning for the operation comes amid a Pakistan-requested pause in U.S. drone
strikes that is entering its third month - the longest period without such an
attack in more than two years - and high-level bilateral meetings.

Pakistan's defense secretary, Asif Yasin Malik, is heading a delegation of
security officials  in Washington. CIA Director John Brennan quietly visited
Pakistan last week, days after Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, head of the U.S.
Central Command, held meetings at military headquarters in Rawalpindi.

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's national security adviser said cabinet-level
consultations on the military option will take place this week. "Dialogue with
the Taliban has derailed, and the writ of the state will be established in the
region," Sartaj Aziz told reporters Monday in Islamabad, the nation's capital.

With 150,000 troops already based in the tribal regions, the senior Pakistani
official said the government is prepared to begin a full-fledged clearing
operation. "We really don't have to start from scratch," the official said.

He said an official evacuation had yet to begin but noted that tens of thousands
of residents, who he said were "spooked" by reports of an imminent government
attack, had left on their own.

U.S. officials, while hailing the current level of cooperation and saying that
they are encouraged by Pakistan's apparent determination, noted that they have
been frequently disappointed in the past. "We'll believe it when we see it,"
said one U.S. official, who like other American and Pakistani officials spoke on
the condition of anonymity to discuss diplomatic contacts and military plans.

"We're not doing it for their happiness," the senior Pakistani official said of
the United States' urging. Instead, he said, the execution last week of 23
Pakistani soldiers held by the Pakistani Taliban since 2010, along with several
recent attacks, including one that killed 19 at a Karachi police station, have
turned public opinion against the militants and the sputtering peace talks. That
has opened new political space for military action.

Political support for action

In statements Monday, the Pakistan People's Party, the official opposition in
Parliament, said it supported a military offensive. Imran Khan, head of the
opposition Movement for Justice party, indicated that military action was
inevitable. "Talks would have still been a better option," he said, but he
called on the government to "take political ownership of any military operation"
and fully inform the nation.

Khan, whose northwestern power base borders the tribal regions and who has been
harshly critical of Sharif and the United States, called for the government to
begin evacuating civilians from North Waziristan before starting a bombardment
of the area, as it did before major military offensives in the Swat region in
2009 and in South Waziristan in 2010.

The Pakistani Taliban - also known by the initials TTP, for Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan - is allied with but separate from the Afghan Taliban that is fighting
U.S. forces in Afghanistan. Elements of both, along with the Afghan Haqqani
network and remnants of al-Qaeda's core leadership, are located in North
Waziristan.

The TTP's stated goal is to overthrow the Pakistani government and install an
Islamic state based on religious law.

Peace talks were proposed early last fall by Sharif, who took office in June
after the first democratic transition in Pakistan's history. Those talks were
canceled when a U.S. drone strike in November killed TTP leader Hakimullah
Mehsud. The action led to one of the frequent downturns in U.S.-Pakistani
relations, as Sharif's government accused the Obama administration of trying to
undermine negotiations.

In late December, as it prepared to relaunch the talks, the Islamabad government
asked the Obama administration to hold off on further drone attacks and made
clear that it was prepared to begin a military offensive if negotiations with
the militants did not succeed.

The senior Pakistani official cautioned that the government has not formally
declared the talks a failure and said that "it's politically important for the
government to take this to its logical conclusion." At least one round of talks
had taken place, with no discernible results, when the execution of the
Pakistani soldiers occurred. In recent days, the government has carried out
several retaliatory airstrikes that it says killed dozens of militants in North
Waziristan.

Trading accusations

The 2010 South Waziristan offensive began with air bombardment, followed by
waves of ground troops, although the official cautioned that the terrain and
militant locations in North Waziristan are somewhat different.

The official said government targeting would "not discriminate" among the TTP,
the Haqqani network and other militant groups in North Waziristan, including
al-Qaeda.

U.S. officials have long attributed Pakistan's reluctance to attack there to
ties between its intelligence and Afghan groups, such as the Haqqani network, as
well as Pakistan's desire to keep its options open in Afghanistan, should U.S.
efforts there fail and the Afghan Taliban return to power.

Pakistan has repeatedly denied the charges and said it would take action that
suited its own strategic priorities.

Even as the United States and Afghanistan have accused Pakistan of failing to
prevent Afghan and al-Qaeda militants from crossing the border, Pakistan has
accused U.S. and Afghan forces of failing to go after TTP forces, many of whom
fled to Afghanistan during previous Pakistani offensives.

Both the United States and Pakistan have touted the advantages of a
hammer-and-anvil strategy, with coordinated operations along the border to stop
fleeing militants in both directions.

But as the two nations' relationship has ebbed and flowed over the years, that
level of cooperation has never come to pass.

Now, with the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan well underway, the United States
no longer has the military resources in eastern Afghanistan to adequately patrol
the border, the senior Pakistani official said.

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


