                             510 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            February 17, 2014 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

Yemeni 'global terrorist' wants to meet with U.S.

BYLINE: Abigail Hauslohner

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: SANAA, YEMEN


SANAA, Yemen - Abd al-Wahhab al-Humayqani has some advice for Washington.

The United States is doing more to stoke terrorism, here in the heartland of
al-Qaeda's most active franchise, than to defeat it, he says. What the United
States ought to do, he argues, is strengthen Yemen's state institutions - rather
than create enemies by carrying out drone strikes.

"The U.S. can protect itself by cooperating directly with local authorities," he
said in an interview in Yemen's capital.

Take it from a man who might know.

In December, the U.S. Treasury Department branded Humayqani, 42, a specially
designated global terrorist, freezing his assets and sanctioning anyone who does
business with him.

The Treasury accused Humayqani of using his network of Yemen-based charities to
funnel money to al-Qaeda, placing him "at the center of global support networks
that fund and facilitate terrorism." The Treasury said that as of 2012,
Humayqani was "an important figure" within one of the terrorist group's most
dangerous wings, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, and that he had helped to
orchestrate violent attacks on government targets and to recruit fighters.

Humayqani denies all of it. He said his charities benefit "orphans, mosques and
poor families," not al-Qaeda. "My personal stance is against al-Qaeda
operations, because they kill outside the law," he said.

It may be no surprise that a person who is the subject of sanctions dismisses
the charges against him. But what makes Humayqani's case slightly more puzzling,
and potentially awkward for the United States, is that he says he is willing to
meet with U.S. officials - he claims to have requested a meeting at the U.S.
Embassy; the embassy declined to comment - and even face a court of law.

"I don't have any objections to going on trial here in Yemen to defend myself
against any charges - even if it's from the American Treasury," he said,
speaking in the lobby of a five-star hotel that is frequented by politicians and
diplomats. His life is hardly that of a terrorist, he said.

"I'm the secretary general of a political party, and I live here in Sanaa," he
said, as two politicians from another party stopped to greet him with kisses.
"I'm a member of the National Dialogue," he added, referring to a partially
U.S.-sponsored effort to bridge divides among Yemeni political parties, tribes
and activists.

Uncomfortable disconnect

Humayqani's open challenge to the U.S. government highlights an uncomfortable
disconnect between Washington and a government that it depends on for local
intelligence and cooperation in its global war on terrorism.

Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) has deep roots in this impoverished
corner of the Arab world. AQAP has carried out at least two failed attacks on
U.S. soil in recent years, and U.S. intelligence officials say they have
thwarted others, including a plot in August that shut down embassies across the
region. The CIA and the Pentagon have collectively carried out dozens of covert
airstrikes against terrorism suspects here over the past five years, according
to the Long War Journal and other monitoring groups that track the strikes.

But Yemen's government has long been a fickle partner, pledging allegiance to
Washington in its war on terrorism while simultaneously appeasing local anger
over drone strikes by paying compensation to some victims. Critics here also
accuse some powerful politicians, including former president Ali Abdullah Saleh,
of cultivating the country's homegrown jihadists.

In December, the Yemeni government openly took issue with its American allies
over Humayqani.

"Yemenis were surprised . . . that a national religious, academic and political
figure . . . was, without any basis, placed on a list of terror supporters,"
Yemen's Ministry of Human Rights said in a statement.

Yemen's National Dialogue Conference also condemned the charges.

Humayqani, who said he has met with President Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi multiple
times since the Treasury imposed its sanctions, was an active participant in the
National Dialogue, which concluded in January. But the Treasury says Humayqani's
Rashad Union political party is a front for al-Qaeda recruitment.

Humayqani counters that if the United States knows anything about terrorists, it
knows that al-Qaeda doesn't believe in participatory politics. Al-Qaeda, he
said, "believes in jihad as a means to establishing an Islamic state, and it
believes that joining the political arena is a form of infidelity, or a
non-Muslim goal."

Humayqani, who wore a string of pearl prayer beads around his traditional Yemeni
dagger, is a smooth operator who knows he has powerful local allies. He smiled
during the interview and expounded on what sounded like well-honed talking
points - discussion, national reconciliation, peace and justice.

"One of our party's goals is to cooperate with the United States within the
framework of justice and forgiveness, mutual interests, benefits, mercy and
peace," he said, beaming.

Whether Humayqani is grandstanding or telling the truth, his words - and very
public presence in the Yemeni capital - may leave Washington on awkward footing.

Legal scholars say the Obama administration has not provided a specific
definition for a direct and "imminent" threat to U.S. citizens - a label that
would qualify a person to become a target for death or capture in Yemen,
Pakistan or Somalia.

Legal experts say the category of specially designated global terrorist, as
Humayqani is described, is strictly a financial classification. But the
Treasury's depiction of Humayqani's activities in al-Qaeda - as more than simply
a financier - also raises the possibility that he could find himself on a U.S.
kill list, said Ashley Deeks, a University of Virginia law professor and former
legal adviser to the State Department.

Humayqani, who appeared relaxed, confident - even a little smug - said he is not
too worried.

Surely the U.S. Treasury will reverse its decision, he said. In the meantime, he
suggested that the U.S. government consider an alternative counterterrorism
policy.

"Support the Yemeni government through a national project that would face
al-Qaeda," he said. Cease drone strikes and develop a reconciliation plan
whereby militants would turn in their weapons. But he acknowledged it would not
be so simple.

"Not all of them will give up their weapons. But this way you give those who are
willing to leave al-Qaeda a chance to become a citizen again and live a normal
life. Those who don't will lose the public's sympathy," he said.

Separately, he said, he would be "very grateful" if the United States would drop
its charges. "It has affected me financially and psychologically."

He smiled.

abigail.hauslohner@washpost.com

Ali al-Mujahed in Sanaa and Lara El Gibaly in Cairo contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


