                             522 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            June 11, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Buiness roundup: Google buying satellite company; AIG names next CEO

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 879 words

TECHNOLOGY

Google buying satellite company

Google said Tuesday that it is acquiring the satellite company Skybox Imaging
for $500 million in cash, the Internet giant's second high-profile acquisition
of an aerospace company this year.

Google said that Skybox's satellites will provide images for Google's online
mapping service. Google, the world's No. 1 Internet search engine, said that
Skybox's technology could also eventually be used to provide Internet access and
help with disaster relief.

The acquisition of the five-year-old company comes as Google and rival Facebook
are racing to snap up satellite and drone companies in an expensive effort to
expand the reach of their businesses.

In April, Google acquired Titan Aerospace, a New Mexico-based maker of
solar-powered drones, for an undisclosed sum. Google also has launched a small
network of balloons designed to deliver Internet access over the Southern
Hemisphere.

Facebook, the world's largest Internet social network, announced in March that
it had created a special "connectivity lab" project tasked with developing
satellites, drones and other technology that could be used to connect people in
underdeveloped parts of the world to the Internet.

Skybox has built satellites packed with sensors and camera electronics that take
high-resolution images and video of Earth but which it says are smaller and
lighter than traditional satellites. The company, based in Mountain View,
Calif., has launched one satellite and had planned to send up a constellation of
24 satellites, according to the company's Web site.

"The time is right to join a company who can challenge us to think even bigger
and bolder, and who can support us in accelerating our ambitious vision," Skybox
said.

- Reuters

INSURANCE

AIG picks new CEO from within

American International Group said that it has named Peter Hancock as its new
chief executive, effective Sept. 1.

Hancock, head of the insurer's global property-casualty business, will succeed
Robert Benmosche, who is retiring.

Hancock joined AIG in 2010 and has headed the company's property-casualty
business since March 2011. Before joining AIG, he was vice chairman of KeyCorp.
Earlier, he was chief financial officer at JPMorgan Chase.

"As AIG enters a time of great change and opportunity, we are confident that
Peter Hancock is uniquely qualified to lead the company and its employees to
future success," Robert Miller, AIG's chairman, said.

Benmosche, who has been with AIG since 2009, is credited with steering the
company through the financial crisis. During his tenure, AIG fully repaid the
$182.3 billion in government support it received in 2008 to stave off
bankruptcy.

Benmosche was diagnosed with cancer in late 2010.

While he was at the helm, AIG's stock more than doubled to Tuesday's close of
$55.01 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.

- Reuters

Also in Business

l Shares in RadioShack  sank Tuesday after the chain reported another big loss
in the first quarter, as sales declined at double-digit rates. Results were hit
hardest by poor cellphone sales because of deals offered exclusively by the big
carriers, the Fort Worth-based company said. RadioShack reported its loss from
continuing operations was $98.3 million for the 13 weeks that ended May 3, far
wider than its $23.3 million in the same period a year ago.

l Target has named  Brad Maiorino chief information security officer as the
company overhauls its security department in the wake of a massive data breach.
The nation's third-largest retailer, which is based in Minneapolis, said
Maiorino will join the company Monday and be responsible for the company's
information security and technology risk strategy. He was General Motors' chief
information security and information technology risk officer.

l A federal appeals court  said Tuesday that Wells Fargo cannot avoid new
allegations of misconduct stemming from the mortgage crisis, even though the
bank has paid $5 billion in a national settlement between the government and
financial institutions.

l U.S. stocks finished nearly flat Tuesday,  although the Dow eked out another
record close. Utilities' shares fell, while 10-year bond yields hit their
highest level in a month. Six of the 10 primary Standard & Poor's 500 sector
indexes ended the session lower. The decline was led by a 0.3 percent drop in
the S&P utilities index. Utility stocks' high dividends tend to lose some of
their appeal when bond yields jump. It was the Dow's fourth straight record
closing high. The S&P 500-stock index fell slightly, however, breaking its
four-day string of record-high finishes.

l Airlines are doing a better job  of arriving on time, although more than one
in five flights still runs late. The Transportation Department said Tuesday that
the nation's biggest airlines achieved an on-time arrival rating of 79.6 percent
in April. That is up from 77.6 percent in March and 77.3 percent in April 2013.
The most punctual airlines were Hawaiian, Alaska and Virgin America. The most
likely to be late were ExpressJet, Southwest Airlines and Envoy, which used to
be called American Eagle.

- From news services

Coming Today

l Noon:  Agriculture Department issues monthly crop production and world
agricultural supply estimates.

l Earnings:  Belk, H&R Block, Restoration Hardware.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


