                              52 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Game of Drones

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 856 words


WASHINGTON -- It will be tough to go into the big battle against drones without
the irrepressible Goose.

And Tom Cruise, now 51, will no longer be playing a snot-nosed jockey with a
need for speed on the highway to the danger zone. Three decades later, the
mature Maverick will be a seasoned pilot with the chops to prove, as John Henry
did against the steam-powered hammer, that man can beat machine. He won't be
going up against Russians in the Cold War, but robots in the Drone War. Instead
of Cruise as a loose cannon, it will be Cruise fighting loose drones.

It was a sequel idea proposed by Tony Scott, who directed the blockbuster ''Top
Gun,'' before he committed suicide in 2012.

Jerry Bruckheimer, who co-produced the 1986 movie, which he once described as ''
'Star Wars' on earth,'' recently revealed to The Huffington Post that he and
Cruise are getting ''closer and closer'' to a deal to make ''Top Gun 2.''

''The concept is, basically: Are the pilots obsolete because of drones?''
Bruckheimer said. ''Cruise is going to show them that they're not obsolete. That
pilots are here to stay.'' (With a hackneyed pitch like that, the producer can
no doubt count on lavish Navy cooperation again.)

But the producer is missing a more original twist. Instead of unmanned planes
controlled by terrorists, the drones could be an army of angry birds amassed by
our computer overlords, Google, Facebook and Amazon. Every time one of the tech
giants reveals it is venturing into the drone business, the rationale is
presented purely as smart business, a benign and even benevolent expansion.

Amazon will be able to drop packages right on your lawn, or even your head. With
fleets of solar-powered jet drones, Google and Facebook would be able to expand
their customer bases by offering online access to poor and remote areas of the
world devoid of telephone wires or cellphone towers.

On Tuesday, The Wall Street Journal published a front-page article about Google
outbidding Facebook to acquire a New Mexico start-up named Titan that makes
solar-powered drones. Facebook then bought a British-based aerospace company
that's working on solar drones.

A Google spokesman said in a statement that ''atmospheric satellites,'' as
Titan's dragonfly-shaped, battery-powered, bigger-than-jetliners drones were
being called, could ''help solve other problems, including disaster relief and
environmental damage like deforestation.''

But given the privacy breaches of Google and Facebook, and their collusion with
N.S.A. spying, we can be forgiven for some skepticism about what happens when
the omnivorous and omniscient tech behemoths acquire the extra-judicial killing
machines.

''Zuckerberg Vows Facebook Will Shoot Down Google Drones,'' Andy Borowitz
proclaimed in The New Yorker.

Can we really trust Google, who stole millions of the world's books and whose
Street View vehicles secretly scooped up data around the world, with drones?

Patrick Egan, a Sacramento drone expert who runs a website on the subject, told
me that we are already in the Kubrickian future. ''Drones are legal in a lot of
countries in Europe, and they're legal in Japan,'' he said. He asserts there are
more than 14,000 certified drone operators in Japan.

So whether the F.A.A. likes it or not, we'll soon have Minnesota ice fishermen
getting beer delivered by a drone and maybe even the mythical TacoCopter.

My friend Jim Gleick, the author of ''The Information'' who is working on a book
about time travel, is as leery as I am about the company whose unofficial motto
is ''Don't Be Evil.''

''We've all learned that the nicest people with the best intentions are capable
of bringing evil into the world,'' he said. ''No matter how sincere and
idealistic they are, they are concentrating an enormous amount of power in our
informational universe in a very small number of hands. A single, giant company
responsible only to its managers can't claim to have the world's interests at
heart. Ultimately, what Google does is for Google.''

He says while Facebook is merely creepy, with an intrusion into privacy that's
so blatant it's part of the game, Google is ''inescapable.''

''You can't get through life anymore without using Google,'' he said.

He said that he bought a Nest thermostat, which connects your home's temperature
to the Internet, and then Google bought Nest. ''So now Google not only knows
what books I'm reading,'' he said, ''but they also know whether I'm shivering
while I'm reading them.''

Even before one falls from the sky and kills somebody or crashes into a
building, the tech drones will mean, as Gleick says, ''we're living in a
dystopian novel, with a continuous eye in the sky on everything that happens
down below.''

He muses: ''Are Google's drones going to be watching while Amazon's drones
deliver my packages? How will we distinguish the drones with cameras from the
drones with cameras and guns? How long before the N.R.A. insists on the rights
of drones to bear arms? The Constitution says people have a right to bear arms.
And the Supreme Court says that corporations are people. Do the math.''

Forget ''Top Gun 2.'' This sounds more like ''Risky Business.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/16/opinion/game-of-drones.html

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


