                             523 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

U.S. weighs its options for quick action

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 1490 words


The Obama administration is weighing options for an imminent response to the
crisis in Iraq, including airstrikes against Islamist extremists who have
overrun Iraqi cities to within striking distance of Baghdad, and expanded
intelligence and targeting assistance for Iraqi military forces.

In the face of rapid extremist advances and the collapse of Iraqi military
defenses in the north, the administration has decided temporarily to put aside
its long-term goal of pressing Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki for political
reforms in favor of immediate action to stabilize the security situation.

Asked whether he was considering drone strikes, President Obama, who held a
principals' meeting with senior national security aides Thursday, said a number
of options were being considered. "It's fair to say . . . there will be some
short-term, immediate things that need to be done militarily," he added.

A senior administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to
discuss the deliberations, said: "We are definitely looking at this with
urgency."

U.S. contractors began evacuating the air base in Balad, 50 miles north of
Baghdad, that is being prepared for the arrival this year of F-16 aircraft
purchased by Iraq. The international engineering and electronics company Siemens
was trying to move 51 people out of Baiji, about 30 miles farther north, where
they are upgrading Iraqi power plants.

The State Department confirmed that "U.S. citizens, under contract to the
Government of Iraq, in support of the U.S. Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program
in Iraq, are being temporarily relocated by their companies due to security
concerns in the area." But "the status of the staffing at the U.S. Embassy and
consulates has not changed," spokeswoman Jen Psaki said.

About 10,000 American officials and contractors are in Iraq.

Iraqi media and a source close to Maliki's office in Baghdad said that Obama had
already agreed to "imminent" U.S. airstrikes, to be launched from a base in
Turkey. The senior official described those reports as "premature" but said a
decision could come "today, tomorrow, in the coming days."

The official confirmed close U.S. consultations with the government of Turkey,
which shares a border with Iraq, and with Iraq's Kurdish regional government,
which has deployed its own forces to guard roads and cities in and near its
northern region.

A number of lawmakers said they expected Obama to consult with Congress before
taking any direct action. "It would depend on what the option is," the senior
official said. "That is very hypothetical. . . . There have not been discussions
on that." While the official noted that the president can take urgent action for
up to 60 days without asking Congress under the War Powers Act - a provision the
administration used for its brief Libya bombing campaign in 2011 - "that's
notional, and I don't want to suggest" any decision has been made.

Maliki's government requested strikes from drones or piloted aircraft "in the
last several weeks" and additional intelligence-sharing as militants from the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria stepped up attacks in Iraq, according to the
official. As long as there is an invitation from the sovereign government, the
United States does not need United Nations approval to act.

Those requests were repeated and amplified as ISIS militants seized Mosul,
Iraq's main northern city, on Tuesday and began moving southward. Officials and
experts on the region said they were more surprised at the speed with which the
Iraqi military retreated than by the audacious ISIS assaults.

"The element of shock came in how quickly the Iraqi security forces seem to have
folded," said a senior Western diplomat, who spoke on the condition of anonymity
because he was not authorized to comment publicly. "We were surprised by the
minimal appetite to stand and fight, given that Iraqi forces are about a million
strong and are well-equipped and trained by the United States, Britain" and
others.

In comments made during an Oval Office meeting with Australian Prime Minister
Tony Abbott, Obama said events this week should be "a wake-up call for the Iraqi
government." Since the U.S. military withdrawal in December 2011, the United
States has been pushing Maliki, whose Shiite bloc won parliamentary elections in
April, to reach out to alienated Sunnis and Kurds.

"That accounts in part for some of the weakness of the state, and that then
carries over into their military capacity," Obama said.

"There has to be a political component to this so that Sunni and Shia . . .
inside of Iraq come together and work diligently against these extremists," he
said. "And that is going to require concessions on the part of both . . . that
we haven't seen so far."

Over the past two years, the administration has tried to use security
cooperation and sales of sophisticated equipment as a carrot to promote
political reforms. But even as Maliki has made few, if any, moves in that
direction, the security situation has forced the U.S. hand.

As suicide and other attacks increased in 2013 to the worst levels since the
height of sectarian fighting during the U.S. occupation, Obama agreed during
Maliki's visit to Washington last fall to sell Iraqi Apache helicopters and
F-16s - none of which have yet arrived in Iraq.

About 300 Hellfire missiles, which the Iraqis fire from their small fleet of
Cessna Caravan turboprops, were urgently supplied, as well as small arms,
ammunition and other equipment.

Early this year, about 100 U.S. Special Operations soldiers were sent to Jordan
to train Iraqi counterterrorism forces. The administration has also increased
its surveillance over Iraq, with unarmed drones, high-altitude flights, and
satellites, as well as communications intercepts.

As the administration contemplated its next move, there was no shortage of
critics Thursday who charged its military withdrawal from Iraq and subsequent
alleged inattention, or its hesitation to intervene in neighboring Syria's civil
war - or both - had precipitated the current crisis by allowing ISIS to grow.

"The Iraqis themselves opted not to keep U.S. forces" there, by refusing to sign
a status of forces agreement in 2011, said James Jeffrey, who served as U.S.
ambassador to Iraq for two years until mid-2012. "Obama pushed for it, but he
didn't push as far as he might."

Whether a residual force in Iraq consisted of the 25,000 troops U.S. commanders
originally requested, or the 2,500 Obama finally agreed to before the status
agreement fell apart, it "would have given us a platform to do . . . the
counterterrorism things we are so good at," Jeffrey said. "We would have had
some air power there, which would have been extremely effective against these
guys [ISIS] who are out in the open with pickup  trucks.

"We would have rotated in conventional battalions to train them to do exactly
what they're not doing now - small-unit tactics, fire-and-maneuver,
platoon-level exercises."

Most important, Jeffrey said, "we would have had Washington's attention. . . .
Whether it's 5,000 or 2,000" troops, "believe me, all of Washington snaps to and
salutes. The country reacts differently."

The senior administration official defended Obama's decision to "go slowly" in
Syria. "The reason for being deliberate was precisely the need to have both an
opposition that we knew was vetted and had . . .  capacity" to absorb aid.

"Clearly, the Syrian conflict exacerbates and provides additional space for
[ISIS] to operate," the official said. "The Syrian conflict has been a symptom
that has escalated the threat of these groups from Iraq, but certainly these
groups existed long before that."

After a closed-door briefing for the Senate Armed Services Committee by military
and intelligence officials Thursday, some lawmakers urged caution.

Committee Chairman Carl Levin (D-Mich.), recalled the Bush administration's
invasion of Iraq in 2003, saying that "we got into Iraq without adequate
consideration for the consequences."

"What is required now is thoughtful consideration of our options, none of which,
typically for the Middle East, is obvious or easy," Levin said. "It's important
to keep in mind that a major source of Iraq's problems has been the refusal of
the Maliki government, despite persistent U.S. encouragement, to reach out to
its Sunni citizens to forge a unified and inclusive Iraq. No action on our part
can resolve that disunity. It's unclear how airstrikes on our part can succeed
unless the Iraqi army is willing to fight, and that's uncertain given the fact
that several Iraqi army divisions have melted away."

Others, primarily Republicans, were harshly critical. "Iraq's unraveling should
come as no surprise," Sens. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.),
said in a joint statement.

"We and others predicted that would happen as a result of the president's
decision to prematurely withdraw all American forces from Iraq."

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


