                             525 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 4, 2014 Friday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. T19

LENGTH: 1680 words

Mini Reviews

 A check mark (g) denotes a show recommended by our critics.

Newly Reviewed

gTHE BFG

At Imagination Stage through Aug. 10

This production of Roald Dahl's 1982 classic, adapted for the stage by David
Wood, feels like a dream come to life. Huge, ingenious stage puppets, actors in
masks, projections and more fill the stage in a happy, synchronous jumble. The
adventure in "The BFG" belongs to an 8-year-old named Sophie, a bespectacled
orphan. Sophie looks out her window one night and spies a towering giant going
house to house with a net and a horn. The BFG is a dream catcher and supplier.
He sees her watching and, fearing she might disclose his secret work, snatches
her up and galumphs away with her. In his cave, he explains to the terrified
girl that he means no harm. The rest of his giant cohorts are horrible
child-eaters. By showing kids the wheels of the production, so to speak, with
transparent stagecraft, the co-directors mitigate the darker aspects of the
story. When Sophie and the BFG overhear the child-eaters plotting to eat the
children of England, they speed-walk to Buckingham Palace. The BFG blows a
docu-dream into the bedroom of the queen (Susan Lynskey). Once the good lady
awakes and learns it's all true, the bad giants haven't a chance.


- Jane Horwitz

Saturday and Sunday at 1:30 and 4, Tuesday-Thursday at 10:30. 4908 Auburn Ave.,
Bethesda. 301-280-1660. www.imaginationstage.org. $10-$25.

Continuing

gAVENUE Q

At Olney Theatre Center through July 20

The scathing irreverence of "Avenue Q" sounds even spikier 11 years after the
show's Broadway debut. One must credit the sheer genius of its "Sesame
Street"-busting premise, but kudos also go to Olney Theatre Center's zippy
revival, staged with well-calibrated abandon by Artistic Director Jason Loewith.
The creators of "Avenue Q" must have had second sight or something, because
their 2003 musical resonates today, touching on jobless college grads, gay
issues, race and sexual impulse control. Olney's uniformly first-rate cast, some
of them voicing and manipulating puppets as their characters' avatars, sing a
crackerjack score. The shorter second act loses some momentum once the initial
shock of the show's incorrectness has passed. Yet there's still that musical
theater itch to end on a hopeful note. In the finale, "For Now," the characters
come to accept life's ups and downs: "Everyone's a little bit unsatisfied /
Everyone goes 'round a little empty inside." That's the spirit.

- J.H.

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2. 2001 Olney-Sandy
Spring Rd., Olney. 301-924-3400. www.olneytheatre.org. $43.50-$63.50.

CLOAK AND DAGGER

At Signature Theatre through Sunday

A wan parody of noirish detective flicks of yore, "Cloak and Dagger" has as its
stock in trade uninspired show tunes interrupted by blue quips denoting an age
before political correctness. As in: "Sorry I'm late. I was doing a midget in
the alley." The musical, directed by Eric Schaeffer, revels in B-movie
stereotypes. I'm pretty sure Ed Dixon, the musical's composer, lyricist, co-star
and book writer, means to send up the caricatures that once were staples of
pulpy gumshoe stories. Instead of radiating affection, though, "Cloak and
Dagger" sends out wave after wave that says: lame. The sight of two veteran
actors, Dixon and Christopher Bloch, wearing stringy wigs and fake bosoms and
speaking in supposedly comic Asian and Irish accents comes across in 2014 as
lazy and desperate. "Cloak and Dagger" aspires to a grade of humor that is the
lowest and easiest.

- Peter Marks

Saturday at 2 and 8 and Sunday at 2 and 7. 4200 Campbell Ave., Arlington.
703-820-9771. www.signature-theatre.org. $29-$93.

gFREUD'S LAST SESSION

At Theater J through Sunday

Sigmund Freud cracks five pretty good jokes in the first five minutes of Mark
St. Germain's easygoing two-character drama. St. Germain wants you to like
Freud, even though he depicts the godfather of psychoanalysis as aggressive,
mean and probably on his last legs. He's 83, and oral cancer is ravaging his
mouth. And it's 1939, so World War II is revving up. The old atheist appears to
be looking, one last time, for God. Why else would Freud have summoned C.S.
Lewis to his office for what turns out to be about an hour-long theological
debate? Theater J hardly needs St. Germain's gingerly approach to venture into
matters of faith; that's where this troupe lives. Yet even if the banter in this
imaginary meeting is a little eager to please, there's nothing wrong with the
soothing tone of this show. The acting is fine-grained, with Rick Foucheux's
richly wound-up Freud as a frequently amusing counterpoint to Todd Scofield's
serene Lewis. As a play, "Freud's Last Session" may glide along fairly easily,
but Foucheux's central performance has a magnificently unsettled edge.

- N.P.

Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8. 1529 16th St. NW. 800-494-8497.
www.theaterj.org. $30-$65.

HAPPY DAYS

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through Saturday

One of Washington theater's most able character actors, Nancy Robinette, uses
her gift for off-kilter line readings and existential angst of the comedic kind
to worthy effect in Samuel Beckett's 1961 piece. That the staging and her
performance aren't quite transcendental doesn't mean lovers of the avant-garde
won't enjoy the production. Robinette plays Winnie, a middle-aged woman buried
up to her waist and unable to extricate herself from what looks like a big sand
dune in Scena Theatre's spare staging. This may be Theater of the Absurd, yet
there's nothing all that obscure about Winnie's situation - trapped by impending
mortality, haunted by opportunities lost and love soured. It's the manner in
which Beckett explores these ideas, combining a kind of blank verse, which comes
at things sideways, and visual symbolism that is literal. Every person watching
can choose whatever metaphor hits them. Robinette's embodiment of Winnie feels a
little undercooked - technically together, but emotionally still marinating.
Expect Robinette to add a pinch more seasoning as she goes along.

- J.H.

Saturday at 3 and 8. 1333 H St. NE. 202-399-7993. www.atlasarts.org.
www.scenatheater.org. $10-$40.

gGROUNDED

At Studio Theatre through Sunday

This propulsive drama chronicles several years in the life of a female American
fighter pilot. When this brash aviator accidentally gets pregnant, her career
takes a new turn: Instead of soaring above the Earth, sovereign and
self-reliant, she finds herself part of a team, steering a drone from a trailer
in the Nevada desert. As she peers down through her monitor at Afghanistan, day
after day, the activity of watching becomes first an uneasy thrill and then
something more threatening. In a fireball performance, Lucy Ellinson portrays
the Pilot. At work, she tracks militants and contemplates explosions and flying
body parts; at home, her daughter wants to play My Little Pony. The experiences
seem a world apart - just as the cramped gray images on the drone monitor seem
irreconcilable with the blue sky she once winged through. A fascinating
exploration of personality, "Grounded" is, of course, all the more interesting
because the controversial subject of drone warfare is so much in the news. The
play also ponders instances and ramifications of watching and being watched. In
its thought-provoking final moments, we in the audience are swept up into this
brooding dynamic. To what extent are we - watching a play - too comfortable
being the voyeurs of an ongoing war?

- Celia Wren

Saturday at 8 and Sunday at 2 and 7. 1501 14th St. NW. www.studiotheatre.org.
$39-$59.

gPRIVATE LIVES

At Lansburgh Theatre through July 13

The play careers merrily, and fleetly, through the brittle skirmishes that ensue
after Bianca Amato's Amanda and James Waterston's Elyot, five years miserably
divorced, wind up in adjoining hotel suites in the south of France with their
far less appealing new spouses. The sleek Amanda finds herself saddled with
stick-in-the-mud Victor (Jeremy Webb), and dapper Elyot has settled for a clingy
crybaby, Sybil (Autumn Hurlbert). Still nursing the wounds from their own
marriage, they've picked Victor and Sybil, it seems, just to give themselves a
breather. On an elegant set of twin balconies we begin to see that this Amanda
and Elyot are not so much besotted with as addicted to each other. Amato and
Waterston radiate a youthful vigor: This is a couple, we're made to feel, with
their best years ahead, giving us all the more reason to hope that, ultimately,
they'll realize they're meant to spend that time with each other.

- P.M.

Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7:30, Tuesday and Wednesday at 7:30,
Thursday at 8. 450 Seventh St. NW. 202-547-1122. 877-487-8849.
www.shakespearetheatre.org. $20-$110.

gSIDE SHOW

At Kennedy Center Eisenhower Theater, through July 13

Capped by two climactic, heartbreaking songs and two tender, epic performances,
"Side Show" is an intoxicating experience - a poignant statement about the
brutal rite of achieving self-acceptance and a glorious comeback for an
important American musical. Erin Davie and Emily Padgett portray Violet and
Daisy Hilton, Siamese twins who go from being a tawdry carnival act to
celebrated vaudeville stars but never what they truly desire: people seen as
separate from their abnormal condition. The musical is based on the real-life
Violet and Daisy, focusing on their rise as entertainers in the late 1920s and
early '30s. In this new version of the 1997 musical, the distance the sisters
travel from a cruel childhood of exploitation has been clarified. The mystical
nature of their connection has been deepened, too, via a more concerted
consideration of loneliness and freedom, themes that envelop them and many of
the other hauntingly conceived "freaks." The story of their ghastly childhood in
England is new to the musical, as is the inspiring visit to the sisters by
escape artist Harry Houdini. Singly and doubly, they'll melt your heart.

- P.M.

Saturday and Sunday at 1:30 and 7:30, Tuesday-Thursday at 7:30. 2700 F St. NW.
202-467-4600. www.kennedy-center.org. $45-$130.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


