                             539 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           September 23, 2014 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

U.S. launches strikes in Syria

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1349 words


The U.S. military expanded its war against the Islamic State late Monday by
sending waves of warplanes and launching Tomahawk cruise missiles into Syria to
attack an array of targets in an aggressive and risk-laden operation that marks
a new phase in the conflict.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said late Monday that U.S.
commanders had deployed a mix of fighter jets and bombers and had also launched
ship-based Tomahawk missiles against Islamic State targets in Syria. He said
that the operations were ongoing and that more details would not be released
until after the strikes were finished.

Kirby said in a statement that "partner nation forces" were also involved in the
attacks, but did not identify the other countries.

Two U.S. defense officials identified the partner nations as Saudi Arabia,
Jordan, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. One official described them as
"full participants" in the airstrikes in Syria but did not give further details,
saying it was up to those countries to fully disclose their roles.

Qatar also sent military aircraft to play a supporting role but did not carry
out strikes, a third U.S. defense official said.

Residents of the northeastern Syrian city of Raqqah - the Islamic State's
self-declared capital - reported news of large explosions on Twitter and said
repeated passes from military aircraft were clearly audible.

The United States was planning to attack as many as 20 Islamic State targets in
the operation, which would mark the biggest single day of attacks since the
military began striking the jihadist group in Iraq on Aug. 8, according to a
senior U.S. military official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss
details of the planned operation.

Among the targets of Monday's operation were buildings occupied by Islamic State
leaders, training sites, supply lines and arsenals, according to the U.S.
military official, who said drones were also involved in the attacks.

The United States has worked assiduously to build an international coalition
against the Islamic State and has placed a special emphasis on recruiting Muslim
countries. Until Monday, those countries had been reluctant to join, at least
publicly, fueling doubts about their willingness to attack an Arab neighbor.

By enlisting five Arab countries to participate in the Syria operation, however,
the Obama administration could boast of a major diplomatic achievement. Saudi
Arabia, Jordan and the UAE in particular have well-trained and well-equipped air
forces, thanks largely to long-standing military partnerships with the Pentagon.

President Obama and other U.S. leaders had all but promised in recent days that
they would order airstrikes against Islamic State strongholds in Syria. The
jihadist movement - which the CIA estimates has up to 31,000 fighters at its
disposal - controls much of eastern Syria and has used its bases there as a
springboard for seizing territory in neighboring Iraq.

But in ordering the attacks, Obama also thrust the U.S. military directly into
Syria's devastating civil war, something that he had steadfastly tried to avoid
since the country began breaking apart in 2011.

The U.S.-led military operation in Syria came just hours before Obama was
scheduled to arrive in New York to attend the annual meeting of the United
Nations General Assembly and make a further pitch for other countries to join
the U.S.-led coalition against the Islamic State.

Obama was on the cusp of ordering U.S. military strikes in Syria a year ago to
punish President Bashar al-Assad after strong evidence emerged that the Syrian
government had used chemical weapons against civilians. Obama backed away at the
last minute, however, when Syria agreed to an international plan to destroy its
massive chemical weapons arsenal.

This time, the Americans' target is not Assad, who has managed to cling to his
seat in Damascus, but the Islamic State, a onetime al-Qaeda affiliate that has
exploited the chaos in Syria to attract a huge flow of recruits, weapons and
money.

The Islamic State also represents a mortal threat to Assad and has beaten back
his forces on several fronts. The Obama administration has said repeatedly that
it would not cooperate with Assad in any way, even though the two sides now
share an enemy. As a result, it was unclear how Assad's armed forces would
respond to unauthorized intrusions into Syrian airspace by U.S. warplanes.

The Syrian government has some of the most formidable air defenses in the Middle
East. Obama had publicly warned Syria in advance not to interfere with any U.S.
operations against the Islamic State, saying the Pentagon would respond
forcefully. In the end, U.S. military planners said they expected Assad would
stand down and allow them to attack Islamic State targets freely.

The Pentagon did not say which military bases it relied upon to conduct the
airstrikes. It has several major air bases in the Persian Gulf, including in the
UAE, Qatar and Kuwait. The U.S. Navy, whose ships launched the Tomahawk missiles
into Syria, keeps its 5th Fleet headquarters in Bahrain.

Those bases have played a crucial role in the U.S. military campaign in Iraq.
Since Aug. 8, U.S. warplanes and drones have conducted 190 airstrikes against
Islamic State targets in Iraq, but the U.S. military has only a handful of
reconnaissance aircraft in the country.

The Pentagon has sent 1,600 advisers and other troops to Iraq to help Iraqi
government forces and Kurdish fighters combat the Islamic State. But air power
has been the crux of the U.S. military involvement in the region.

To reach eastern Syria from the Persian Gulf, the U.S. military and its allies
almost certainly would have had to rely on long-range tanker aircraft to refuel
their warplanes.

The Pentagon also has a large number of aircraft stationed at Incirlik Air Base
in Turkey, a NATO installation. But with the exception of unarmed U.S.
surveillance drones based there, Turkish authorities have said they won't allow
the U.S. military to conduct airstrikes against the Islamic State from their
territory.

Earlier Monday, Obama and other senior administration officials informed
congressional leaders about plans to target the Islamic State in Syria.

Obama spoke Monday evening by telephone with House Speaker John A. Boehner
(R-Ohio) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), telling them of
plans to begin an expanded military campaign into Syria, according to senior
congressional aides.

Vice President Biden phoned Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Dianne
Feinstein (D-Calif.) and her GOP counterpart, Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.),
aides said. And House Armed Services Committee Chairman Howard P. "Buck" McKeon
(R-Calif.) was informed by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel, according to an aide
to the lawmaker.

Arab participation in the operation began to solidify in recent days.

Secretary of State John F. Kerry met with the Arab states involved last week.
All had told the administration weeks ago that their air forces would
participate in Syria strikes if the United States provided a viable plan and
convinced them that it would follow through.

Although France has agreed to join in airstrikes in Iraq, and last week
conducted a bombing raid there, French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said
Monday that his government did not believe it had the legal basis to join the
Syria operations.

Since the Iraq strikes began during the summer, the U.S.-backed Syrian
Opposition Coalition has pleaded for similar action in Syria, along with the
Obama administration's agreement, approved last week by Congress, to sharply
increase weapons shipments and authorize the U.S. military to provide training
on the ground in the region.

In remarks Monday to reporters at the United Nations, coalition President Hadi
al-Bahra reiterated his plea for "immediate" U.S. and coalition strikes in
Syria. "Time is of the essence," Bahra said. "Hitting them in Iraq alone will
not work if they can continue to operate, regroup, train and plan inside Syria."

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

Ed O'Keefe and Karen DeYoung contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


