                             534 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           August 27, 2014 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

U.S. relies on bases in Persian Gulf for its airstrikes in Iraq

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1240 words


The U.S. military is relying on bases in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere in the
Middle East to carry out airstrikes in Iraq but is masking the locations and
other details about the units and aircraft involved to avoid embarrassing
partners in the region.

The Persian Gulf monarchies have long hosted U.S. forces to bolster their own
security. But most have shied away from acknowledging the American presence and
are even more reluctant with U.S. warplanes attacking targets in Iraq.

The arrangement is especially delicate given long-standing accusations from
Washington that wealthy donors in the gulf underwrite terrorist groups,
including Islamic militants being targeted by the Pentagon.

Public records and U.S. military statements about the types of U.S. aircraft
deployed over Iraq indicate that they are primarily drawn from three major bases
in the gulf: al Udeid Air Base in Qatar, Ali al Salem Air Base in Kuwait and al
Dhafra Air Base in the United Arab Emirates.

In addition, Predator drones and possibly other U.S. aircraft are flying from
Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, a NATO ally.

Those bases are responsible for launching about two-thirds of the airstrikes in
Iraq since Aug. 8, as well as a similar proportion of the thousands of
surveillance sorties that have been conducted since June, according to U.S.
military commanders.

The remainder have been launched from the USS George H.W. Bush, an aircraft
carrier in the Persian Gulf, and other ships in the carrier's strike group,
according to Navy commanders.

The Pentagon has become increasingly dependent on the tiny gulf states to host
the bulk of its forces in the Middle East since it withdrew from Iraq in 2011
and vacated several large bases there.

Mustafa Alani, director of security and defense studies at the Gulf Research
Center in Geneva, said that gulf countries generally support U.S. military
action against the Islamic State, the jihadist movement that has taken over
large parts of Iraq and Syria. But he said gulf rulers are wary of directly
linking themselves to U.S. military operations, fearful of a popular backlash
should airstrikes result in civilian casualties.

An ambiguity

"These countries try to protect themselves by not knowing and not asking," Alani
said. Washington has its own reasons to cloak the extent of its military
presence in the region, he added. "It is an ambiguity that both sides think they
have an interest to maintain."

The most strategically important U.S. base in the region is al Udeid in Qatar,
home of the Air Force's command center for all air operations in the Middle East
and Afghanistan.

An outgrowth of the war in Afghanistan and the 2003 U.S.-led invasion of Iraq,
al Udeid is home to about 9,000 U.S. troops and contractors. Its principal unit
is the 379th Air Expeditionary Wing, which has more than 90 combat aircraft and
support planes.

Even though the base's existence is an open secret, for years the U.S. military
would refrain from uttering its name, saying only that aircraft and personnel
there were stationed somewhere in "Southwest Asia."

That changed, briefly, in December when Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel visited
Qatar to sign a 10-year lease extension for the base and publicly acknowledged
the presence of U.S. troops. Base officials began issuing statements and news
releases mentioning al Udeid.

But since June, when President Obama ordered troops to return to Iraq in small
numbers and the skies over the country became thick with U.S. warplanes,
military officials have imposed a blackout on information about where those
forces are coming from.

"Due to host nation sensitivities and operational security, we are not detailing
locations of specific bases of origin, aircraft or ordnance types," said Maj.
Curtis J. Kellogg, a spokesman for Central Command, which oversees military
operations in the Middle East.

Another base that the Pentagon will only identify as being located in Southwest
Asia is Ali al Salem Air Base in Kuwait. Nicknamed "the Rock" by U.S. forces, it
is the closest drone base to Iraq. Predator drones from the Air Force's 46th
Expeditionary Reconnaissance Squadron have to fly only about 40 miles to the
border.

Occasionally, military commanders provide hard clues about where U.S. warplanes
are flying from. On Aug. 11, Lt. Gen. William C. Mayville Jr., director of
operations for the Pentagon's Joint Staff, told reporters that among the planes
carrying out airstrikes were F-15E Strike Eagles and F-16 Fighting Falcons.
Squadrons of both fighter jets are routinely deployed to al Udeid.

On Aug. 17, Central Command announced that U.S. bomber aircraft had joined the
air campaign. Although it did not give details, officials acknowledged that the
statement referred to B-1 bombers, which are also based at al Udeid.

Leverage over U.S. policy

While the stationing of American troops in the Persian Gulf and Turkey has given
the Obama administration flexibility, it has also given governments in the
region political leverage over U.S. policy.

For instance, the administration has effectively conditioned its military
intervention in Iraq on the removal of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, a Shiite
leader who resigned this month under pressure. His resignation this month made
the U.S. airstrike campaign against the Islamic State more politically palatable
for the Sunni rulers of the gulf states and Turkey, who didn't want Washington
to take any action that might help keep Maliki in power.

"From a gulf perspective, there are good interventions and bad interventions,"
said Shadi Hamid, a Middle East scholar with the Brookings Institution in
Washington. "Maliki was anathema to them and seen as distinctly sectarian."

At the same time, Hamid said, leaders in the gulf are unlikely to acknowledge
their military cooperation with Washington even if they favor the mission.
"There will continue to be strong suspicion of anything the U.S. does in terms
of intentions and motive," he said. "It also would be admitting a kind of
dependence on the U.S. that would not sit well with the public."

The suspicion can be mutual. Many officials in Washington and Europe have
accused Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates of turning a blind eye to
fundraising in their countries by clerics and others who support the Islamic
State, al-Qaeda and other extremist groups.

Last week, a German government minister, Gerd Mueller, accused Qatar of
financing Islamic State militants and helping to arm them. Although the Qatari
Foreign Ministry denied the charge and the German government apologized, some in
Washington have questioned whether the Qataris have accumulated outsize
influence because of their military cooperation.

"They play a good game with us," former vice president Richard B. Cheney said in
June on "The Charlie Rose Show" on PBS. "And the reason is supposedly because we
have that big base up there, in al Udeid. . . . So it's leverage for the Qataris
to, in effect, get away with kind of the activity they do with respect to
supporting the more radical elements of the jihadi movement."

Similarly, in Kuwait, even as Ali al Salem Air Base has taken on added
importance for U.S. military operations, other branches of the U.S. government
have expressed increasing concern about local support for extremist groups. On
Aug. 6, the Treasury Department blacklisted three Kuwaitis for allegedly
financing the Islamic State and Jabhat al-Nusra, an al-Qaeda affiliate in Syria.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


