                             533 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           August 27, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

World Digest: Aug. 26, 2014

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 747 words

TUNISIA

U.S. military aid to grow by $60 million

The United States has announced that it will give Tunisia an additional $60
million in military aid next year.

The head of the U.S. African command, Gen. David M. Rodriguez, said Tuesday
during a visit to Tunisia that the aid would be directed toward training, mine
detection, naval craft and counterterrorism exercises with Tunisian troops.

Since 2011, the United States has given Tunisia $100 million in military aid.

Rodriguez said the two countries face a common terrorist threat in the form of
al-Qaeda-linked organizations.

Last month, 15 Tunisian troops were killed by suspected al-Qaeda militants near
the Algerian border. It was only the latest in a series of militant attacks in
Tunisia.

- Associated Press

CENTRAL AFRICANREPUBLIC

17 killed in infighting among Seleka rebels

Seventeen people were killed in a gun battle between rival factions of the
Seleka rebel movement in territory they control in the Central African Republic,
a rebel spokesman said Tuesday.

The clash over control of potentially lucrative roadblocks highlights factional
tensions within the coalition that for months has controlled the north of a
country riven along sectarian lines.

Three people also were wounded in the clash, which started Monday in the town of
Bambari and continued Tuesday, said Capt. Ahamat Najat, the rebels' spokesman.

The former French colony has been gripped by violence since the Seleka, a
coalition of mostly Muslim rebels and some fighters from neighboring Chad and
Sudan, seized power in March 2013.

Their rule was marked by abuses, which prompted a backlash from a Christian
militia. The conflict has killed thousands of people and displaced about 1
million.

- Reuters

WHO shuts Sierra Leone Ebola lab after worker is infected:  The World Health
Organization said it shut a laboratory in Sierra Leone after a health worker
there was infected with Ebola, a move that may hamper efforts to boost the
global response to the worst outbreak of the disease. The WHO said the closure
was temporary. At least 1,427 people have died and 2,615 have been infected in
the outbreak in West Africa.

Iran, Saudi Arabia hold rare talks:  Saudi Arabia's foreign minister met with an
Iranian deputy foreign minister in the highest-level talks between the two
Middle East powers since moderate Iranian President Hassan Rouhani's election
last year. Relations between Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia and Shiite powerhouse Iran
are tense, but both are concerned about the threat posed by the rise of the
Islamic State militant group in Iraq - a country they both border.

U.N. helicopter reportedly shot down in South Sudan : A rebel commander who
warned the United Nations not to fly over his territory shot down a U.N.
helicopter in rural South Sudan, according to a spokesman for the governor of
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal state. The United Nations confirmed that three people
died and one survived when one of its helicopters crashed. The U.N. mission said
the Mi-8 cargo helicopter crashed near Bentiu, an area hotly contested by the
government and rebel fighters.

China deploys armed drone to multinational drills:  China's air force said it
deployed an armed drone to multinational anti-terrorism drills, underscoring the
country's rapid progress in developing unmanned aerial vehicles. The drone,
which was not identified by type, carried out a mission in which it destroyed a
mock enemy command vehicle with a missile, the official Xinhua News Agency
quoted an air force spokesman as saying. The Peace Mission-2014 drills involve
more than 7,000 personnel from China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan.

Car bombing kills at least 11 in Baghdad:  A car bombing in a busy Shiite area
in eastern Baghdad killed at least 11 people, officials said, the latest attack
to shake the Iraqi capital as theShiite-led government struggles to dislodge
Sunni militants from the country's west and north. The explosives-laden car went
off during the morning rush hour in the main commercial area of the New Baghdad
district. The attack also wounded 31, authorities said.

24 migrants drown after boat sinks in Mediterranean:  At least 24 migrants
trying to reach Europe from Africa  died after their boat sank in the
Mediterranean, the Italian navy said after completing a two-day search for
bodies. Navy and coast guard vessels rescued 364 other migrants after the
fishing boat capsized on Sunday, the latest in a series of similar shipwrecks.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


