                              53 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 5:42 PM EST

Drones and laws of general applicability

BYLINE: Michael Berry;Nabiha Syed (guest-blogging)

LENGTH: 1201 words


Our last post described the laws some states have passed to regulate private
drone use. In addition to these new laws, existing common-law doctrines and
statutes throughout the country serve to regulate people's use of drones. Those
laws serve to protect individual's privacy, safety, and property.

First, the tort of intrusion upon seclusion provides a remedy for a person who
claims a drone invaded her privacy. The tort has two necessary elements: (1) a
person "intentionally intrudes, physically or otherwise, upon the solitude or
seclusion of another or his private affairs or concerns," and (2) "the intrusion
would be highly offensive to a reasonable person." As the comments in the
Restatement (Second) of Torts section addressing intrusion explain, the tort is
committed if the defendant pries into a private place or "otherwise invades a
private seclusion that the plaintiff has thrown about his person or affairs." In
the words of the Restatement, an intrusion can be committed through "the use of
the defendant's senses, with or without mechanical aids, to oversee or overhear
the plaintiff's private affairs, as by looking into his upstairs windows with
binoculars." Thus, intrusion claims have been lodged against people for illicit
filming and eavesdropping. The key is that the alleged victim had a reasonable
expectation of privacy at the time and in the place of the alleged intrusion.
This tort would seem to cover people who claim that a drone recorded or
photographed them in a private place, gathered private information about them,
or otherwise invaded their physical privacy.

While the intrusion tort can give rise to liability for gathering information in
a manner that invades someone's privacy, the publication of private facts tort
provides a remedy when private information is disseminated. A person commits
that tort by publishing or broadcasting private information about someone else
if the disclosure of that information would be highly offensive to the
reasonable person and the information is not a matter of legitimate public
concern. This tort only protects information about which people have a
reasonable expectation of privacy and is circumscribed by the First Amendment
protection afforded to the publication of truthful information about matters of
legitimate public concern. Accordingly, if a drone filmed a person engaged in a
private activity, and then the film was subsequently published, that person
might have a claim for publication or private facts, as long as the publication
did not address a matter of legitimate public concern.

A number of statutes also protect people from invasions of privacy, including
invasions involving drones. For example, state wiretap statutes serve to
restrict people from using drones to record audio. Under those laws, people who
intentionally intercept audio communications when the speakers have a reasonable
expectation of privacy could face civil and criminal liability. "Peeping Tom"
and similar state statutes set out crimes when people film, photograph, or
observe others in places or circumstances where they have reasonable
expectations of privacy. Other criminal laws might apply as well. Over the past
year, New York police arrested drone operators for reckless endangerment
following incidents in which one operator lost control of his drone, another
flew a drone over the U.S. Open, and yet another flew a drone to close to a
police helicopter.

Some states have unique laws designed to protect privacy that seemingly would
cover alleged invasions by drones. The California legislature, for instance,
recently amended its controversial anti-paparazzi law with an eye toward
ensuring that it covers drones. The amended law would create a private cause of
action for "constructive invasion of privacy," which is committed when someone
"attempts to capture, in a manner that is offensive to a reasonable person," an
image or recording of a person "engaging in a personal or familial activity
under circumstances in which the plaintiff had a reasonable expectation of
privacy, through the use of any device" if the image or recording "could not
have been achieved without a trespass unless the device was used."

Existing laws also provide remedies for any physical harm that might be caused
by drones. If a drone crashes into a person, that person can pursue claims for
battery or negligence. Likewise, if someone used a drone to follow another
person or to place them in reasonable fear of physical injury, criminal stalking
and harassment statutes could come in to play.

Existing state law also protects people's interest against having drones flying
over their property, most notably through the law of trespass and nuisance. At
common law, property ownership "extended to the periphery of the universe." But,
in 1946, the Supreme Court abrogated that common-law understanding in United
States v. Causby.The Causby case involved a Fifth Amendment takings claim by a
chicken farmer who lived near a runway used by military planes. In addressing
that claim, the Court held that a landowner "must have exclusive control of the
immediate reaches of the enveloping atmosphere" and that a taking occurs only
when the government engages in activity that has a "direct and immediate
interference with the enjoyment and use of the land."

In the wake of Causby and with the proliferation of airplanes, state trespass
long began to evolve. Now, the Restatement provides that "flight by an aircraft"
constitutes a trespass if "it enters into the immediate reaches of the air space
next to the land" and "interferes substantially with the [owner's] use and
enjoyment of his land." While state laws vary on trespass through the air,
Restatement commentary explains that "it is an actionable trespass . . . to fire
projectiles or to fly an advertising kite or balloon through the air above
[land], even though no harm is done to the land or to the possessor's enjoyment
of it."

The law of nuisance also serves as a potential check on drone operations. A
person can assert a nuisance claim, and seek an injunction, by showing that
someone has committed an intentional and unreasonable invasion that interferes
with a property owner's enjoyment of his land. Courts have allowed nuisance
claims in some instances when a property owner is regularly subjected to flying
objects. For example, property owners have used the law of nuisance to seek
redress and injunctions against golf balls regularly flying onto their property
because an adjoining driving range has not fixed a broken net. Courts permit
these claims because there is a continuing possibility that a ball could be hit
onto the private property. This same theory could be applied to drone operators.

* * * * *

Drones are not flying into entirely lawless territory. Although the protections
and remedies vary from state to state, there are a number of pre-existing laws
that can help guide the integration of drones into domestic airspace. In our
final piece, we will discuss why these existing laws may provide a sufficient
framework for providing remedies for alleged wrongs, as potential uses of drones
evolve, the technology develops, and the FAA eventually issues regulations.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


