                             546 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

U.S. must justify using drones to kill citizens

BYLINE: Larry Neumeister

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 397 words


NEW YORK The U.S. government must publicly disclose in redacted form secret
papers describing its legal justification for using drones to kill citizens
suspected of terrorism overseas, because President Barack Obama and senior
government officials have commented on the subject, a federal appeals court
ruled Monday.

The 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York ruled in a Freedom of
Information Act case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union and two
reporters for The New York Times. In 2011, they sought any documents in which
Department of Justice lawyers had discussed the highly classified "targeted
killing" program.

The requests came after a September 2011 drone strike in Yemen killed Anwar al
Awlaki, an al Qaeda leader who had been born in the United States, and another
U.S. citizen, Samir Khan, and after an October 2011 strike killed Abdulrahman al
Awlaki, al Awlaki's teenage son and also a U.S. citizen. Some legal scholars and
human rights activists complained that it was illegal for the U.S. to kill
American citizens away from the battlefield without a trial.

The Justice Department did not respond to requests for comment.

In January 2013, U.S. District Court Judge Colleen McMahon ruled that she had no
authority to order the documents disclosed, although she chided the Obama
administration for refusing to release them.

In an opinion written by 2nd Circuit Judge Jon Newman, a three judge panel noted
that after McMahon ruled, senior government officials spoke about the subject.
The panel rejected the government's claim that the court could not consider
official disclosures made after McMahon's ruling, including a 16 page Justice
Department white paper on the subject and public comments by Obama in May in
which he acknowledged his role in the al Awlaki killing, saying he had
"authorized the strike that took him out."

Jameel Jaffer, deputy legal director of the ACLU, said in an e mail that "the
government can't pretend that everything about its targeted killing program is a
classified secret while senior officials selectively disclose information meant
to paint the program in the most favorable light."

David E. McCraw, vice president of The New York Times, said the 2nd Circuit
"reaffirmed a bedrock principle of democracy: The people do not have to accept
blindly the government's assurances that it is operating within the bounds of
the law."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


