                             543 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            November 15, 2013 Friday
                               FRI FINAL Edition

Cathedral reopens after man arrested

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 285 words


Worship services and other events St. John's Episcopal Cathedral in Capitol Hill
have resumed after the Thursday arrest of a man who police said threatened to
kill priests and bishops there.

Dominique Richard, 60, also threatened to kill a woman and desecrate the altar
at St. Andrew's Episcopal Church at East 20th Avenue and Glenarm Place,
according to his arrest affidavit. Richard was jailed on $1,000 bond and faces
menacing charges.

Richard on Tuesday called a woman who had been dispersing his Social Security
payments and left her voice mail messages. When she called him back, he told
her, "It doesn't matter, I'm going to get a gun and come kill you, and I'm
killing any priest and bishop from the Episcopal Church, and I am going to
desecrate the altar at St. Andrews," according to the affidavit.

The threats led to the closure and cancellation of events at the cathedral,
where a handwritten note on the door told visitors that a Wednesday gathering
had been canceled due to an apparent "gun threat at the church."

The Episcopal Diocese of Colorado said Thursday the cathedral would resume its
normal schedule and hold regular worship services.

LAMAR

Ban on using drones in hunting advances

A ban on drone assisted hunting has passed its first test with Colorado wildlife
authorities.

According to 7News, the Colorado Parks and Wildlife Commission on Thursday
approved a proposal to make it illegal to use aerial drones while hunting.

The rule was heard in an informal meeting during the commission's regularly
scheduled meeting. It received general support and moves to a final vote by the
commission in January. If it passes, it will take effect in the 2014 big game
hunting season, which begins in August.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richard

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


