                             549 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            September 8, 2014 Monday
                              MON REGIONAL Edition

Court blocks release of murder suspect

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 370 words


The Colorado Supreme Court says a man awaiting a new trial in the shooting death
of his wife won't be released on bond.

The seven member court granted a prosecutors' request for an emergency stay to
keep Michael Blagg, 51, from posting bail. A judge on Thursday set bail at
$500,000 for Blagg, who was convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison
in 2004 in the death of Jennifer Blagg.

The conviction was thrown out in June after the judge determined a juror lied
when she said she had never experienced domestic violence.

Prosecutors say the order letting Blagg post bail violated the state
constitution. The Supreme Court gave Blagg's defense until Sept. 17 to argue
against the stay.

WESTMINSTER

Man critically injured in road rage incident

A 67 year old man was critically injured Sunday morning in a suspected road rage
incident in Westminster, police said.

The man was found outside his vehicle about 8:30 a.m. near the intersection of
104th Avenue and Independence Street and was taken to a hospital with critical
injuries, police said.

"Several witnesses in the area reported hearing an argument between at least two
male parties shortly before the man was found," the release said.

Police are asking for the public's help in identifying a man who was in a white,
late model pickup truck who is suspected of being involved in the incident.
Authorities are also seeking a woman in a red car who may have been a witness.

Police ask anyone with information to call 303 658 4360.

MESA COUNTY

Grand Junction man dies in off road crash

A Grand Junction man involved in an off road utility task vehicle accident died
of multiple injuries, the Mesa County coroner's office said Sunday.

Ernie Farris, 48, was a passenger in the UTV when it rolled over on the
Interstate 70 Frontage Road at 29th Road on Saturday night.

WINDSOR

Firefighter uses drone to investigate fires

Windsor Severance Fire Rescue volunteer Mike Vickerman uses a drone he purchased
to investigate fire damaged structures.

Vickerman, 43, plans to use his unmanned aerial vehicle to help firefighters as
they work to extinguish burning structures.

For now, Vickerman is using the drone to film events like the 93rd annual
Windsor Harvest Festival and CPR training.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


