                             544 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           December 31, 2013 Tuesday
                              TUE REGIONAL Edition

FAA selects test sites for drone programs

BYLINE: Kristen Leigh Painter

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 310 words


Colorado's bid for a drone test site failed to win one of the Federal Aviation
Administration's official designations announced Monday, as six other states
celebrated victory.

The University of Colorado acted as the primary applicant, with support from
industry, academic and other public entities.

The six sites which essentially were awarded a five year head start in the
burgeoning commercial unmanned industry are in Nevada, Alaska, New York, North
Dakota, Texas and Virginia.

"We really had convinced ourselves, with the team that we had assembled, that we
were in the top six. It was a real disappointment," said Gary Bartmann, CEO of
Rocky Mountain UAS, the industry group created to assist the university in
putting its best proposal forward.

The FAA, under congressional mandate to integrate commercial unmanned aircraft
into national airspace by 2015, received 25 proposals from 24 states.

The agency will use these sites to research civilian drone operations.

After a 10 month evaluation process, the federal agency selected the test site
operators based on "geography, climate, location of ground infrastructure,
research needs, airspace use, safety, aviation experience and risk."

The Colorado team has a debriefing call with the FAA, in which it hopes to learn
where it fell short and what special permits it may acquire for pursuing
unmanned aircraft systems. "We have fires, floods, and search and rescue
scenarios in Colorado, and those are the kinds of things that we would like to
hopefully pursue with the FAA's blessing," Bartmann said.

Brian Argrow, a professor at CU's Research and Engineering Center for Unmanned
Vehicles, said: "We still want to leverage the collaborations we've formed.
There was a lot of effort in pulling together a Colorado effort."

Kristen Leigh Painter: 303 954 1638, kpainter@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/kristenpainter

LOAD-DATE: January 03, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: University of Colorado research support member James Mach works on his
laptop next to the Tempest unmanned aircraft system in February in the
engineering building on campus. Mach is the pilot of the Tempest, designed for
storm chasing. Jeremy Papasso, Daily Camera

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


