                             556 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 29, 2013 Friday
                                Regional Edition

U.S. drone strike killed child, Karzai alleges

BYLINE: Tim Craig

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 623 words

DATELINE: KABUL


KABUL - Afghan President Hamid Karzai accused the United States of launching a
drone strike that killed a 2-year-old child Thursday and vowed to not sign a
long-term security agreement if similar attacks continue.

In a statement, Karzai said a suspected U.S. "pilot-less aircraft" fired into a
house shortly before noon in Helmand province, killing the child and wounding
two women. He said the information was relayed to him by Mohammad Naem, the
governor of the province.

Spokesmen for the U.S.-led coalition did not respond to requests for comment.
The U.S. Embassy in Kabul referred questions to the international coalition.

Although few details were available Thursday night, the allegations are likely
to stoke tension over Karzai's reluctance to endorse a plan that would allow
several thousand U.S. troops to remain in Afghanistan after 2014.

After a year of negotiations, the Obama administration thought it had finalized
an agreement with Karzai last week to allow up to 15,000 foreign troops to stay
to train and assist the military.

But Karzai has been reluctant to sign it, saying he first wants assurances that
the United States won't meddle in Afghan elections next year, will cease
military raids on Afghan homes, and will help start peace talks between Karzai's
government and Taliban insurgents. For the latter, he has demanded that the
United States release 17 Afghan prisoners from the U.S. detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Now, Karzai has added a reduction of U.S. airstrikes to
his list of demands.

"This attack shows that American forces are not respecting the life and safety
of Afghan people's houses," he said in the statement. He added, "For years, our
innocent people have become victims of the war under the name of terrorism, and
they have had no safety in their homes."

He said he won't sign the security agreement if such "oppressions by foreign
forces continue."

It was unclear from his statement whether he was calling for an end of all drone
strikes or just attacks that target homes.

The alleged death of the child comes one week after Karzai accused U.S. special
forces of killing two Afghan civilians during a raid on a house in eastern
Afghanistan. Karzai's assertion angered coalition commanders, who insisted that
the men were "armed insurgents." They accused Karzai of using "allegations of
civilian deaths for political purposes."

But Karzai cited the incident as justification for his decision to delay the
signing of the agreement. During a meeting Monday with U.S. National Security
Adviser Susan E. Rice, Karzai demanded that American troops immediately stop
entering the homes of Afghan citizens, his spokesman said.

The Obama administration responded by saying that if the agreement is not signed
by the end of the year, it will have no choice but to begin preparing for a full
withdrawal of U.S. forces from Afghanistan next year.

"It's not something that we want to foresee or want to pursue," U.S. Ambassador
James B. Cunningham told Afghan reporters Wednesday. But, he added, "it could be
a consequence of decisions that your government takes or doesn't take."

Karzai's stance has befuddled Western analysts, and is a growing concern for
many Afghan political leaders, who say he is endangering Afghanistan's security
because the agreement includes $4 billion in annual U.S. and coalition funding
for the Afghan military.

On Sunday, a council of 2,500 Afghan tribal leaders and civic activists endorsed
the agreement and called on Karzai to quickly sign it. In his statement
Thursday, Karzai accused the United States of undermining the spirit of that
gathering by launching the airstrike that he said killed a child.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Sayed Salahuddin in Kabul contributed to this report

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


