                             555 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            November 25, 2013 Monday
                                 Met 2 Edition

World Digest: Nov. 24, 2013

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 679 words

SYRIA

Rebels try to break siege near capital

Heavy clashes between Syrian troops and rebels trying to break a government
siege in the suburbs of Damascus have killed at least 160 fighters over two
days, activists said Sunday.

Forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad have for months laid siege to rebel
bastions in the Ghouta area east of the capital, preventing food, clean water,
medicine and other supplies from entering in a bid to crush resistance.

The tactic, which activists say has led to famine, has helped government troops
capture a string of rebel-held areas on Damascus's doorstep over the past month.

The government's push around the capital has coincided with gains by Assad's
forces around the northern city of Aleppo and a new offensive in the rugged
Qalamoun region north of Damascus.

The recent victories have shifted the momentum of the conflict in Assad's favor
and given him greater leverage in proposed peace talks that the United States
and Russia are trying to convene to end the civil war.

The intense fighting in the Ghouta area began Friday when several rebel groups
attacked government forces, according to the Britain-based Syrian Observatory
for Human Rights and an activist based in Qalamoun. The activist spoke on the
condition of anonymity for fear of government reprisal.

- Associated Press

PAKISTAN

Protesters try to stop NATO supply trucks

Demonstrators protesting U.S. drone strikes roughed up drivers Sunday in an
attempt to stop trucks carrying NATO troop supplies and equipment from passing
through northwest Pakistan into Afghanistan.

The rally came a day after a political party led by former cricket star Imran
Khan said it would prevent NATO supply trucks making their way to and from
Afghanistan from traveling through Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province until the United
States stops its drone campaign. The United States leads the NATO coalition of
troops battling the Taliban in Afghanistan.

About 100 protesters on the outskirts of Peshawar, the capital of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, checked the documents of truck drivers headed toward Afghanistan as
they passed through a toll booth. They shouted at the drivers and pulled one
man, Gul Zaman, out of his truck when he told them that he was carrying
commercial goods to Afghanistan, not NATO supplies. Video of the incident was
shown by Pakistan's GEO TV.

"Without waiting for me to take my documents out of the glove compartment, they
dragged me out," Zaman said. "We are also concerned about drone attacks, but
they shouldn't come down heavy on us like this."

Police were present at the scene but did not stop the protesters, some of whom
were carrying wooden batons.

- Associated Press

Thousands rally in Ukraine for E.U. agreement: About 50,000 demonstrators
rallied in the center of Kiev on Sunday to demand that Ukraine's government
reverse course and sign a landmark agreement with the European Union in defiance
of Russia. It was the biggest protest in Ukraine since the peaceful 2004 Orange
Revolution, which overturned a fraudulent presidential election result and
brought a Western-leaning government to power.

New Egyptian law restricts protests: Egypt's president signed a bill into law on
Sunday restricting rallies and other public gatherings, a move that is likely to
raise fresh questions about the military-backed government's democratic
credentials. Thousands of anti-government demonstrators were on the streets of
Cairo and other cities when the bill was announced on state media, as they have
been regularly in the nearly three years since autocrat Hosni Mubarak was
ousted.

Dominicans expel scores of Haitians after killing: Dominican authorities have
expelled 244 Haitians after the killing of three people along the border between
Haiti and the Dominican Republic, a Haitian priest and migrant advocate said
Sunday. The Rev. Antoine Lissaint of the Jesuit Refugee and Migrant Organization
told the Associated Press that people of Haitian descent were blamed in the
fatal stabbing of a married Dominican couple. A Dominican mob retaliated by
killing a Haitian man.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


