                             550 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Startups pitch high-tech oil, gas cleanup

BYLINE: Mark Jaffe

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 574 words


Drones, real time pollution sensors and solar evaporation systems were among the
technologies pitched Thursday as ways to help clean up oil and gas development.

Startup companies from Colorado and five other states rolled out their wares at
a session organized by the Colorado Cleantech Industries Association.

"This is an opportunity to see a lot of cutting technologies and figure out if
we can use it to reduce our footprint," said Curtis Rueter, a Noble Energy Inc.
environmental manager. "It is like brainstorming."

The pitch session came on the same day the Environmental Defense Fund issued a
report that said there is a growing industry focused on capturing fugitive
methane emissions from oil and gas operations.

The EDF report identified 76 companies around the nation that are manufacturing
methane controls or providing control services.

Nineteen of the companies are operating in Colorado, which in February adopted
the first methane control rule in the country.

"The report released today by the Environmental Defense Fund shows smart methane
policy, like we have in Colorado, not only produces cleaner air, but creates
good paying local jobs," Gov. John Hickenlooper said in a statement.

Colorado has become the biggest market for the thermal imaging leak detectors
made by FLIR Systems Inc., said Tom Scanlon, a company vice president.

"Regulation, even the prospect of regulation, has driven the market," he said.

While most of the methane capture companies focus on things such as valves,
pumps and plungers, the technologies pitched at the clean tech association
session held in Denver at the governor's mansion were more exotic.

The association issued an oil and gas clean tech challenge in July that drew
more than 40 companies from a dozen states. Twelve were chosen to make
presentations.

Pinedale, Wyo. based Alert Plus offered its gas monitor that includes an alert
system by computer, cellphone or Twitter and an automatic emergency shutdown
feature.

In the last year, 20 people have been hospitalized in gas related incidents in
the two large natural gas fields around Pinedale, said Matt Murdock, the
company's chief operating officer.

"This company is birthed out of boots on the ground," Murdock told the group.

Fort Collins based OptiEnz, using technology spun out of Colorado State
University, pitched its real time sensors to test well wastewater for the
pollutants methanol and BTEX.

BTEX includes the carcinogen benzene.

Oil and gas companies now must wait days for lab analysis of water samples, said
Jeff Lints, OptiEnz's vice president for sales.

"The operators are flying blind," Lints said. Holding the slender tube sensor,
Lints said, "This gives up to the minute information."

Denver based Solar Multiple adapted technology from the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory to create a thermal solar system to more quickly evaporate
water in drilling pits.

"Most of us come out of the solar energy industry," the company's finance lead,
Bill Hargett, explained.

Agribotix, a Boulder based company using drones to collect data coupled with
cloud based data analysis, also made a pitch.

Drones could be used to check pipelines, quickly get to spills, and be equipped
with sensors and cameras, company founder Tom McKinnon said.

"We started using this in agriculture," McKinnon said, "and we're trying to see
how it could be applied to the oil and gas industry."

Mark Jaffe: 303 954 1912, mjaffe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bymarkjaffe

LOAD-DATE: October 07, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


