                             563 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            December 9, 2013 Monday

Alibaba Invests $360 Million in Logistics Deal with Haier

BYLINE: NEIL GOUGH

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 608 words



HIGHLIGHT: The Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group announced a plan Monday to
invest in the new venture with Haier Group, a manufacturer and distributor of
household appliances in China.


HONG KONG-In a major push into the logistics business, Alibaba Group, the
Chinese e-commerce giant, said Monday it would invest around $360 million in
Haier  Group, one of China's biggest manufacturers and distributors of household
appliances.

The deal calls for the two companies  to set up a joint-venture logistics
business, bringing together Alibaba's huge  online retailing platform and client
network with Haier's logistics unit,  Goodaymart, which has an especially
strong presence in China's smaller inland cities and provinces.

Shares in Haier's Hong Kong-listed  unit, Haier Electronics Group, rose as  much
as  20 percent in early trading on  Monday on news of the deal.

''Alibaba Group is honored to join  with Haier Group to create this platform
that will equip China's manufacturing  industry with enhanced nationwide and
global access,'' Jack Ma, Alibaba's  founder and executive chairman, said in  a
statement.

Companies around the world are responding to the rapid growth of Internet
retail by seeking ways to deliver goods  more quickly to buyers.

Last week, Jeff Bezos, the founder of  Amazon.com, proposed using dronesto
deliver packages to customers in the  United States.

Other companies, including United Parcel Service  and Google are considering
using drones for delivery, too, but  are also working on ways to provideso
called on-demand delivery.

For Alibaba, which isconsidering an initial public offering in New York that
analysts say could make it one of the  world's most valuable Internet companies,
one of the strongest selling points  to the tie-up with Haier is a stronger
distribution network for the goods that are  sold on Tmall.com, its popular
business- to-consumer platform.

Alibaba says more than 70,000 international and Chinese brands have  already set
up digital storefronts on  Tmall.com, where transaction volumes  in 2012
surpassed 200 billion renminbi,  or about $33 billion, and hit a single day
global record of 35 billion renminbi on  Nov. 11 of this year - a day celebrated
in  China as ''Singles' Day,'' which is now a nationwide shopping event.

The deal gives Tmall.com access to  Goodaymart's extensive network in  China,
which includes nine shipping  bases and  more than 21 million square  feet of
warehouse space.

Haier says Goodaymart runs logistics  and distribution sites in more than 2,800
counties across China and operates  more than 17,000 service points.

Haier, which in September sold a 10  percent stake in itself to Kohlberg Kravis
Roberts & Company, a private equity  group, is best known for selling white
goods, like a washing machine that also  washes potatoes.

But it is Haier's logistics and distribution business, which handles both its
own products and those of competitors,  that today accounts for most of its
sales.

This business line, which Haier Electronics refers to as integrated channel
services, reported revenue of 26.6 billion renminbi in the first six months of
this year, up 11 percent from a year earlier.

Alibaba's total investment in Haier is  worth 2.82 billion Hong Kong dollars, or
$364 million, and consists of several  transactions. The Internet company  will
pay 965 million dollars for new  shares, representing a 2 percent stake  in
Haier Electronics.

Alibaba will also pay 541 million dollars for a 9.9 percent stake in Goodaymart,
and 1.32 billion dollars for convertible bonds issued by Goodaymart that  will
lift its total stake in the logistics  business to 24.1 percent once the notes
are converted into shares.


     ·    Why Alibaba Could Be China's Next $100 Billion I.P.O.
     ·    Chinese Internet Giant Alibaba Plans to Issue I.P.O. in New York


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


