                             561 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday

Morning Agenda: Citigroup's Low-Key Chief

BYLINE: WILLIAM ALDEN

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2046 words



HIGHLIGHT: The low profile of Citigroup&#8217;s chief executive, Michael L.
Corbat, may be an advantage. | November is shaping up to be the month that puts
many hedge funds solidly in the black for the year. | T-Mobile&#8217;s chief
executive is shaking up the mobile industry. | Martin Scorsese&#8217;s cinematic
romp through the securities business is the director&#8217;s longest film ever.



Michael L. Corbat has kept a relatively low profile since taking the helm of
Citigroup in October 2012. And that appears to be just fine with the bank he
runs, Susanne Craig and Jessica Silver-Greenberg report in DealBook.

"To be a prominent face of Wall Street at a time when banks are feeling the heat
from federal authorities on a number of fronts clearly has its drawbacks. Mr.
Corbat's counterpart at rival JPMorgan Chase, Jamie Dimon, has been widely
viewed as the point man for the bank as it wrestles with investigations by at
least seven federal agencies, several state regulators and two foreign nations.
And under Mr. Dimon, JPMorgan has in just a few years gone from a Washington
favorite to a magnet for government scrutiny.

"The low-key approach taken by Citigroup - which faces a number of
investigations of its own - has not gone unnoticed inside JPMorgan. Some board
members and executives there have recently pointed to Mr. Corbat in privately
discussing the apparent advantages of a more self-effacing approach in a chief
executive. The perks of a lower profile have become clear to Mr. Dimon, too,
according to people close to him who note he has recently refrained from giving
interviews to focus, in part, on client meetings.

"JPMorgan's board, of course, remains solidly behind Mr. Dimon. But at least two
directors, people close to the board say, have also privately acknowledged that
Mr. Dimon's previous offhandedness toward authorities - including his referring
several years ago to the former Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner as
"Timmy" - at times rankled regulators, adding to the steep challenge the bank
faces as it now tries to mend those frayed relationships."

A STRONG MONTH FOR HEDGE FUNDS  |  November is shaping up to be the month that
puts many hedge funds solidly in the black for the year, at least judging by the
performance of two closely watched portfolios, Matthew Goldstein reports in
DealBook.

David Einhorn's Greenlight Capital reported a 4.7 percent gain for the month,
putting the firm's flagship fund up about 19.1 percent for the year, according
to an investor with knowledge of the matter. Another firm that reported early,
Daniel Loeb's Third Point, also had a strong November, Mr. Goldstein reports.
Its flagship fund, Third Point Partners, was up 2.7 percent for November and is
now up 23.2 percent for the year, while the more leveraged Third Point Ultra
fund is now up 33.4 percent for the year, after rising 3.6 percent in November.

T-MOBILE'S BRASH C.E.O. KEEPS RIVALS OFF BALANCE  |  T-Mobile had all but been
given up for dead two years ago, when its owner, Deutsche Telekom, agreed to
sell it to AT&T and was already describing the business as a "discontinued"
operation in its financial statements. But then came John J. Legere. Named chief
executive of T-Mobile in September 2012, after the antitrust division of the
Justice Department sued to block the proposed merger and AT&T threw in the
towel, Mr. Legere quickly started shaking up the industry, James B. Stewart
writes in the Common Sense column in The New York Times.

"Mr. Legere not only looked but also acted the part of the 'disruptive'
competitor beloved by antitrust regulators but all too rare in most concentrated
industries (there are just four major cellular carriers). He branded T-Mobile
the 'Un-carrier' and took square aim at the staid giants of the industry, AT&T
and Verizon, publicly describing them with language that can't be printed in
this newspaper," Mr. Stewart writes. "This might have been dismissed as little
more than a colorful stunt, given the depth of T-Mobile's problems. But then the
results started rolling in."

How did he do it? When he joined T-Mobile, "We had a limited time window and a
sense of urgency," Mr. Legere told Mr. Stewart. "We were losing over two million
customers a year. So we moved as fast as we humanly could. My board wondered if
we were doing too much. But the fact is, speed has become one of our biggest
weapons. The current industry is arrogant, stupid and slow, which gives
companies like T-Mobile a real competitive advantage."

DELIVERY BY DRONE?  |  If Jeff Bezos has his way, Amazon's future delivery
system will run on drones. On "60 Minutes" on Sunday night, Mr. Bezos, the
Amazon founder, floated the notion of using drones to deliver packages, showing
Charlie Rose a video of a tiny helicopter seizing a package from a warehouse and
airlifting it to a house. "I know this looks like science fiction. It's not,"
Mr. Bezos said. Still, he cautioned that there were "years of additional work
from this point." The hardest challenge, he said, would be convincing the
Federal Aviation Administration that this is a good idea.

ON THE AGENDA  |  The ISM manufacturing index for November is released at 10
a.m. The restructuring expert James E. Millstein is on Bloomberg TV at 10:30
a.m. Claudio Del Vecchio, the owner of Brooks Brothers, is on Bloomberg TV at
3:30 p.m.

SCORSESE'S WALL STREET EPIC  |  Martin Scorsese's new movie, "The Wolf of Wall
Street," is the last of the Oscar season movies to surface, Michael Cieply and
Brooks Barnes report in The New York Times. Completed just last Wednesday and
scheduled for release on Christmas Day, the two-hour, 59-minute cinematic romp
through the securities business is Mr. Scorsese's longest film ever.

Will the picture do for crooked stock traders what Mr. Scorsese's "Goodfellas"
did for the mob, or will it become a problem for the executives at Paramount?
"For Paramount, the stakes are not inconsiderable. Though the Viacom-owned
studio had spring-summer hits in 'Star Trek Into Darkness' and 'World War Z,' it
is running last among the major studios, with only about $823 million in
domestic ticket sales, roughly half those of first-place Warner Brothers," The
Times writes.

 |  Contact: @williamalden | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Akamai Technologies to Buy Cybersecurity Firm  |  Akamai Technologies said it
would buy Prolexic Technologies, a cloud-based cybersecurity provider, for about
$370 million. REUTERS

Pearson to Sell Financial News Group for $623 Million  |  Pearson, the publisher
of The Financial Times, put Mergermarket up for sale earlier this year, and the
private equity firm BC Partners emerged as the buyer. DealBook »

Australia Blocks A.D.M.'s $2.7 Billion Bid for GrainCorp  |  The rejection of
the takeover by the American agribusiness giant raised doubts about the
coalition government's pro-business pledges. DealBook »

American-US Airways Merger Cleared  |  The merger of American Airlines and US
Airways has cleared its final hurdle as a federal bankruptcy judge approves
American's reorganization plan, reports Jad Mouawad of The New York Times.
DealBook »

Orange to Sell Dominican Telecom Business  |  Orange, the French
telecommunications company, will sell its Dominican unit for $1.4 billion to
Altice, a Luxembourg cable and broadband provider that is expanding its presence
in the Caribbean. DealBook »

CVS Caremark to Buy Infusion Business  |  The $2.1 billion acquisition of Coram
will not affect CVS Caremark's financial results in 2014 but is expected to add
3 to 5 cents to adjusted earnings per share in 2015. DealBook »

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Commuter Train Accident in the Bronx Kills 4 and Injures Dozens  |  More than 60
passengers were injured, 11 critically, after all eight cars of a Metro-North
train from Poughkeepsie veered off the tracks on Sunday near the Spuyten Duyvil
station along the Hudson River, officials said. NEW YORK TIMES

Commercial Mortgage Securities Make a Comeback  |  The Financial Times reports:
"Worldwide issuance of securities backed by revenues from commercial mortgages
has nearly doubled this year to the highest level since 2007 as U.S. and
European banks pile back into property lending." FINANCIAL TIMES

UBS Consolidates in Effort to Shrink Its Investment Bank  |  The Swiss bank is
combining its currency, interest rates and credit trading businesses into one
unit. DealBook »

Wall Street's Need for Speed Approaches a Natural Limit  |  Strike Technologies,
a company racing to build networks of microwave radio transmitters linking
financial hubs around the world, says its technology can beam market data at
about 95 percent of the theoretical speed of light, The Los Angeles Times
reports. LOS ANGELES TIMES

The Overlooked Secret to Great Performance  |  Few companies or leaders
systematically focus on, and invest in, how their employees feel, even though
doing so would serve their bottom line, Tony Schwartz writes in the Life@Work
column. DealBook »

PRIVATE EQUITY »

Hilton Aims to Raise Up to $2.37 Billion in I.P.O.  |  Hilton Worldwide, which
is owned by the Blackstone Group, said in a filing on Monday that it planned to
price an offering of 112.8 million shares at $18 to $21 a share. REUTERS

Private Equity Transaction Fees Under Fire  |  An unidentified "senior private
equity insider" has filed a whistle-blower complaint with the Securities and
Exchange Commission to take aim at "transaction fees" collected by private
equity firms, Crain's New York Business reports. CRAIN'S NEW YORK BUSINESS

HEDGE FUNDS »

Some Big Public Pension Funds Are Behaving Like Activist Investors  |  Some of
the biggest public pension funds are engaging with, and sometimes seeking to
oust, directors of companies whose stock they own. DealBook »

Analyst Says SAC Trader Sought 'Edgy' Information  |  Jon Horvath, the federal
government's star witness in an insider trading case, said his former boss,
Michael S. Steinberg, wanted him to cross a legal line. DealBook »

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Markit May Add New Directors Ahead of Possible I.P.O.  |  Financial News
reports: "Markit Group, the 10-year-old financial information provider now worth
an estimated $5 billion, is this week expected to appoint a majority-independent
board for the first time in the latest sign it may pursue a public listing next
year." FINANCIAL NEWS

A Backlog of I.P.O.'s in China  |  Stocks fell after China's securities
regulator announced plans to lift a 13-month moratorium on initial public
offerings in January, as investors pondered the glut of 760 firms waiting to go
public, Quartz writes. QUARTZ

Moncler Sets Price Range for Public Offering  |  The Italian maker of luxury
winter jackets plans to raise as much as $1.1 billion in its initial public
offering on the Milan stock exchange. DealBook »

VENTURE CAPITAL »

A Prediction: Bitcoin Is Doomed to Fail  |  The web currency appeals to
right-wing thinkers. But private sector money is a fantasy. Currencies need
political authority to raise taxes or to pass laws to unwind monetary excesses,
Edward Hadas of Reuters Breakingviews writes. REUTERS BREAKINGVIEWS

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Fed Zeroes In on a Weak Link in Finance  |  "Regulators have spent the past five
years trying to siphon risk out of the financial system, but the Federal Reserve
sees one major piece of unfinished business: short-term funding," The Wall
Street Journal writes. WALL STREET JOURNAL

Mortgages Without Risk, at Least for the Banks  |  A part of the Dodd-Frank
financial overhaul law is being challenged by a coalition that wants to drop
risk retention for mortgage loans, Floyd Norris writes in his column for The New
York Times. DealBook »

Turning the Wheels of Justice, and Making Room for Springsteen  |  Preet
Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, has an office with official
portraits, plaques and seals adorning the walls - but also the constant sound of
music filling the air. An interview with Edward Lewine for the Workspace column
in The New York Times. DealBook »

A Trusting Couple Thrown for Two Loops  |  The lawyer for a Miami Beach couple
says their names were forged on mortgage documents, Gretchen Morgenson writes in
the Fair Game column in The New York Times. And now the title insurer has
refused to make a settlement on most of the properties involved. NEW YORK TIMES

Brazil High Court Puts Off Depositor Ruling Until 2014  |  Multiple class-action
lawsuits over more than two-decade-old policies could together cost Brazil's
$64.8 billion - more than a quarter of the banking system's equity. DealBook »

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


