                             564 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                          December 18, 2013 Wednesday

Today's Scuttlebot: How Alleged Harvard Hoaxer Didn't Cover Digital Tracks, and
Hackers on Front Lines

BYLINE: THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 371 words



HIGHLIGHT: Wednesday&#8217;s highlights from around the web include the Internet
trail left by the student accused in a bomb hoax at Harvard. Plus, hackers get
courted by the government to fight the next generation cyberwarfare.


Every day, The New York Times's staff scours the web for interesting and
peculiar items.

Here's what we noticed Wednesday:

How the Alleged Harvard Bomb Hoaxer Failed to Cover His Online Tracks
Slate |  This is essentially a how-to for sending anonymous email.  - Damon
Darlin

Also: F.B.I. Identified Bomb Suspect Through Use of Anonymous Service Tor

The Geeks on the Front Lines
Rolling Stone |  There's a battle taking place: one between government and
industry to score the country's toughest geeks - like the ones here this weekend
- to join their front lines. - Nicole Perlroth

Universal Laptop Charger Standard Coming in 2014
IT Pro Portal |  That was fast: Thirty years after the first laptops, and the a
universal charger standard finally arrives. - Damon Darlin

The Coin Miracle Credit Card Is Still a Junky Prototype
Valleywag |  Evidence mounts that Coin, the wallet gadget, might not yet be all
it intends to be. But it has a few months to go. - Damon Darlin

Coming Soon: 'Car-Key Kids'
Education Next |  Could children ride alone in Google driverless cars before
they're old enough to drive? - Claire Cain Miller

The Culture That Gave Birth to the Personal Computer
Medium |  A tale of Silicon Valley in the 1970s, part of a rough draft from
Walter Isaacson's new book on digital innovation. - Ashwin Seshagiri

C'mon Silicon Valley, Ditch the Lazy Lady-Tech
The Daily Beast |  Wearable tech comes to the lingerie department (and I doubt
women designed the bra to stop emotional overeating). - Claire Cain Miller

The Birth of the iPhone
Medium |  A fascinating excerpt from "Jony Ive: The Genius Behind Apple's
Greatest Products." - Jenna Wortham

A Chinese Mobile Phone Company's International Ambitions
Wall Street Journal |  The Chinese smartphone start-up Xiaomi is expanding
across Asia, using consumers' interest to promote its handsets - Mark Scott

And, finally, what do you think of a future filled with drones? A video project
explored "the technology, capability, and purpose of drones, as their presence
becomes an increasingly pervasive reality in the skies of tomorrow."

Our Drone Future  http://t.co/OMQwMFBcc4  I can hardly wait for this exciting
dystopia to be realized!  via @Myles

- Stewart Butterfield (@stewart)18 Dec 13

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


