                             562 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                           December 4, 2013 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Remember Groupon?

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 486 words



HIGHLIGHT: Small-business borrowing and hiring are both up. Walmart&#8217;s
hottest item. What are the most ridiculous things your employees have tried to
expense?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    Groupon has its biggest holiday weekend ever.
     ·    Driven by mobile devices, Cyber Monday spending was up 16 percent over
          last year.
     ·    A report shows that housing prices were up 12.5 percent year-over-year
          in October.
     ·    Auto sales rose in November.
     ·    Small-business borrowing hits a six-year high. And small businesses
          created 102,000 jobs in November.
     ·    Media and entertainment executives have turned more bullish.
     ·    James Pethokoukis says the economy may be doing better than we think.


Management


     ·    Belle Beth Cooper looks at the science of creativity and explores how
          to harness your brain to come up with great ideas.
     ·    An author and speaker encourages you to brag about your failures.


Employees


     ·    Here are 25 ridiculous things employees have tried to expense.
     ·    A new report finds that 55 percent of business owners plan to give
          their employees a bonus this year.


Social Media


     ·    John Jantsch shares how he made Twitter infinitely more useful by
          editing his follows "down to a number I could manage."


Retail


     ·    The hottest item from Walmart's Black Friday sales this year was a
          29-cent washcloth.
     ·    National retailers generally do not consider small businesses to be
          major competitors, but a new report says they should.
     ·    This is how to optimize your e-commerce website for holiday shoppers.


Customer Service


     ·    Ty Montague says that Amazon's drone announcement was "a stroke of
          genius," but the Olive Garden's decision to sell hamburgers was a
          mistake.
     ·    Now UPS is experimenting with delivery drones.
     ·    If you're afraid that Amazon will crush your small business, Jeff
          Bezos has some advice: "Complaining is not a strategy."
     ·    Delta Airlines quietly bumps an entire flight for a college basketball
          team.


Around the Country


     ·    Here's a list of the top L.G.B.T.-owned businesses in Philadelphia.
     ·    Pittsburgh welcomes its first new distillery since prohibition.
     ·    Truckers will now pay $102 to cross the George Washington Bridge into
          New York.
     ·    A "Christmas Story" is played out for real on a New York subway.
     ·    A judge says Detroit can file for bankruptcy and rules that pension
          benefits owed to public employees aren't necessarily protected.
     ·    A New Hampshire factory owner is held accountable for a blast that
          killed two workers.


Around the World


     ·    These are the 23 most corrupt countries in the world.
     ·    China's currency is now the second most used in trade finance,
          overtaking the euro.


Technology


     ·    Philadelphia is the most active city government on GitHub, a developer
          platform.
     ·    A start-up develops an app to make you happier.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Gloomy Numbers
     ·    What Have You Seen Businesses Doing to Get Customers in the Door?
     ·    Today in Small Business: 12 Angry Women
     ·    Never Mind. I'll Find Someone Else.
     ·    Hiring to Carry Out Tasks Vs. Hiring to Achieve Goals


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


