                             565 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            January 31, 2014 Friday

All Quiet on the Amazon Front

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 410 words



HIGHLIGHT: Amazon is one of the most highly valued, most innovative and just
plain most interesting companies in the country. It is also one that places a
premium on saying nothing.


Amazon is one of the most exciting companies in the country, redefining retail,
web hosting, publishing and a bunch of other enterprises. When it says it is
merely thinking of doing something - as it did Thursday with the first-ever
price increasefor Amazon Prime shipping service - it makes news. It also makes
news when it talks about something that it is planning to do, maybe, a bunch of
years from now, in the unlikely event everything works out. Yes, we're talking
drones.

But suppose you wanted to know not about the future, but about the present or
even the past. About how, for instance, Amazon's grocery delivery service is
working out in the test markets, or how many Kindles have been sold. Surely this
would be the easiest thing in the world for Amazon to answer, because, you know,
it's past. Apple is one of the most secretive companies in the world, but it
will readily tell you how many iPhones and iPads it is selling.

But Amazon will not tell you any of this. Every quarter, the analysts get on the
phone with Tom Szkutak, the chief financial officer, and pepper him with
questions. But whether it is past, present or future, Mr. Szkutak ably dodges
each query. Here were his repliesThursday:

"I am sorry I can't help you ... you have to wait on that ... In terms of the
details, I can't really give you a lot of color ... you will have to stay tuned
on that one ... I can't talk to the specifics of that ... there is not a lot I
can help you with there ... I wouldn't speculate what we would do or not do
going forward ... I wouldn't speculate. We might or might not do in the future
... if you look back at what we have done, you can't expect that we might do
[it] going forward ... I wouldn't want to speculate what they would or wouldn't
do related to pricing ... it's hard to tell, honestly. It's hard to know ...
it's very early ... that's really all I can say ... I can't comment."

Some day, Harvard professors will teach courses in how Amazon rose from a cute
little online bookstore to the largest retailer on earth without ever managing
to disclose a thing. Meanwhile, don't expect to learn any more about when Amazon
will be increasing fees until it does it.


     ·    Amazon Reveals a New Hint About Prime Membership Rolls
     ·    Fewer Gmail Users Are Opening Retailers' Messages This Shopping Season
     ·    Amazon Floats the Notion of Delivery Drones
     ·    Daily Report: Retailers Turn to Social Media to Showcase Products
     ·    Amazon Web Services Gets Personal and Pretty


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


