                             567 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                             March 28, 2014 Friday

Citi's Blues

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2406 words



HIGHLIGHT: After failing the Fed&#8217;s stress test for the second time in
three years, Citi is facing a familiar question: Is the bank too big to manage?
| CBS Outdoor&#8217;s I.P.O. will relieve its parent of an awkward fit. |
Facebook gets into drones. | The identity of one of the mysterious Dewey seven
was revealed.


TOO BIG TO MANAGE?  |  A day after Citigroup's capital plan failed the Fed's
stress test for the second time in three years, the bank's executives were still
struggling to understand the Fed's decision and how best to respond. But the
regulator's rebuke should not have come as a complete surprise, Michael Corkery
and Jessica Silver-Greenberg write in DealBook. With the Fed's decision, a
question that has dogged Citigroup for nearly two decades has resurfaced: Is the
bank simply too big to manage?

Most of the nation's largest banks operate globally, but few banks have the
reach of Citigroup. The bank has a physical presence in more than 100 countries,
generating roughly half of its total revenue from countries outside the United
States. More than many of its peers, Citigroup also lends directly to consumers
and companies outside the United States, a strategy that may have contributed to
the $400 million fraud recently uncovered in Citigroup's Mexican banking unit,
Banamex.

Citigroup's failure was a personal blow to Michael L. Corbat, the bank's chief
executive, who has been praised for improving the bank's relations with
regulators. His predecessor, Vikram S. Pandit, was pushed out after the bank
failed to pass the stress test in 2012. Mr. Corbat has vowed to restructure the
bank by cutting costs and shedding unwanted businesses. But alas, as if to
underscore the bank's global sprawl, Mr. Corbat found out about the bank's
failure from a hotel room in South Korea.

I.P.O. TO RELIEVE CBS OF AN AWKWARD FIT  |  When CBS Outdoor begins trading on
the New York Stock Exchange on Friday, its parent company, CBS, may breathe a
sigh of relief, David Gelles writes in DealBook. CBS Outdoor is among the
largest advertising companies in the country, but its core focus - operating
billboards, airport signs and digital displays - was an awkward fit for CBS,
best known for its broadcast television network. CBS Outdoor's shares were
priced on Thursday at $28 apiece.

"Outdoor doesn't quite fit with us because it's sales, but not content. The
synergies didn't really exist," said Leslie Moonves, chief executive of CBS.
After the initial public offering, CBS Outdoor, which will be renamed in the
coming months, will be a stand-alone advertising company with a market
capitalization expected to be about $3.3 billion. Jeremy J. Male, chief
executive of CBS Outdoor, said the spinoff will allow his company to be able to
make its own capital decisions without having to fight for capital allocation.
For his part, Mr. Moonves said CBS Outdoor would be "a fabulous stand-alone
company."

FACEBOOK GETS INTO DRONES  |  In his second mind-boggling announcement of the
week, Mark Zuckerberg, the co-founder and chief executive of Facebook, revealed
on Thursday that the company was creating a new lab charged with figuring out
how to beam Internet from the sky. To that end, Facebook is buying a small
British company called Ascenta, which makes solar-powered drones, Vindu Goel
writes in The New York Times. The deal comes only days after Facebook announced
that it would spend at least $2 billion to buy Oculus VR, a maker of virtual
reality headsets.

Facebook's new lab is part of Mr. Zuckerberg's Internet.org project, which aims
to bring Internet to the two-thirds of the world's population without Internet
access. The company envisions using satellites, drones and lasers to reach the
10 percent of the world's population that are in areas difficult to reach via
traditional Internet solutions.

Facebook's recent initiatives have prompted some to wonder whether the company
is trying to keep up with its bigger Silicon valley rival, Google, which already
has its own head-mounted computing project, Glass, and is trying to bring the
Internet to the middle of nowhere. (Google, however, is trying to do so through
a network of high-flying balloons).

ON THE AGENDA  |  Personal income data for February is out at 8:30 a.m. The
Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan consumer sentiment index for March is
released at 9:55 a.m. Michael Carr, the head of Goldman Sachs's mergers and
acquisitions group in the Americas, is on CNBC at 8:10 a.m. Leslie Moonves, the
chief executive of the CBS Corporation, and Jeremy J. Male, the chief executive
of CBS Outdoor Americas, are on CNBC at 9:45 a.m. Richard W. Fisher, the
president of the Dallas Fed, is on CNBC at 7 p.m. John S. Chen, the executive
chairman and chief executive of BlackBerry, is on Bloomberg TV at 11:30 a.m.
Sunday Morning Futures with Maria Bartiromo debuts on the Fox News Channel on
Sunday.

MYSTERIOUS DEWEY SEVEN REDUCED TO SIX  |  In a statement unsealed on Thursday,
Francis J. Canellas, the former finance director of the bankrupt law firm Dewey
& LeBoeuf, pointed fingers at his former co-workers, Matthew Goldstein writes in
DealBook. Mr. Canellas is one of seven former Dewey employees who pleaded guilty
to taking part in a four-year plan to manipulate the financial statements of the
once-mighty law firm, but whose identities and plea agreements were being kept
under wraps by New York prosecutors. The pleas of most of the other employees
are expected to be unsealed on Friday.

The cooperation of Mr. Canellas and some of the other former employees is
regarded as crucial in the criminal case against the firm's former chairman, two
other former top executives and a low-level employee, who were indicted this
month by a New York grand jury on multiple counts of grand larceny and
falsifying business records. The four men have pleaded innocent to the charges.
The unsealing of Mr. Canellas's plea deal came after The New York Times filed a
motion asking the judge to unseal the cases.

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

A Nasty Corporate Divorce, With Insults Traded on Twitter  |  The breakup of an
Indonesian coal company and its co-founders is turning out to be nasty,
culminating with a tirade of schoolboy insults hurled across Twitter.
DealBook »

Shareholders of Brazil's Oi Approve Capital Increase  |  The telecommunications
company takes a step closer to a merger with Portugal Telecom.
DealBook »

Adviser on Dell Buyout Questions a Tumultuous Process  |  At the Tulane
Corporate Law Institute, an adviser on Dell's leveraged buyout wondered whether
the myriad steps the board took to ensure the integrity of the sales process
could have been improved.
DealBook »

Big Deals Drive Global M.&A. Recovery  |  A spate of big transactions drove the
value of global mergers and acquisitions activity up by 54 percent in the first
quarter compared with the same period a year ago, Reuters writes.
REUTERS

A Buying Spree for Tech  |  Deep pockets and ambition are fueling one of the
biggest buying and investing sprees for the technology industry's giants -
including Facebook, Google and Amazon - since the dot-com era of the late 1990s,
The Wall Street Journal writes.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Intesa Sanpaolo Posts Steep Fourth-Quarter Loss  |  The Italian lender took a
(EURO)5.8 billion impairment on the goodwill of some of its business and set
aside more than (EURO)3 billion for bad loans in the quarter.
DealBook »

Backlash for the Fed Over Stress Test Results  |  Bank executives and investors
criticized the Federal Reserve on Thursday after the results sent Citigroup's
share price tumbling, The Financial Times writes.
FINANCIAL TIMES

Bank of China to Sell Soured Loans to Investment Bank Unit  |  The Bank of
China, one of the country's state-owned banks, has started unloading troubled
loans to its investment banking unit, The Wall Street Journal writes, citing
unidentified people familiar with the situation. The unit is expected to try to
restructure the debt in hopes of recovering more than it paid for the loans.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

PRIVATE EQUITY »

TPG Said to Be in Talks to Invest in Chobani  |  Chobani, the yogurt maker, has
been in discussions with potential investors to help it grow internationally,
and TPG, the private equity giant, is now apparently the lead bidder.
DealBook »

Tiger Global Looks to Invest in Start-Ups  |  Tiger Global Management is among
the investment firms turning to Silicon Valley, as an increasing number of
technology companies hold off on initial public offerings, Reuters reports.
REUTERS

Ares Management Said to Prepare to File I.P.O.  |  The Los Angeles investment
firm Ares Management, which oversees $74 billion in credit and private equity,
is said to be preparing to sell shares in the biggest initial public offering of
an alternative asset manager since the Carlyle Group went public in 2012,
Bloomberg Businessweek writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the
situation.
BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK

El Pollo Loco Planning to Go Public  |  The private equity owners of the fast
food chicken chain El Pollo Loco are planning an initial public offering of the
company's shares, The Wall Street Journal reports.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

HEDGE FUNDS »

Falcone Accused of Using Company Assets in Cash Crunch  |  Faced with investor
redemptions in the weeks after an S.E.C. settlement, Philip Falcone used his
publicly listed company to "bail himself out," an investor contends in a
lawsuit.
DealBook »

A Boom Now, but Hurdles Ahead for Activist Investors  |  "A lot of people coming
to this space where I question their skills," says an adviser at the Tulane
Corporate Law Institute. "I do have concern about less-than-intelligent
activists."
DealBook »

Distressed Debt Investors Gear Up for Energy Future Restructuring  |  Distressed
debt players, including hedge funds and sell-side trading desks, have been
taking positions in Energy Future Holdings in the last year in anticipation of a
debt restructuring or a filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, The Wall
Street Journal writes.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

SAC Urges Approval of Insider Trading Settlement  |  Steven A. Cohen's hedge
fund, SAC Capital Advisors, urged a federal judge to approve its $1.8 billion
insider trading settlement with the government, Bloomberg News reports.
BLOOMBERG NEWS

Bernanke Seen Dining with Hedge Fund Billionaires  |  Ben S. Bernanke, the
former chairman of the Federal Reserve, was spotted on Wednesday enjoying dinner
with several hedge fund billionaires including David Einhorn, Louis M. Bacon and
Larry Robbins, Forbes writes.
FORBES

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

U.S. to Shrink Stake in Ally Financial  |  The Treasury Department plans to sell
95 million shares of the former financing arm of General Motors in an initial
public offering.
DealBook »

Specialty Insurer Brit Raises Nearly $400 Million in London I.P.O.  |  The
insurer, which is based in the Netherlands, is the latest private equity-owned
company to seek to publicly float its stock in recent months.
DealBook »

Baxter to Split Into 2 Health Care Companies  |  Baxter International plans to
spin off its biopharmaceuticals business to shareholders by the middle of next
year.
DealBook »

Conscious Uncoupling for Drug Makers  |  In the wake of Baxter's split, Merck,
Bayer and Johnson & Johnson may find it hard not to jump on the bandwagon,
Robert Cyran of Reuters Breakingviews writes.
DealBook »

Spotify Said to Be Planning I.P.O.  |  The music streaming service Spotify is
said to have participated in informal talks with investment banks likely to seek
a role in a potential initial public offering, Quartz reports, citing
unidentified sources familiar with the situation.
QUARTZ

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Andreessen Horowitz Raises Another $1.5 Billion Fund  |  The venture capital
firm Andreessen Horowitz has closed it fourth fund at $1.5 billion, Reuters
writes.
REUTERS

Intel Exits a Data Analysis Business and Invests in Another One  |  Intel said
on Thursday that it was making a "significant" equity investment in Cloudera,
which produces the most popular version of the Hadoop software framework for big
data analysis, the Bits blog reports. Intel is also turning over to Cloudera its
own version of Hadoop and would seek to move its customers over to Cloudera.
NEW YORK TIMES BITS

Tweets About Music to Get a Billboard Chart  |  Twitter and Billboard plan to
create the Billboard Twitter Real-Time Charts: continuously updated lists of the
songs being discussed and shared the most on Twitter in the United States. For
Billboard, the deal adds some Silicon Valley cachet as it tries to reinvent
itself as a more consumer-oriented publication, The New York Times writes.
NEW YORK TIMES

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Judge Urges Dismissal of Mortgage Suit Against Bank of America  |  The
recommendation to toss out a Justice Department lawsuit over a soured mortgage
deal at Bank of America could inspire other banks to test their luck in court.
DealBook »

S.E.C. Official Criticizes Proxy Proposals on Social Issues  |  Daniel M.
Gallagher, an S.E.C. commissioner, argued that the agency must clamp down on the
filing of shareholder proposals unrelated to the long-term interests of
corporations, such as those relating to climate change or sustainability.
DealBook »

Appeals Court in Gupta Case Chooses Not to Admonish Bad Behavior  |  The court
hearing the appeal of Rajat Gupta, former managing director of McKinsey &
Company, did not take up the opportunity to make a statement about improper
business conduct, David Zaring writes in Another View.
DealBook »

With Banking, What Happens in Europe Does Not Stay in Europe  |  The creation of
a Single Resolution Mechanism to resolve a failing bank in Europe is an
important step forward, but it faces a number of hurdles, writes Mayra Rodríguez
Valladares in an Another View column.
DealBook | Another View »

Congress Approves $1 Billion in Aid for Ukraine  |  The measure passed after the
White House dropped efforts to tie it to an overhaul of the International
Monetary Fund negotiated by President Obama, The New York Times writes.
NEW YORK TIMES

Disabled Borrowers Trade Loan Debt for a Tax Bill From the I.R.S.   |  The
Internal Revenue Service may count a forgiven debt as income, leaving some
disabled borrowers with tax bills they cannot pay, The New York Times reports.
NEW YORK TIMES

Growth in the Fourth Quarter Is Revised Up a Shade, to 2.6%   |  The Commerce
Department's final revision for gross domestic product growth in the fourth
quarter of 2013 ticked up to 2.6 percent, slightly higher than previously
estimated, The New York Times writes.
NEW YORK TIMES

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


