                             569 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                         (The Public Editor's Journal)

                            April 30, 2014 Wednesday

More on Drones and James Risen - and a new AnonyWatch entry

BYLINE: MARGARET SULLIVAN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 318 words



HIGHLIGHT: The public editor empties out her notebook and leaves town.


 I'm heading off to the International Journalism Festival in Perugia, Italy
where I'm one of the (many) speakers this week. My speech has an admittedly
unwieldy title: "What I've Learned at the New York Times (And What That Says
About Journalism)." I have copious notes - and a long flight to get them in
order.

But before I go, I'll unload my notebook of some items, mostly following up on
subjects I've written about previously, before they reach their expiration date:


1. Drones. Two New York University law professors - Sarah Knuckey and Ryan
Goodman - took a fascinating and detailed look at a recent Times story on a
drone strike in Yemen. Their article in Just Security features an almost
line-by-line annotation and is well worth a careful read. I wrote about some of
the same issues they take up ina 2012 column.

2. James Risen. The Justice Department has filed its brief opposing the effort
to have Mr. Risen's case go to the Supreme Court. The Times reporter is
attempting to avoid going to jail as he keeps his promise to protect a
confidential source. Mr. Risen described the timeline of his legal efforts to me
for a recent post. Disclosure of the obvious: I'm on his side. Here's the brief.

13 1009 Risen v United States (PDF)

13 1009 Risen v United States (Text)

3. AnonyWatch. ABC News reported that an unnamed source-one it says was used in
a Times article last August-stood to be paid in the millions were he to lose his
job after his disclosures to the press and to the government about Herbalife,
the company that's been so much in the news. (The Times article noted that the
source's legal expenses were being paid, but not the full amount that ABC says
he could stand to gain.) As I've noted in my AnonyWatch feature, unnamed sources
usually have an agenda of some kind, and that makes careful scrutiny a necessity
for reporters and their editors.  This is an extreme example of that rule.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


