                             579 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 19, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Is California dreaming?

BYLINE: Brian Fung

SECTION: Pg. B08

LENGTH: 580 words


California is grappling with one of its worst droughts in history. The water
shortage is so dire it risks affecting the entire country's food supply. As
Mother Jones reported in February, California provides 99 percent of the United
States' almonds, 95 percent of its broccoli, 91 percent of its grapes and 90
percent of its tomatoes. Now those and other crops are in danger: Economists say
that, already, the drought has taken half a million acres of farmland out of
action.

Growers have responded by - what else? - pumping more water out of the ground.
But that's just a temporary fix, not much better than borrowing against the
future. So some in the agricultural industry are beginning to explore technology
that may help them adapt to the new, arid reality. Increasingly, farmers are
interested in a type of technology that's typically more associated with
surreptitious marijuana growers than massive agricultural operations.

Yep, we're talking grow lights.

Grow lights act as a supplement to sunshine in indoor environments. The basic
idea has been around for decades. But recent developments have made grow lights
far more energy-efficient, enabling them to be fielded on a much larger scale.

Grow lights are ideal for northern latitudes where water is abundant but
sunlight is not. What does this have to do with California? As the drought
continues and farmland goes fallow, some crops are going to shift north. There's
some evidence this is already happening to wine grapes, said Dave Runsten,
policy director for the California-based Community Alliance for Family Farmers.

"There's a lot of investment going into Washington, and areas up in that
direction," said Runsten. "Some of the predictions show places like northern
Idaho and Canada being good for wine production, but they're covered in forest.
. . . The models show that a lot of places in California won't be able to grow
high-value wine" for much longer.

In California, farmers are expected to lose $2.2 billion and more than 17,000
jobs to this year's water crisis alone, according to a study by the University
of California at Davis. Those numbers will only worsen if the drought continues,
as expected, into 2015 and perhaps 2016.

Moving agriculture to higher latitudes may improve access to water. But the
further up you go, the less light you get. Hence the grow lights.

A basic Lumigrow lamp starts at $600. More advanced models sell for $1,000 or
more. Commercial greenhouses may use hundreds of thousands of these LED lights,
said Wells. The company recently supplied the U.S. Department of Agriculture
with a number of grow lights in a bid to reduce carbon emissions and cut energy
costs.

Even as farmers look to move some crops indoors to extend the growing season and
adapt to a changing climate, others hope to coax more water from unconventional
sources, such as clouds. Cloud seeding - the firing of silver iodide into the
cloud layer to stimulate precipitation - typically relies on ground-based
launchers or manned aircraft to distribute the chemical. But with the rise of
unmanned aerial systems, researchers dream of  doing cloud seeding cheaply and
easily - with drones.

As much as drones and grow lights might help the industry adapt to a changing
climate, the technology's also a reminder of climate change's unequal effects.
For American growers, the decision to start seeding clouds with a drone may be
easy - and cheap. For farmers in other parts of the world, it's probably a
different story.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


