                              57 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 8:29 PM EST

National Park Service bans drone use in all national parks

BYLINE: Mark Berman

LENGTH: 493 words


If you're heading to the Grand Canyon this summer, leave the drone at home.
(We're assuming for the purposes of this sentence that you have a drone, but if
you don't, just pretend that you have a drone.)

The National Park Service announced Friday that it had banned the use of
unmanned aircraft aerial vehicles - better known as drones - in all of its
parks.

Jonathan Jarvis, the agency's director, said in a statement that the decision
stems from "serious concerns about the negative impact that flying unmanned
aircraft is having in parks."

Drones were prohibited in other national parks earlier this year after
complaints regarding noise and an episode involving young sheep getting
separated from adults. In May, the agency said that drones were banned in
Yosemite National Park because an increased number of visitors had been using
drones to film climbers and capture other aerial footage. Drones would not be
allowed because they could disturb visitors, adversely impact wildlife in the
area and potentially interfere with emergency rescues, the Park Service said.

Jarvis said that the new rules are only temporary and will prohibit drone use
until the agency can figure out a policy to serve the parks as well as the
visitors. Of course, the Park Service notes that the process of figuring out
drone-related regulations could "take considerable time." Any permits already
issued for unmanned aircraft have been suspended and need to be reviewed and
approved again.

While the rules are in effect, drones cannot be launched from, landed in or
flown over the land or water overseen by the agency, which manages 84 million
acres of land and 4.5 million acres of oceans, lakes and reservoirs.

There is an exception: The agency says it may still use unmanned aircraft for
certain things, like scientific studies, search and rescue operations and
fire-related situations.

Earlier this month, the Federal Aviation Administration announced that it had
approved the first commercial drone flights over land. The FAA has said that
fully integrating drones into the airspace over the United States will take
years. It has selected sites across the country where drones will fly in
specially-designated airspace to test things like the impact on air traffic
control and links between drones and controllers.

The agency estimates that there could be about 7,500 small, commercial drones in
the air by 2018. Industry groups have also asked the FAA to develop regulations
for small drones, which can be operated by hobbyists but not actual companies.

The National Park Service's drone announcement arrived the same day that The
Post released the first part of an investigation into military drone crashes.
Since 2001, more than 400 large U.S. military drones have crashed around the
world, hitting houses, farms, runways, highways and even an Air Force transport
plane that was in the air, reports Craig Whitlock. Nearly a quarter of the most
severe crashes occurred in the U.S.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


