                             575 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                          September 25, 2014 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Mobile Is Not a Priority

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 460 words



HIGHLIGHT: The U.S. dollar strengthens. Retailers plan to open even earlier for
Thanksgiving. How to protect your business name.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    The United States dollar has emerged once again as the preferred
          currency for global investors.
     ·    The Architecture Billings Index showed "continued strength" in August.
     ·    This chart shows the distribution of income gains during periods of
          economic expansion.


Retail


     ·    Expect retailers to open even earlier this Thanksgiving.
     ·    Sixty-eight percent of retailers say they have no plans to improve
          their mobile commerce infrastructure heading into the holiday season.


Marketing


     ·    Here's how to improve your content marketing.
     ·    And here's why your business should consider the publishing platform
          Medium.
     ·    And here's how to protect your business name.


Companies


     ·    HP announces its goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
     ·    The great story of Manischewitz, a not-so-great wine-maker, includes
          stolen identity, price-fixing and a "Mad Men" cameo.


Finance


     ·    Walmart is pushing further into financial services with a mobile
          checking service.
     ·    A crowdfunded project that aims to put a red house on the moon is
          $248,000 short of its goal.
     ·    Kabbage, a money-lending platform for small, online businesses, is
          turning to the consumer market.
     ·    Sodexo, one of the world's largest companies, vows to pump $1 billion
          into 5,000 local farms and other small businesses around the world.


Online


     ·    Here's why last week's $25 billion public offering for Alibaba could
          boost small-business profits in the United States.


Opportunities


     ·    The shale revolution is just getting started.
     ·    Here is why fashion trucks are popping up all over America.
     ·    Samsung Electronics has opened a call for entries for a contest that
          will give small-business owners a chance to win digital signage.
     ·    Computer services tops the list of Sageworks' study of the
          fastest-growing small-business sectors.


Internet Security


     ·    Banks are seeing efforts to use credit and debit card information
          related to the latest breach at Home Depot.
     ·    Jimmy John's reports a data breach.
     ·    A study shows that the most serious cyberattacks are coming from
          inside the United States.


Technology


     ·    Amazon doubles down on the connected home.
     ·    User gripes about the new iPhone are surfacing.
     ·    DHL will begin testing drone deliveries.
     ·    Facebook's Wi-Fi drone is the size of a jumbo jet and could fly in
          2015.


Around the Country


     ·    Business owners in Fort Collins, Colo. are upset by a nearby transient
          park.


Around the World


     ·    An important economic indicator in Germany falls, fueling recession
          fears.
     ·    General Motors says its sales in China this year will top 3.1 million
          vehicles.
     ·    Chinese firms are swooping into Israel and looking for tech
          investments.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


