                             577 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              June 9, 2014 Monday
                                 Every Edition

A look at the start-ups showcasing at venture association's TechBuzz event

BYLINE: J.D. Harrison

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 571 words


One designs men's dress shirts. One builds drone-detection devices. One sells
planning and management software to farmers.

Next week, they will share the stage with an eclectic assortment of upstart
companies at the Mid-Atlantic Venture Association's second of three TechBuzz
events this year - each intended to showcase some of the area's most promising
young companies and introduce them to potential investors and business partners.

Held at AOL's campus in Dulles on June 18, the event will feature 20 start-ups.
Each will have a few minutes to present their vision to investors such as Gil
Beyda, founder of Genacast Ventures in New York, and Paul Singh, founder of
Disruption Corp. and the Crystal Tech Fund in Crystal City.

"We are seeing entrepreneurs put together teams and attack problems across an
increasingly broad range of industry sectors and verticals," said Julia Spicer,
MAVA's executive director , noting that the event will feature companies ranging
from e-commerce to agriculture to education.

Here's a brief primer on each of the upstarts slated to take the stage:

ADR Software , based in Dulles, helps construction companies and contractors
monitor their labor force presence in real-time.

AgSquared , based in the District, provides management and record-keeping
software to help farms.

Attentive.ly , based in the District, offers marketing software to help
companies monitor social behavior and target customers.

CareLuLu , based in the District, provides information and reviews of day-care
centers.

Create Inc. , based in the District, helps real estate investors monitor their
portfolios.

Drone Shield , based in the District, builds devices that detect the presence of
nearby aerial drones.

EasyPaint , based in the District, helps connect consumers and professional
painters through online project bidding.

Foodem , based in the Baltimore, connects food distributors and farmers with
wholesale food buyers such as restaurants and hotels.

Gopop.tv , based in Leesburg, helps television viewers connect with other
passionate fans of their favorite shows.

GovProcure , based in Falls Church, provides an online project management
platform for federal contracting officers.

Hugh & Crye , based in the District, designs and sells menswear, specializing in
dress shirts with a new sizing system.

Ipsiti , based in Reston, provides a secure, identity-verifying communication
network for businesses and law enforcement.

Knox Payments , based in Richmond, offers a payment processing system that
connects customers' banks with a merchant.

Ostendio , based in Arlington, provides software to help small businesses comply
with information technology security rules.

Roadmap , based in Baltimore, offers online project management tools to help
companies manage their resources.

SimpleTix , based in Alexandria, provides electronic ticketing software for
small performance venues.

Staq , based in Baltimore, helps marketing teams collect and analyze data from
various advertising servers.

Tales2Go , based in Bethesda, streams thousands of children's audio books to
mobile devices and desktop computers.

ThreatQuotient , based in Ashburn, provides cybersecurity software and
consulting services to businesses.

ThreatSim , based in Herndon, provides cybersecurity training tools and software
to help employers educate their workforce.

Follow J.D. Harrison and On Small Business on Twitter.

jd.harrison@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


