                             573 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                             July 3, 2014 Thursday

Morning Views

BYLINE: JAKE FLANAGIN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 674 words



HIGHLIGHT: Opinions on Japanese pacifism, Middle East restraint, a one-day
difference and the drone memo.


The New York Times editorial board is critical of the decision of Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe to reinterpret "his country's pacifist postwar Constitution
so that the military can play a more assertive role than it has since World War
II." The board believes the move will only exacerbate tensions in a region where
they are already high. "Japan's military would still face restrictions on what
it could do, but it would be allowed for the first time, for example, to help
defend an American ship under attack, destroy a North Korean missile heading
toward the United States or play a larger role in United Nations peacekeeping
operations." Still, the Japanese people remain generally opposed to engagement
in conflict of any kind, and The Times believes it is fair for citizens to
demand its government assure them that Japan will not revert to its militaristic
roots.

Other significant viewpoints from around the world:

"Israel and the Palestinian territories have been an unlikely island of calm in
a Middle East wracked by war and revolution," The Washington Post comments. But
now, following the deaths of three abducted Israeli teenagers, "a Palestinian
youth was kidnapped and killed. Angry citizens from both sides have rioted,
Hamas fired rockets at southern Israel from the Gaza Strip and Israel has
responded with airstrikes." The editorial board commends Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas for denouncing the
conflagrations and responding with "relative maturity," but both will have to do
more to ease tensions. "U.S. influence is needed now to restrain Israeli and
Palestinian leaders."

"Lawmakers in Sacramento are considering a bill to lop a single day off the
maximum state punishment for misdemeanors," The Los Angeles Times reports. "And
contrary to appearances, it's not an exercise in tinkering or legislative
wheel-spinning. It's an important, substantive reform that for thousands of
Californians could mean the difference between being able to get their lives
back on track or being expelled forever from their neighborhoods, their state
and, in fact, their country." The one-day change would mark the difference for
citizens-to-be between an "aggrieved felony" under a federal immigration law -
resulting in deportation - and a low-level crime in  California, which would
not. So "a relatively minor crime in California is treated as a serious crime
under the federal law." The board supports the one-day change.

Critics of the United States' drone program "won a small victory last week," The
Boston Globe reports, "when a U.S. Court of Appeals released much of a 2010
Justice Department memo that declared it lawful to kill Anwar al-Awlaki, a
U.S.-born cleric living in Yemen who was accused of plotting attacks." The memo
was "carefully considered and narrowly tailored" in its criteria for action, but
"the secrecy surrounding the drone program makes it impossible for the public to
understand if Awlaki's case, or any other, meets it." Further transparency is
needed: "Real questions remain about how long the war against Al Qaeda,
authorized by Congress in 2001, should be allowed to continue, and how
expansively this authorization should be applied to fighters far from
Afghanistan," the editorial board writes.

"In some ways, the results of four federal by-elections held on Monday don't
matter much," The Globe and Mail editorial board writes on recent Canadian
parliamentary elections. "They don't alter the balance of power in the House of
Commons: The Conservatives are still a majority government, the New Democratic
Party is still the Official Opposition, and the Liberals are still in third
place in seat count. The mechanics of who runs Ottawa stay the same." But
election results suggest rising popularity of Canada's Liberals: "Since 1972,
whenever Liberals have won the riding in a general election, they've gone on to
form the government," the board adds. "A lot can change in a year. But the
by-elections confirm that there are new dynamics at play."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


