                             572 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              June 20, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: Google My Business

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 540 words



HIGHLIGHT: Will Google&#8217;s new portal help small businesses? Is it time to
stop paying attention to click-through rates? And why you should give your sales
force a checkup.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The St. Louis Fed's Financial Stress Index fell to an record low for the second
time in three weeks.

Sales

A sales expert explains why it's important to give your sales force a checkup.

Marketing

Why Google My Business might not fix some local marketing challenges for small
businesses.

A survey suggests that retailers plan to increase spending on email marketing.

A vice president of an email marketing service thinks it may be time to stop
paying attention to click-through rates.

Management

A chief executive explains how standing up in meetings cut his company's meeting
times by 25 percent.

Here's why another chief executive won't use the word "employee."

An entrepreneur warns that reaching the million-dollar revenue mark is tough,
but chasing the second million comes with its own challenges.

Legal

The Supreme Court rules that basic business methods can't be patented.

After a wave of bad publicity, Ikea rethinks its legal war on an unofficial fan
site.

Social Media

An investor explains why he thinks Facebook will be successful with small
businesses.

Instagram is becoming increasingly important to many small-business social media
strategies, particularly for businesses that sell items that photograph well.

Start-Up

Ten Pittsburgh start-ups are vying for a $100,000 investment.

The founder of a chocolate company shares her start-up mistakes and successes.

Entrepreneurship

An entrepreneur who sold her start-up for $100 million at age 21 describes how
she spends her mornings.

Here's how an entrepreneur helped Jeffrey P. Bezos look good at the introduction
of the Amazon smartphone.

And here's an interview in which Mr. Bezos explains why he wanted a phone.

"Entrepreneur Barbie" heads for Silicon Valley with some glam accessories.

Online

Felix Kjellberg, the Swedish YouTube star better known as PewDiePie, has 27.9
million subscribers and makes $4 million a year in ad sales.

Almost half of tablet viewing time is spent watching long-form video.

Google begins a new push to get girls into coding.

Here are 19 A/B comparison tests you should run on your website.

Around the Country

According to a Gallup poll, Americans have almost three times more confidence in
small businesses than in big businesses.

A Las Vegas club offers a poolside bottle service, drone bottle-delivered by
drone.

After flooding caused by heavy rains in Michigan, a small business had fish
flowing into its garage.

Around the World

Toronto business owners are upset that plants are being stolen from in front of
their shops.

A report suggests South Korea as an e-commerce market for American retailers.

Ideas

Harley-Davidson unveils its first electric motorcycle.

Here are the apps teens love, in five charts.

A 3-D-printed material can carry 160,000 times its own weight.

Technology

Apple's smartwatch is expected to debut as early as October with a 2.5-inch
screen and wireless charging.

Google Glass could replace audio guides at some museums.

Tech job seekers are holding out for higher pay and better positions.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


