                             576 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            January 12, 2014 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

Persuading reluctant Pakistanis to trust polio vaccine

BYLINE: Pamela Constable

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1339 words

DATELINE: IN AKORA KHATTAK, PAKISTAN


Pakistan's anti-polio drive under attack        Pakistan's anti-polio drive is
under attack Officials enlist influential Pakistanis, including Muslim scholars,
to encourage vaccination.

In the tribal badlands of Pakistan's northwest, where Pakistani soldiers and
American drones target Taliban insurgents, a parallel war is being waged over a
crippling virus that endures in only three places in the world.

Last year, 83 new polio cases were reported in Pakistan, more than in either
Afghanistan or Nigeria, the other countries where it is endemic.

But aggressive efforts to combat the virus are being hampered by a surge of
attacks attributed to Islamist extremists. In the past three months, at least a
dozen government vaccinators or their police escorts have been killed or wounded
in the northwest region near the Afghan border.

Now officials hope that by enlisting influential Pakistanis, including Muslim
scholars, in a high-profile campaign to endorse polio vaccines, they can defeat
the shadowy gunmen and the remnants of doubt about the program among devout
Muslims.

"This has been a very difficult campaign, but the problems are limited to a very
few areas," said Elias Durry, a doctor with the World Health Organization in
Islamabad who heads the national polio vaccine campaign. "In places where the
vaccinators can go, there is very little resistance. The major problem is that
most cases are coming from areas where the vaccinators are not able to go."

Health workers and officials have tried for years to persuade conservative
Muslims to accept the vaccines. Violence against polio workers flared after
revelations in 2011 that the CIA used a separate immunization campaign as a ruse
to gain information about Osama bin Laden before he was killed in Pakistan. The
attacks have continued sporadically ever since.

Spokesmen for the Pakistani Taliban deny carrying out the recent attacks, none
of which has been solved. But the extremist group opposes the vaccines as a
Western conspiracy against Islam. In districts that are too dangerous for health
workers to enter, officials said, several hundred thousand children have not
been immunized. As a consequence, the number of new cases in the country has
risen sharply, from 51 in 2012.

Sami ul-Haq, a conservative Sunni cleric whose seminary, or madrassa, in this
northwest town once trained Afghan Taliban fighters, is part of the new effort
in support of the anti-polio campaign. He recently issued an Islamic edict
declaring that vaccines against polio and other diseases are "useful" for
health, that there is "no prohibition in Islam" against them and that
"suspicions being spread about them have no basis in fact."

"I felt it was important for the facts to be clear so people will not be
confused," ul-Haq, who was recently named as a government peace emissary to the
Pakistani Taliban, said in an interview at his seminary. His vaccinated grandson
Mohammed, 2, sat on his lap. "Islam says that treating all diseases is a must."

One reason prominent Pakistanis are speaking up about polio is because of the
growing threat of foreign quarantines and travel restrictions, especially for
Pakistani workers abroad whose wages help prop up the nation's teetering
economy.

On Jan. 3, the government of India issued a mid-February deadline for all
Pakistani visitors to obtain proof of polio immunization.

In a one-room vaccine clinic at a hospital near ul-Haq's seminary, several women
with covered faces waited on a recent afternoon for their babies to be immunized
against polio and other diseases. The women said they did not know what the word
"polio" meant, but they used a local term for "cripple" and said they wanted
their children to be protected.

"We believe this is something good to serve humanity," said Momin Khan, 53, a
turbaned cattle farmer who had brought his wife with their infant grandson to be
immunized.

The clinic technician, Jamal Shah, recounted that when the government began
immunizing children against polio in the 1980s, many people believed the
vaccines were a Western plot to sterilize Muslims. With public education, he
said, resistance gradually declined. Today, Shah's clinic inoculates about 5,000
children a month, and 34 million children in Pakistan have been immunized.

Against the immunizers

But Shah and other local medical officials said their work had been badly set
back by the case of Shakil Afridi, a Pakistani surgeon from the tribal area. He
was arrested in 2011 after being sent by the CIA to seek information about bin
Laden, under the guise of conducting a hepatitis immunization survey in the
northwest city where the al-Qaeda leader was later killed in a U.S. raid.

Afridi's role was praised by U.S. officials but viewed as traitorous by many
Pakistanis, and some Western medical charities said the false immunization
scheme undermined their credibility. Afridi was convicted of treason and
sentenced to 33 years in prison, though officials later said this was due to his
alleged ties with Pakistani militant groups.

"That incident had a great effect on the minds of the people. After that, they
started hating the polio teams," Shah said. "Now that we have celebrities coming
to support us, people are thinking more positively, and they are coming to us on
their own. We only have about 10 families in our area who are still refusing the
vaccine."

In addition to ul-Haq's edict, one of Pakistan's most popular politicians, Imran
Khan, visited clinics in this area late last month and was shown on television
administering polio drops to children. The handsome former cricket star heads
the party that holds power in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, which surrounds the
semiautonomous tribal region.

Yet even though religious and cultural opposition to the vaccines has faded, and
the Afridi case is no longer in the news, anti-Americanism still runs extremely
high in this conservative region, largely because of the U.S. campaign of drone
attacks against suspected militants.

In an e-mail this month, Taliban spokesman Ehsanullah Ehsan insisted that the
polio campaign is "used to spy on our holy fighters, and many have been
martyred" as a result. He cited bin Laden's death in 2011 as an example.

Taliban officials have denied shooting the polio vaccinators, but lingering
antipathy to a Western-backed medical campaign may well have motivated other
militants or individuals to attack them. Even educated professionals in the
area, including doctors, speak with deep anger about the Afridi espionage case
and American drone attacks.

"I am a doctor, and I ask people to trust me. Afridi has done a very bad thing
that also made him an enemy of every child in Pakistan," said Akbar Khaksar,
medical director of the hospital that houses Shah's clinic.

He said the attacks against polio immunizers were orchestrated by "foreign
terrorists" who want to weaken Pakistan.

'A very sensitive issue'

The attacks have come despite stricter government oversight of the vaccine
campaign, said the WHO's Durry, and despite requirements that every immunization
team be escorted by police. In November and December, teams were fatally
attacked in Khyber, a busy trading area, and in Swabi, a market region between
the tribal belt and the main provincial highway.

An aide to ul-Haq, who researches religious groups and publications, offered a
detailed hypothesis about the intellectual source of the attacks. He said he had
located anti-polio pamphlets and propaganda from Nigeria, where anti-vaccine
sentiment has also damaged immunization efforts. They had been funneled through
Islamist extremists in India and spread by anti-Western religious groups in
Pakistan, he said.

"This is still a very sensitive issue," said the aide, Izrar Madani. "All the
madrassas have this kind of literature about the vaccine campaign being used by
Western spies. The Afridi case really gave a boost to their argument." Now that
ul-Haq has publicly vouched for the vaccines and shown his family being
immunized, Madani said, "we hope that will change."

pamela.constable@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


