                             570 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                              May 19, 2014 Monday

Questions Remain After Chinese Hacking Indictments

BYLINE: NICOLE PERLROTH

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 1087 words



HIGHLIGHT: After the indictment of five members of a Chinese military hacking
unit Monday, a nagging question remained: What about the other 20 hacking groups
intelligence officials are tracking in China?


The indictments of five Chinese military hackers by the Justice Department on
Monday has raised questions of what actions, if any, American officials plan to
take against members of the more than 20 other hacking units that American
officials and their partners are currently tracking inside China.

"If you look at all the groups that we track in China, this is just the very tip
of the iceberg," said George Kurtz, a co-founder of Crowdstrike, a private
security firm that has been tracking the People's Liberation Army Unit 61398 and
other hacking groups in China. "The indictments are just one piece of a broader
puzzle."

Beyond Unit 61398, the National Security Agency and its intelligence partners
are currently tracking more than 20 Chinese hacking groups - over half of them
Chinese military and naval units - as they break into an array of American
government agencies and companies, ranging from drone and nuclear weapon parts
makers to technology, retail and energy firms and nonprofit research
organizations, according to a half-dozen United States officials who declined to
be named because of the classified and ongoing nature of the investigations.

Security officials said that the indictments were intended to push China to get
serious about reining in various P.L.A. hacking units and that they have been in
the works for two years. One of the major challenges, officials said, was
persuading the victim corporations - which feared a loss of sales in China or
state retaliation - to come forward.

"They had to gather really strong evidence that these companies had been hacked,
and then had to convince the companies to go public, despite fear of
retaliation," said James A. Lewis, a cybersecurity expert at the Center for
Strategic Studies in Washington, who has participated in several official
Sino-American discussions on cyberespionage.

The indictments, Mr. Lewis said, are not about what the United States will do
with these hackers, but what the Chinese government will do with them. "The
indictment is meant to send a clear public message to China that they need to
take action," he said. "They need to get these P.L.A. entities under control."

While the majority of the groups the N.S.A. has been tracking, including Unit
61398, are P.L.A. units, officials say many of them are murky collectives of
hackers from privately owed Chinese companies and state-funded universities that
officials believe have been contracted by the Ministry of State Security,
China's civilian spy agency, to hack victims - such as clean energy firms - that
help China meet its economic objectives.

Officials say it is unclear how the Chinese government tasks such missions, a
quandary that has taken on more urgency after analysts were able to trace
sophisticated cyberattacks against a disconcerting list of victims - drone and
missile makers and nuclear technology developers among them - to three privately
contracted groups of Chinese hackers.

Officials say one of these privately contracted groups, based in Guangzhou,
China, has been tied to attacks against defense contractors - including missile,
satellite and space technologies and nuclear propulsion technology developers -
in the United States, Britain and Russia. More recently, two officials said that
the group has expanded its targets to include law firms, which hold valuable
intellectual property for their clients but often lack the security defenses of
a larger corporation.

Separately, officials say, the N.S.A. and its partners have been tracking a
group of privately employed technology workers based in the industrial city of
Tianjin. Since 2005, officials say, they have tied attacks on defense
contractors and technology and energy firms, as well as Chinese separatists, to
the group.

One of these groups of privately employed Chinese hackers that have officials
most concerned is also one of the least prolific.<<< Since 2008, officials say
members of this group have surgically struck a number of companies that develop
drones and satellite technology.

Officials say that they believe these groups work at the behest of the Ministry
of State Security and that the fact that they are contracted but not directly
employed by the state gives Beijing a degree of deniability.

But the vast majority of groups the N.S.A. and its partners are tracking are
units of the People's Liberation Army's Second and Third Departments, which
maintain eavesdropping posts across China. They say Unit 61398 - formally the
Second Bureau of the People's Liberation Army's Third Department - accounts for
only a slice of the attacks orchestrated by the P.L.A.'s Third Department.

According to interviews with three former government officials, the N.S.A. began
tracking the PLA's Third Department in 2004 after its First Bureau hacked into
the Pentagon's networks, two former government officials said. Since then, the
unit has been tied to numerous cyberattacks on foreign telecom and technology
companies that specialize in networking and encryption equipment, like the types
manufactured by American companies including Cisco, Juniper and Broadcom.

Judging by their victims, officials say other P.L.A. bureaus are assigned to
targets - including politicians and diplomats at government agencies - in
specific geographies. For example, one P.L.A. bureau has been tied to several
attacks against diplomats and politicians in South Asia, while another has been
linked to attacks on targets in Central Asia, including the foreign ministries
of Afghanistan, India and Pakistan.

Officials also say that thousands of attacks against the military networks of
the United States and a number of Asian countries, including South Korea and
Japan, have been  attributed to the Chinese Navy's First and Second Technical
Reconnaissance Bureaus.

After Monday's indictments, American officials say that they will be looking to
see what, if any, steps Beijing takes to curb cyberespionage.

"A lot of this will depend on how the Chinese react to this in private," said
Mr. Lewis, the cybersecurity expert. "If they blow this off, you could imagine
actions by the Treasury, visa restrictions on travel or restrictions on study."

He added: "The Chinese have more to lose in this than we do."


     ·    Daily Report: U.S. Eases Some Rules on Data Disclosure
     ·    Daily Report: Snowden Trained as Hacker While With N.S.A., Résumé Says
     ·    Daily Report: White House Calls for More Privacy Protections
     ·    Heartbleed Internet Security Flaw Used in Attack
     ·    2 Regulators Issue Guidelines on Sharing Cyber Security Information


LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


