                             587 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 3, 2014 Thursday 5:28 PM EST

21 maps and charts that prove America is Number One

BYLINE: Christopher Ingraham

LENGTH: 741 words


This weekend, as we celebrate the birth of the world's oldest democracy with
goods imported from the world's largest autocracy, it's worth remembering that
America is truly an exceptional nation - in many ways good, and some ways bad.
Below, the charts and maps that quantify 21 of the ways that America is #1.

Whether you measure it using exchange rates or get down with PPP, the U.S. is
still the world's largest economy. On the exchange rate measure, the U.S.
accounts for more than a fifth of the world's GDP.

The U.S.'s incarceration rate of 716 prisoners per 100,000 population is the
world's highest. Thirty-six of our states also have higher incarceration rates
than any country in the world. Freedom isn't free, especially if you're behind
bars.

What could be more American than jean shorts? NOTHING, that's what. Americans
search Google for "jorts" three times as much as Canadians, and ten times as
much as Brits.

America is dead last among OECD nations when it comes to paid parental leave.
But this means that we're first in not providing paid leave! Technically, we are
tied on this measure with Liberia, Papua New Guinea and Swaziland. But we are
better than those countries in nearly every other respect, which means the tie
goes to us.

We all already know that our health care is insanely expensive. But it's always
good to have a reminder of just how expensive it is.

Okay, I know I said that nothing was more American than jorts just a few minutes
ago, but I might have to take that back, because guns. There is nearly one gun
for every single man, woman and child in the U.S. I'm not sure how many jorts
there are, but I bet it's not that much.

America is Number 1, according to Americans. Or at least, that was the case in
2012, when more Americans rated the U.S. favorably than people in any other
country. Oddly, in 2013, the Philippines, Israel and Ghana all had higher
opinions of us than we did of ourselves. How is it possible that people in other
countries have more American pride than Americans do? I don't know, but when
you're number one, anything is possible.

The United States was the first country to kill people with drones, and we're
the country killing the most people with drones. Setting aside all the thorny
legal and moral questions, we're also the country most likely to approve of
killing people with drones.

Technically the EU makes more cheese than we do, but the E.U. isn't a country.
Of course, this finding assumes that American cheese counts as a proper cheese,
which of course it does.

Half of the world's 70,000 bald eagles live in Alaska. An additional 20,000 live
in the lower 48, which means we totally crush Canada for the title of World's
Bald Eagle Capital. You can have the moose and maple syrup, Canada - but the
eagles are ours.

Hahaha. Seriously though.

Nobody else can touch our military spending. In 2012, our military budget was
$683 billion. The next-highest spender, China, was less than a quarter of that.

The U.S. is the world's tornado capital.

France may import - and drink - the most whisky, but Americans spend more on it.
Like health care, when it comes to whisky, we spend more and get less, because
it's the American way.

Americans use Twitter more than people in any other country. Twitter is an
amazing tool - you can use it to spread democracy and topple dictators! But in
reality, most of us are using it to share pictures of red pandas and get in
stupid fights we know we'll never win.

This isn't a chart, but there's only one Bill Murray and he lives in America.

We are really, really good at being rich, especially when it comes to the share
of total income going to our 1 percent. One reason for this? Our tax policy is
very favorable to high-income earners.

The U.S. is the world's top exporter of corn products. For that matter, we're
also the world's top consumer of high-fructose corn syrup.

We watch more TV than anyone else in the world. And among Americans, West
Virginians watch the most, averaging nearly four hours of tube time per day.

Not only do we make our new moms get right back to work, we also encourage sick
workers to suck it up by not mandating paid sick leave. Maybe that's why our
productivity's so high?

Even if we're not the best at democracy anymore, we've been doing it longer than
anyone else.

Did I miss your favorite American superlative? Let me know in the comments.

Need more Freedom? 19 photos that make you appreciate America.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


