                             586 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 1, 2014 Tuesday 7:17 PM EST

Keeping boots off the ground in Iraq, as the skies get crowded

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

LENGTH: 446 words


While the Obama administration is trying its best to keep American boots off the
ground in Iraq, the skies over the embattled Middle Eastern country are getting
crowded.

Russian SU-25 fighter jets, to be flown by Russian pilots, have reportedly
arrived in Iraq, while U.S. helicopter gunships have been tasked with supporting
American troops sent to help secure the U.S. Embassy and Baghdad's international
airport. The U.S. has also been flying 30-35 daily surveillance missions over
with a mixture of manned and unmanned aircraft, while to the north of the
country, Iran has been flying drone sorties of its own.

Even though Iraq has an air force, it has taken a beating in the past weeks from
Islamic State forces equipped with MANPADS and anti-aircraft guns. Currently,
Iraqi forces are awaiting the shipment of F-16s - set to be delivered in August
- as well as a number of Apache gunships to supplement their aging force of
Soviet helicopters.

Iraqi commanders have depleted their stock of the Hellfire missiles and
expressed concern about their lack of aircraft capable of firing more of them.
The Iraqis have only a small number of modified Cessnas capable of firing the
guided rocket and are currently awaiting more advanced aircraft.

As they await, the United States, Russia and Iran are all flying over the
country. Here are some of the aircraft reported to be in Iraqi skies.

AH-64 Apache (U.S.): First flown in 1975, has gone through a variety of
iterations. Carries Hellfire rockets and a 30mm cannon slaved to the gunner's
helmet.

MQ-1 Predator (U.S.): Both armed or unarmed aircraft being used. Can stay
airborne for more than 12 hours and travel up to 450 miles. It is the younger
brother to the MQ-9 Reaper, which is also in flight over Iraq. The Reaper can
carry more weapons, stay in the air longer and travel farther than the older
Predator.

RQ-4 Global Hawk (U.S): A high-altitude unarmed drone that can stay airborne for
around 19 hours.

F/A-18 Super Hornet (U.S): Carrier-based fighter, first flown in 1995. Has a
number of variants for different mission types. Most likely being flown over
Iraq from the aircraft carrier U.S.S. George W. Bush, which is currently
stationed in the Persian Gulf.

P-3 Orion (U.S.): First flown in 1959, it is a four engine turbo-prop aircraft
used primarily for surveillance and anti-submarine operations.

SU-25 (Russia): The SU-25 is known as the "Frogfoot" by NATO-aligned countries
and is used primarily for close air support.

Shahed-129 (Iran): While Iran has not identified the aircraft it is flying
across the border, this drone, a Predator lookalike would be a likely choice.
Iran is believed to have used the aircraft in Syria.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


