                             582 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 12:03 PM EST

Apple, Amazon have a dangerous obsession with the tech gadget du jour

BYLINE: Dominic Basulto

LENGTH: 806 words


Apple has a new smartwatch coming in the fall and Amazon has a new Fire
smartphone coming in July. That should be good news for consumer technology
fans, but the reality is that both products are "me-too" plays that should be
setting off all kinds of warning bells for Silicon Valley watchers. Instead of
launching truly innovative new products and opening up entirely new markets, the
best and brightest companies are seemingly content to make a more conservative
play for market share and rely on incremental innovations to win over customers.

Take the Apple "iWatch," for example. Even die-hard Apple fans would have to
admit that the iWatch sounds like a "me-too" tech play that has the company
struggling to catch up with the likes of Samsung. It's almost like Apple is
unwillingly being pulled into creating an iWatch just because its top tech
rivals also have a smartwatch. True, there's an opportunity to create a
market-changing digital fitness product using the iWatch - but smartwatches have
had trouble gaining any traction to date.

Or, for example, consider the new Amazon Fire phone. Do we really need another
smartphone that helps us buy more products? Amazon's decision to roll out a new
smartphone when the entire smartphone industry is nearing its saturation point
seems a lot like a lot of reactive strategy. In short, a big company reacts to
what's going on around it rather than really mapping out a strategy for the
future. Yes, there are some features that sound innovative - but the bigger
picture is that an Amazon smartphone sounds a lot like a Facebook smartphone,
and we all know how that did.

Not that there aren't some big ideas out there in Silicon Valley.

You have Google launching Internet balloons, building a fleet of driverless cars
and developing quantum computers. But, oh, by the way, Google's Nest plans to
acquire Dropcam for more than half a billion dollars. A company that promises to
change the world ends up buying a webcam company.

Amazon wowed the world with its delivery drones last year, but followed that up
with tepid adventures in innovation such as Fire TV and the Fire phone. No word
yet if the Fire smartwatch is next.

Facebook has its share of innovative concepts in the works - like a plan to use
satellite drones to provide Internet access to the world - but on a day-to-day
basis, Facebook seems more interested in carrying out little tweaks to its
algorithms. Meanwhile the company rolls out ever more apps that seem like
"me-too" plays in an effort to keep up with innovators around it. The latest is
Slingshot, which sounds a lot like Snapchat.

Apple has a futuristic new headquarters in the works and a vision to change the
way we think about digital health. But it follows that up with the so-called
iWatch - a smartwatch that reportedly comes in a variety of screen sizes and
colors along with sensors for tracking health.

The problem, quite simply, is that the recent moves by the likes of Amazon,
Apple, Facebook and Google actually make too much sense. From a purely business
and analytical perspective, the moves are designed to maximize market share,
increase user engagement, and hit any of the various other metrics designed to
measure their performance. Wall Street analysts, even if they're not in love
with the moves, have to respect them. If the Amazon Fire phone succeeds in
signing more people up for Amazon Prime and selling an incremental number of
products on Amazon, does it really matter that the phone never acquires the
market cachet of an iPhone?

Follow the arc of the rise and fall of any industry leader, however, and that's
exactly how smaller companies with inferior technologies begin to chip away at
the market leaders. As Clayton Christensen has pointed out in The Innovator's
Dilemma - still one of the classic innovation reads - what makes true innovation
so hard is that the business case for "business as usual" just makes so much
sense once you're the market leader. It becomes a matter of continual
improvements and tweaks to "what works," while ceding the ground to upstarts
when it comes to new technologies.

So here's why the infatuation with the latest product du jour is so dangerous -
in the pursuit of incremental gains to quarterly financial numbers, America's
most innovative companies risk ceding more and more ground to upstarts who are
coming up with disruptive products. It almost seems impossible to think of a
company more innovative than Google or Apple these days - but the same was once
surely true of great American companies such as IBM or Kodak. When the best and
brightest in Silicon Valley are buying the likes of Nest or Beats, one wonders
if they are doing so because they are one step ahead of the curve - or one step
behind.

Disclosure: Amazon chief executive Jeff Bezos owns The Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


