                             589 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        July 11, 2014 Friday 1:17 AM EST

Obama's counterterrorism blueprint looks good, on paper;
His counterterrorism blueprint looks good, on paper.

BYLINE: David Ignatius

LENGTH: 791 words


In President Obama's sometimes maddeningly cautious foreign policy, you can see
him struggling to answer what may be the hardest question of his presidency: How
should the United States project power in a disorderly world without making the
same mistakes it did in Iraq and Afghanistan?

Obama, whose deliberative approach often resembles that of a Supreme Court
justice rather than a politician, has developed a conceptual framework for
combating terrorism and instability. It looks good on paper. But the problem is
that he hasn't yet applied this framework successfully in dealing with the
challenges that arose on his watch: civil wars in Libya, Yemen and Syria, and
the emergence in Iraq of the Islamic State.

Obama is emphatic about what he doesn't want to do. He wants to avoid "boots on
the ground" with U.S. troops; he wants to avoid unilateral actions that isolate
the United States; he prefers quiet partnerships that shield America and its
allies from domestic political criticism. He is willing to use what amounts to
targeted killing.

Instead of significant U.S. military intervention, Obama seeks a network of
partnerships stretching from Morocco to South Asia. The United States would
provide training and other support for the security services and militaries of
nations across this belt. Where governance has vanished and terrorism reigns -
as is the case now in parts of Syria and Iraq - the United States would fill the
gaps, using surveillance drones, armed drones and Special Operations forces.

It's a strategy in which Obama, despite his legalistic temperament, plays a role
I've described as "covert commander in chief." He relies on the two instruments
of national power he most trusts: the CIA and its armed drones and "special
activities," overseen by Director John Brennan, one of his closest aides; and
Special Operations Command's "Global SOF Network," developed by Adm. William
McRaven, the architect of the Osama bin Laden raid and perhaps Obama's favorite
military adviser.

This framework has some obvious conceptual holes: It assumes that countries such
as Libya and Yemen can be put back together and turned into functioning allies
after near-death experiences. It extends partner status to countries such as
Egypt and Turkey, which are perilously close to being autocratic dictatorships
despite their long history of friendship with the United States. And it ignores
altogether the role, positive or negative, of Iran.

Obama has posited the counterterrorism strategy in two major speeches, in May
2013 at the National Defense University and May 2014 at West Point. Further
explanation was offered by Ben Rhodes, Obama's speechwriter, deputy national
security adviser and the closest thing he has to a chief strategist.

This "CT architecture," as Rhodes calls it, sounds good in principle but is hard
to accomplish. Just look at Syria: The United States has been debating covert
support for the Syrian rebels since mid-2012; it has had an actual CIA-led
training program since 2013, with little effect. It has sought to coordinate
regional partners, in earnest, since last September, again with little effect.
Meanwhile, a one-time al-Qaeda affiliate has morphed into a deadly adversary
that controls one-third of Iraq and part of Syria.

The United States' prospective partners seem wary of the role Obama envisions.
Jordan fears blowback from the CIA covert program for Syria, and it likes even
less a proposed overt version employing SOF trainers. Among the other countries
that ring Iraq and Syria, you see similar skittishness or outright paralysis.
It's like trying to build a fortress out of putty. The enterprise would be
difficult even for a president who was strong politically at home and abroad.
For Obama, it may be impossible.

The best example of a mobilization similar to what Obama is imagining in his
counterterrorism partnership was the global covert action launched by President
Ronald Reagan against the Soviet Union. Under the generalship of CIA Director
William Casey, the United States ran operations in Nicaragua, Angola, Cambodia
and Poland, not to mention Afghanistan. But even Reagan and Casey stumbled (and
eventually, retreated) when they confronted a few hundred disciplined terrorists
in Lebanon. This isn't as easy as it may sound, in other words.

Obama has the right concept in creating a global network of Special Operations
forces and intelligence services that can combat the frightening evolution of
al-Qaeda into new and potentially more toxic offshoots. But someone at the White
House needs to drive this policy every day and make sure it's happening on the
ground, in Syria and Iraq and all the other potential ungoverned places on
Obama's new map.

davidignatius@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


