                             581 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                The Federal Eye

                       May 28, 2014 Wednesday 2:59 AM EST

Does the USDA need night vision and drones to combat feral pigs?

BYLINE: Josh Hicks

LENGTH: 409 words


A few items that caught our attention on Tuesday:

USDA wants night vision and possibly drones to fight feral pigs: The Department
of Agriculture plans to buy thermal-imaging scopes, worth about $12,000 apiece
on eBay, and is considering drones to help locate and kill feral swine that are
spreading across the nation and causing an estimated $1.5 billion in damage to
crops and livestock, according to a Reuters report.

It's SIGAR against the world right now: Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction John Sopko may make more noise right now than anyone
else in the inspectors general community as he battles waste and fraud in a
fledgling nation supported in large part by U.S. taxpayers, according to a
Washington Post profile.

White House mistakenly identifies CIA chief in Afghanistan: The White House
inadvertently exposed the CIA's top officer in Kabul by including his name on a
list of senior U.S. officials participating in President Obama's surprise visit
with U.S. troops in Afghanistan, according to a Washington Post report.

Congressional committees reject proposed defense cuts: Members of the House and
Senate armed services committees rejected many of President Obama's proposed
cost-saving measures for the Defense Department, including closing obsolete
facilities, eliminating an attack-aircraft fleet and changes in pay, according
to a Washington Post report.

VA officials in the hot seat: Three Department of Veterans Affairs officials are
scheduled to testify Wednesday before the House Veterans Affairs Committee about
what happened with destroyed documents related to the VA scheduling controversy,
according to In the Loop's round-up of notable hearings.

Advocates for homeless vets to meet in Washington: The National Coalition for
Homeless Veterans conference takes place Wednesday, and participants say they
are concerned that the budgets for their work may shrink because of increasing
pressure to reduce federal spending, according to a Military Times article.

Follow Josh Hicks on Twitter, Facebook or Google+. Connect by e-mail at
josh.hicks(at)washpost.com. Visit The Federal Eye, and The Fed Page for more
federal news. Submit news tips and suggestions to federalworker@washpost.com
.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


