                             580 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                The Federal Eye

                     January 15, 2014 Wednesday 5:24 PM EST

Agencies increasingly borrow border-patrol drones for domestic surveillance

BYLINE: Josh Hicks

LENGTH: 514 words


A few items that caught our attention on Wednesday:

Agencies borrowing border-patrol drones more often than previously known:
Customs and Border Protection is one of the few agencies permitted by the
Federal Aviation Administration to fly unmanned aircraft within U.S. borders.
But law-enforcement agencies of all varieties are increasingly using
border-patrol drones for domestic surveillance operations, including to search
for marijuana crops, methamphetamine labs and missing persons, along with other
missions not directly related to border protection, such as supporting disaster
responses, according to a Washington Post report.

NSA creates radio pathway into computers: The National Security Agency has
implanted software in thousands of computers across the globe to conduct
surveillance and create a "digital highway for launching cyberattacks,"
according to a New York Times report.

Federal clerical workers edging toward extinction: Secretarial roles across
government are vanishing, taking up just 4 percent of the federal workforce
today compared to 75 percent in 1950, according to a Washington Post report.

Feds and contractors to lose ally with retirement of Rep. Jim Moran: The
Northern Virginia Republican has decided not to seek reelection after 23 years
in Congress, much of which he spent advocating for defense spending and the
federal contracting industry, according to a Washington Post article.

Budget deal doesn't change public's view of Congress: Polling shows Americans
still largely disapprove of Congress despite lawmakers reaching their first
major budget agreement in several years, according to The Fix.

What the spending bill means for feds: Federal blue-collar workers would receive
a raise, but funding for travel, conferences and bonuses would decline,
according to a Government Executive report.

Senate panel approves Homeland Security nominees: The Senate Homeland Security
and Government Affairs Committee agreed to several nominees to the full Senate
for a vote, including John Roth to serve as DHS inspector general and Suzanne
Spaulding to become the department's next undersecretary for national protection
and programs, according to a Federal Times report.

House approves new funding for OPM's IG: The House voted unanimously on Tuesday
to give the agency's auditors access to new funding for their investigations,
allowing them to tap a $2 billion fund generated through fees OPM charges other
agencies for services such as background checks, according to a Federal News
Radio article.

Follow Josh Hicks on Twitter, Facebook or Google+. Connect by e-mail at
josh.hicks@washpost.com Visit The Federal Eye,                          The Fed
Page and                             Post Politics for more federal news.
E-mail federalworker@washpost.com                 with news tips and other
suggestions.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


