                             591 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 29, 2014 Tuesday 11:46 PM EST

Review of 'The Bees': Paull's transfixing first novel exposes dangers of the
hive mind

BYLINE: Sara Sklaroff

LENGTH: 502 words


Bees - which is to say, the fear of them - dominated many summers of my
childhood. Especially when walking (inevitably barefoot) through a particular
Eastern Shore clover patch, I could focus on little else than trying to avoid
their sting.

Now my thoughts are hovering around bees again, but for a less foreboding
reason.  Laline Paull's transfixing first novel, "The Bees," isn't explicitly
about the real-world problems that threaten their survival , but the story's
inspired imagining of hive life compels one to wonder about the extraordinary
complexity and sophistication of these insects - and to care about their fate.

Set in a honeybee hive, the novel is a parable about the consequences of
groupthink. Its heroine, Flora 717,  is born into the worker caste, destined for
nothing but the basest drudgery. But 717 isn't like the other Floras. Though the
elite bees, the Sages, call her big and ugly, she can speak, she produces royal
jelly, and she's very brave. Those unique abilities allow 717 an unprecedented
freedom within the hive's rigid class system. She nurses the larvae in the
Nursery, waits on the bawdy males in the Drones' Hall  and flies as a forager,
gathering pollen and nectar. But her greatest ability is also her most
dangerous: Flora 717 can produce eggs, something only the queen is meant to do
and a guaranteed death sentence for any others who dare.

At first, I found myself putting down the book every few pages to research
Paull's descriptions of bee life. (Do they really secrete beeswax from their
bellies? Fan nectar into honey? Periodically murder the drones?) It quickly
became clear that in its basic facts, the novel sticks closely to real-world
apian biology and behavior.

That is fascinating enough, but Paull deftly wields this information to create
an even more elaborately layered culture of beeness. It is beautiful with the
intricate architecture of the hive. It is religious with worship centered on the
queen: "Our mother who art in labor. . . hallowed be Thy womb." It is sensual
and passionate, especially when it comes to the harvesting of pollen from
flowers. But it is also vicious, particularly when bee turns cruelly on bee.

Paull's version of the hive's extreme matriarchy is home to many kinds of
females, strong and meek, thoughtful and superficial, forward-thinking and
hidebound. There is something comforting and cozy in the group-focused industry
of the hive, where every bee knows its role. But of course, there is something
deeply creepy, too, about a world that rejects individualism. In this sense the
hive mind of "The Bees" evokes that of Star Trek's Borg. While Paull may not
have named Flora 717 in homage to the former Borg drone Seven of Nine, both are
misfit members of dystopian collectives who break free. We can't help but hope
that 717 has the brains, strength and drive to save her colony from disaster.

Sadly, whether her real-life sisters will survive remains to be seen.

bookworld@washpost.com

Sklaroff is a writer in Washington.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


