                             592 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       July 31, 2014 Thursday 7:07 PM EST

Obama should fire John Brennan

BYLINE: James Downie

LENGTH: 582 words


In March, at the Council on Foreign Relations, CIA Director John Brennan was
asked by NBC's Andrea Mitchell whether the CIA had illegally accessed Senate
Intelligence Committee staff computers "to thwart an investigation by the
committee into" the agency's past interrogation techniques. The accusation had
been made earlier that day by Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), who said the CIA
had "violated the separation-of-powers principles embodied in the United States
Constitution." Brennan answered:

As far as the allegations of, you know, CIA hacking into, you know, Senate
computers, nothing could be further from the truth. I mean, we wouldn't do that.
I mean, that's - that's just beyond the - you know, the scope of reason in terms
of what we would do. {...}

(You can see the video of Brennan's answer here.)

Now we know that the truth was far different. The Post's Greg Miller reports:

CIA Director John O. Brennan has apologized to leaders of the Senate
Intelligence Committee after an agency investigation determined that its
employees improperly searched computers used by committee staff to review
classified files on interrogations of prisoners. {...}

An apology and an internal review board might suffice if this were Brennan or
intelligence leaders' first offense, but the track record is far from spotless.
In 2011, Brennan claimed that dozens of U.S. drone strikes on overseas targets
had not killed a single civilian. This remarkable success rate was not only
disputed at the time by news reports - even supporters of the drone program
called it "absurd" - but as the Bureau of Investigative Journalism and the New
York Times both reported later, President Obama received reports from the very
beginning of his presidency about drone strikes killing numerous civilians. As
Obama's top counterterrorism adviser at the time, Brennan would have received
these reports as well, so either Brennan knew that his claim was a lie, or he is
secretly deaf. Similarly, Brennan denied snooping on Senate computers six weeks
after Feinstein first made the accusation to the CIA in private, which means
either that he was lying, or he had ignored a serious charge against his agency
for six weeks, then spouted off about it without any real knowledge - hardly the
behavior expected of an agency director.

And last year, Director of National Intelligence James Clapper lied under oath
to Congress when he told Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) and the Senate Intelligence
Committee that the National Security Agency did not collect any kind of data on
millions of Americans, a claim later disproved by documents leaked by former NSA
employee Edward Snowden. Despite Clapper receiving criticism from both sides of
the aisle, the damage to Clapper's and the White House's credibility on
intelligence and civil liberties issues and, well, the fact that lying to
Congress is a crime (though one that's difficult to prosecute), Obama has not
disciplined Clapper in any way.

Sadly, it's unlikely that this latest incident will encourage Obama to finally
induce some accountability in the intelligence community: White House press
secretary Josh Earnest called the CIA's illegal activities mere
"misunderstandings." But as Brennan said when he denied the allegations, "if I
did something wrong...he is the one who can ask me to stay or to go." It's time
for Obama to take that responsibility head-on and start to restore in U.S.
intelligence agencies some semblance of responsibility to the Constitution and
the public.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


