                             593 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 11:30 AM EST

The Switchboard: Snowden gets another 3 years in Russia

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 365 words


Published every weekday, the Switchboard is your morning helping of hand-picked
stories from the Switch team.

Join us tomorrow for our weekly livechat, Switchback. We'll kick things off at
11 a.m. Eastern by talking about the ripple effects from Europe's "right to be
forgotten" law, and how it's affecting sites like Wikipedia. The comment box is
open, so submit them now.

The Russian 'hack of the century' doesn't add up. The Verge reports: "If the
idea of hacking 1.2 billion usernames sounds incredible, it should." (Security
researcher Brian Krebs defends the report, saying the hack is "for real.")

Google has scrubbed 50 links to Wikipedia, thanks to the 'right to be forgotten'
law. "The nonprofit behind Wikipedia said Wednesday that it has received five
notices from Google in the last week saying its content has been scrubbed from
European search results," I write. "The notices affect more than 50 links and
Web pages on Wikipedia. That's far more than the one Wikipedia entry that's been
reportedly affected by the law to date."

Snowden said to be allowed 3 more years in Russia. The New York Times reports:
"Edward J. Snowden, the American intelligence contractor who published a raft of
secret documents and then fled to Russia, has been granted a three-year
residence permit, his lawyer announced Thursday."

AOL still has 2.3 million dialup subscribers-and they're very profitable. Quartz
reports: "AOL has spent the last decade-since the broadband era really took
off-trying to build a business around online advertising. But its legacy dialup
internet subscription business is still generating a big portion of its
sales-and most of its profits."

San Jose Police Department says FAA can't regulate its drone use. Ars Technica
reports: "Newly published documents show that the San Jose Police Department
(SJPD), which publicly acknowledged Tuesday that it should have "done a better
job of communicating" its drone acquisition, does not believe that it even needs
federal authorization in order to fly a drone. The Federal Aviation
Administration thinks otherwise."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


