                             606 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 4, 2014 Thursday 10:35 AM EST

Kremlin warns Ukraine against joining NATO;
Moscow warns any bid by Ukraine to join alliance could scuttle peace prospects
in nation's restive east.

BYLINE: Michael Birnbaum;Annie Gowen;Daniela Deane

LENGTH: 1473 words


MOSCOW - The Kremlin on Thursday underscored Russia's opposition to NATO
membership for Ukraine, warning that such a move could derail efforts to end the
conflict in eastern Ukraine, as leaders of the alliance gathered for a key
summit in Wales.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov also told the United States not to try to
impose its own will on Kiev.

Lavrov's comments came one day after Russian President Vladimir Putin announced
a plan to end the fighting that would entrench gains by pro-Russian rebels and
hand a significant defeat to Ukrainian leaders who have sought to regain full
control of their nation.

Lavrov said Ukraine's attempts to abandon its nonaligned status by joining the
NATO alliance could "derail all efforts aimed at initiating a dialogue with the
aim of ensuring national security," according to the Russian news agency
ITAR-TASS.

He said Russia was ready to take "practical steps" to de-escalate the crisis
under the proposals made by Putin. "We hope that the calls [by Putin] will be
heard, especially by Kiev, [and the rebel leaders of] Donetsk and Luhansk," he
was quoted as saying by the Interfax news agency.

Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko was invited to the NATO summit, where he
attended a group meeting Thursday with President Obama and the leaders of
Britain, France, Germany and Italy. He was also scheduled to have a bilateral
meeting with Secretary of State John F. Kerry.

Putin said Wednesday that he and Poroshenko had agreed on the broad outlines of
a seven-point peace settlement that would at least temporarily freeze the
conflict on the ground. He specified no major concessions for the rebels and
insisted instead on a large-scale Ukrainian military pullback and the
introduction of international monitors to ensure that fighting does not resume.

Poroshenko did not specifically address the "Putin plan," as it was dubbed by
the Kremlin, but he said that the time had come to end the conflict.

"The first task is peace," Poro足shenko said in a statement. "Today at 5 a.m. I
spoke to President Putin about how we can stop this horrible process. There is
no denying that people must stop dying."

Both leaders said they hoped that peace talks could start Friday.

The apparent concessions to Russia dealt a further blow to Ukrainian aspirations
to escape the orbit of the nation to which they were once joined as part of the
Soviet Union. Months of pro-European protests in Kiev ended in February with the
ouster of President Viktor Yanukovych. Russia quickly moved to annex the Crimean
Peninsula in response. The Europe-friendly Poroshenko was elected in a landslide
victory in May, but his popularity has been damaged by the grueling conflict in
the east, where 足Russian-backed rebels have claimed important swaths of
territory.

Just weeks ago, Ukrainian forces appeared close to defeating the rebels. But
since early last week, the rebels have made rapid, renewed strides against the
Ukrainian military after Kiev reported a large-scale Russian incursion into
southeastern Ukraine. The Kremlin denies aiding the rebels, although rebel
leaders have said that Russian soldiers were using vacation time to fight on
their side.

President Obama was cautious about reports of the settlement, speaking at a news
conference in the Estonian capital, Tallinn, before Putin outlined the details
of his peace proposal.

"There's an opportunity here," Obama said. "But no realistic political
settlement can be achieved if, effectively, Russia says, 'We are going to
continue to send tanks and troops and arms and advisers under the guise of
separatists who are not homegrown, and the only possible settlement is if
Ukraine cedes its territory or its sovereignty or its ability to make its own
decisions about its security and its economic future.' "

Putin told reporters during a visit to Mongolia that he believed he and
Poroshenko were broadly in agreement about peace terms.

"Our views . . . are very close," Putin told reporters in remarks that were
broadcast on Russian state television. He said he had sketched out a peace plan
on his flight from Russia.

But Putin's demands could be difficult for Poroshenko to meet. The Ukrainian
leader is under heavy domestic pressure not to surrender Ukraine's industrial
heartland to the rebels.

In a late-Wednesday phone conversation with German Chancellor Angela Merkel,
Poroshenko said that any peace deal also needed to include the withdrawal of all
foreign troops from the territory of Ukraine and the creation of a buffer zone
along the Russian border, according to the presidential administration.

In a measure of the political unpopularity of any deal with Russia, even a
Poroshenko ally, Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk, said Wednesday that Putin's
plan would "destroy Ukraine and bring back the Soviet Union."

Poroshenko also does not maintain full control over 足pro-Kiev volunteer militias
that have been fighting the rebels alongside the regular army. They may be
inclined to keep fighting despite instructions from Kiev. A previous cease-fire
in June quickly broke down after each side accused the other of violating it.

Putin said that after an initial cease-fire, the Ukrainian government should
withdraw its forces out of range of the current combat operations in
southeastern Ukraine and commit to allowing international observers into the
region to ensure that no further hostilities take place.

He also called for opening corridors to allow humanitarian aid into the war-torn
regions, for a full exchange of prisoners of war, for an end to combat aircraft
operations and for allowing repair brigades to restore damaged infrastructure in
the region.

The Russian president specified no conditions regarding the political status of
the territories seized by rebels, and his spokesman later said that the
proposals were not "dogma" that had to be used in full and were intended only as
a starting point to achieve an immediate halt to bloodshed.

But the plan would leave rebels in control of the key cities they have seized
while a final settlement was discussed, thus freezing the conflict in a manner
similar to what has happened in other disputed territories, such as South
Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia and Transnistria in Moldova. Those contested
regions are administered by pro-Russia groups but have scant international
recognition.

It was not clear whether Putin was demanding a full Ukrainian withdrawal from
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, both of which have been claimed by rebels but
are not fully under their control.

An entrenched territorial dispute would make it far more difficult for Ukraine
to join the NATO defense alliance. Blocking Ukraine from NATO would be a key
Russian goal in the conflict.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, whose monitoring
mission in eastern Ukraine has been limited by security concerns and
checkpoints, said Wednesday that it was moving ahead with plans to use drones to
monitor border crossings between Ukraine and Russia. Two drones purchased from
Schiebel, an Austrian contractor that will assist in operating the unmanned
aircraft, are expected to be in operation within several weeks, according to
Michael Bociurkiw, spokesman for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine.

Data from the drones' video cameras and radar will be collected in real time by
OSCE monitors, Bociurkiw said. He said the OSCE would expect to continue its
monitoring mission if a cease-fire is agreed upon.

Rebel leaders told Russian news agencies that they were not consulted before the
cease-fire was announced, but they appeared to be willing to abide by Putin's
terms.

"If Kiev withdraws troops from settlements," a rebel leader, Miroslav Rudenko,
told the Interfax news agency, "then no sense will exist for resolving the
conflict with force and then, of course, we will not carry out combat
operations."

Still, a day earlier rebels were saying that they wanted full independence from
Ukraine, a step that would be politically impossible for Poroshenko to accept.
Putin on Sunday called for "statehood" for the rebel-held territories, although
his spokesman later clarified that he meant more autonomy within Ukraine.

In the southeastern port city of Mariupol, Ruslan Onishchenko, the commander of
the Shakhtersk Battalion, a pro-govern足ment volunteer militia, said shelling
continued throughout the day Wednesday despite the talk of a cease-fire,
although it was not clear who was shooting. He said troops had not been
instructed to hold their fire as of midday Wednesday.

NATO has said that at least 1,000 Russian soldiers are fighting on Ukrainian
soil and that Russian artillery has been firing on Ukrainian positions from
inside and outside the country.

michael.birnbaum@washpost.com

annie.gowen@washpost.com

daniela.deane@washpost.com

Gowen reported from Kiev. Deane reported from Rome.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


