                             600 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 26, 2014 Tuesday 7:26 PM EST

Why it might be difficult to fly surveillance aircraft over Syria

BYLINE: Thomas Gibbons-Neff

LENGTH: 549 words


With U.S. airstrikes in Iraq continuing, President Obama has authorized
surveillance flights into Syria in an effort to gather intelligence on Islamic
State forces.

The move marks an escalation against the radical Islamist group, and some
observers have suggested that the flights are a precursor to airstrikes like
those being carried out across the border in northern Iraq. But sending
surveillance flights into Syria would be complicated and potentially dangerous
for both manned and unmanned aircraft.

As our colleague Greg Miller noted over the weekend, any U.S. aircraft in Syria
could be seen by the government of President Bashar al-Assad as a threat, in
part because they could gather valuable intelligence on his forces. Syria's
foreign minister, Walid al-Moualem, has already signaled that Damascus would not
tolerate unilateral U.S. strikes against the extremists.

Drones such as Predators, Reapers and even the high-flying Global Hawk could be
easily shot down by both the Syrian air force and the country's air defense
grid, according to a former drone operator.

While the U.S. military has penetrated Syrian airspace on at least one occasion
over the past year - during the failed bid to rescue journalist James Foley and
other Americans being held by the Islamic State - that raid involved the use of
modified Black Hawk helicopters. The helicopters are designed to fly into
hostile air space and conceivably could have been flown at very low altitudes to
avoid radar detection.

Surveillance aircraft, however, operate high and slow.

"These aircraft are not built to go into denied airspace," the pilot said, who
requested anonymity due to the sensitivity surrounding his former employment.
"If the Syrians wanted to send up a MiG 23 and shoot down a Predator, they could
easily do it."

In addition to fielding a moderately capable air force, Syria possesses advanced
surface-to-air missile systems like the SA-22 Greyhound, according to Military
Balance, a publication issued by the International Institute of Strategic
Studies that documents foreign military capabilities.

The SA-22 can hit targets up to 65,000 feet, which coincidentally is believed to
be the maximum altitude of the Global Hawk.

Other high-flying U.S. military assets include the RQ-180, a stealth drone that
could avoid radar-guided surface-to-air systems, and the U2 spy plane, which
flies well above 70,000 feet. But those aircraft are usually used to monitor
larger targets and could have a difficult time tracking small groups of
militants, particularly if they are intermingled with the civilian population.

That doesn't mean U.S. forces aren't trying. The former pilot speculated that
any U.S. aircraft that successfully made it into Syrian would be given a number
of tasks to gather intelligence about the Islamic State, sometimes referred to
as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.

The former pilot noted that surveillance missions could involve a number of
distinct "scan" patterns.  A point scan would involve identifying individual
targets, like fighting positions and battle formations, while a raster scan
would involve sweeping large swaths of territory.

"If they wanted to do strikes, they could do it right now," the former pilot
said. "But I think they're trying to get a sense of how powerful ISIS is."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


