                             602 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 11:46 AM EST

The Switchboard: Apple is investigating leak of naked celebrity photos

BYLINE: Brian Fung

LENGTH: 302 words


Published every weekday, the Switchboard is your morning helping of hand-picked
stories from the Switch team.

Apple says it is 'actively investigating' celeb photo hack. "Apple said Monday
it was 'actively investigating' the violation of several of its iCloud accounts,
in which revealing photos and videos of prominent Hollywood actresses were taken
and posted all over the Web," according to Re/code.

Naked celebrity hack: security experts focus on iCloud backup theory. The
Guardian reports: "One theory gaining ground is that many of the pictures had
been accumulated by one hacker over a period of time - and were then 'popped' by
another hacker who somehow broke into a machine belonging to the first."

Drone developers consider obstacles that cannot be flown around. "Researchers at
NASA are working on ways to manage that menagerie of low-flying aircraft," the
New York Times reports. "At NASA's Moffett Field, about four miles from Google's
headquarters in Mountain View, Calif., the agency has been developing a drone
traffic management program that would in effect be a separate air traffic
control system for things that fly low to the ground - around 400 to 500 feet
for most drones."

Namecheap says accounts compromised in hacking incident. Computerworld reports:
"Hosting provider Namecheap said Monday hackers compromised some of its users'
accounts, likely using a recently disclosed list of 1.2 billion usernames and
passwords compiled by Russian hackers."

It's made-for-TV patent war, as AT&T sues Cox. "AT&T has sued Cox
Communications, saying that Cox has infringed seven AT&T patents covering
everything from DVRs to methods for hiding 'packet loss or frame erasure' over a
network," according to Ars Technica.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


