                             608 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 6, 2014 Saturday 1:34 AM EST

The only way to defeat the Islamic State

BYLINE: ;Robert H. Scales

LENGTH: 859 words


President Obama may be developing a strategy to confront the apocalyptic horrors
of the Islamic State, but he already has a method, a gift of sorts from soldiers
who have been fighting similar enemies for more than a decade.

To understand, consider some history: George S. Patton's method of war, the one
that defeated the Wehrmacht in the European theater in World War II, consisted
of a mechanized war doctrine stolen from the Germans, plus a uniquely American
skill for applying air- and land-delivered firepower in support of tanks on the
move. Patton's method would be perfected during future U.S. and Israeli
conflicts, culminating in the "Great Wheel" envelopment of Saddam Hussein's army
in Desert Storm in 1991 and the march to Baghdad in 2003.

Over time, however, enemies learn and adapt. Eventually, Patton's method was
successfully challenged in Lebanon, by Hezbollah's anti-tank missiles, and in
Iraq, by al-Qaeda's improvised explosive devices.

Enter a new prophet, Gen. Stanley McChrystal, the former head of the U.S.
Special Operations Command. Over the past 20 years, McChrystal and his teams
have developed another uniquely American method of war by substituting skill,
information and precision for mass, maneuver and weight of shell. We first
watched the McChrystal method at work in Afghanistan following the attacks of
Sept. 11, 2001, when small Special Forces units and the Afghan Northern Alliance
teamed to destroy the Taliban using precision strikes delivered from aircraft
high overhead.

But the secret of this new method is in people, not technology. McChrystal's
success proves that small units of superbly selected, trained, educated, led and
bonded soldiers can kill much larger aggregations of enemy while holding the
deaths of friendly forces and innocent civilians to a minimum.

Make no mistake, the McChrystal method is about killing, but it is killing of a
different sort. The president has lamented the "whack-a-mole" nature of battling
insurgents and militants. But whack-a-mole tactics work when the moles are
enemies who occupy critical positions within terrorist networks, when they are
essentially a middle-management layer of leaders, communicators, transporters,
financiers, technicians and enforcers.

In many ways, the McChrystal method is the opposite of shock and awe. It is
often painfully deliberate, fed as it is by the patient collection of
intelligence wrung from sources as disparate as informants and the big ears of
the National Security Agency. Nothing happens without repetitive, realistic
planning and rehearsals. No operation goes down without involving many layers of
"enablers." Intelligence officers feed information constantly to teams as they
move to the fight. Armed and unarmed drones feed video of enemy movements. Some
of the killing is done up close, to be sure, but most comes from precision
aerial weapons that obliterate the enemy in the dead of night.

The day will inevitably come when the McChrystal method is employed against the
Islamic State. But crushing the group will require a scaling-up of the method,
never attempted before. The Islamic State is huge, and, sadly, the men and
machines necessary to do the job are too few and have been terribly overused. To
succeed, the McChrystal method will have to be cloned to a degree as yet
unimagined within the Defense Department.

Obstacles to this are many. The Special Operations Command could be the most
intractable enemy of replicating the approach. It argues that such elite forces
can be made only in small batches. Truth is, there are more than enough men to
fully expand the McChrystal method if some Army and Marine close-combat forces
were repurposed. Of course, such a transformation would take time. Building a
conventional "elite" force would require a ruthless culling of the ranks to
allow only the best and brightest to be selected, trained and bonded together in
a manner proven by decades of success in the special operations community.

There are equipment issues as well. The Special Operations Command makes its own
materiel - and its stuff is much better than what is carried by conventional
forces. A means must be found to transfer and proliferate the superior weapons,
sensors, radios, body armor, helicopters and vehicles to these newly created
"conventional" special operators.

Drones are the modern equivalent of Patton's tanks, and we simply have too few.
The shortage is due in large part to the reluctance of the air services to
embrace the need for unmanned, "unblinking eyes" positioned permanently over any
ground forces in harm's way. The Air Force and Navy must be made to expand their
fleets of drones tenfold or more.

The Islamic State cannot be defeated by diplomacy, sanctions, coalitions or
political maneuverings. Its fighters must eventually be killed in large numbers,
and Americans will never allow large conventional military forces to take them
on. The butcher's bill would simply be too large. The only sure means for
defeating the group is with a renewed, expanded and overwhelming legion of
capable special fighters who have learned through painful trial and error how to
do the job.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


