                             607 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      September 5, 2014 Friday 7:51 PM EST

White House confirms al-Shabab leader killed in airstrike in Somalia;
Ahmed Abdi Godane died Monday in strike against Somali jihadist group with ties
to al-Qaeda, officials say.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 568 words


The Obama administration said Friday that it had confirmed the death of a key
Somali militant leader allied with al-Qaeda who had been targeted in a U.S.
airstrike earlier this week.

Ahmed Abdi Godane, a co-founder of a network blamed for its brutal tactics in
Somalia and for the attack on an upscale Kenyan shopping mall last year, was
killed Monday in an attack carried out by U.S. drones and other aircraft,
according to the White House and the Pentagon.

Speaking to reporters at the NATO summit in Wales, President Obama cited
Godane's death as the result of the U.S. government's "very systematic and
methodical approach" in combating al-Shabab, al-Qaeda, Islamic State and other
radical networks.

"That deliberation allows us to do it right," he added. "But, have no doubt, we
will continue and I will continue to do what is necessary to protect the
American people."

U.S. military officials had acknowledged that they were trying to kill Godane in
Monday's air assault on a Shabab compound in southern Somalia. But they had been
cautious about asserting the mission was successful, mindful of reports of other
al-Qaeda leaders who had been killed in drone attacks, only to resurface later.

Al-Shabab, which means "the youth" in Arabic, is a jihadist movement that has
formally affiliated itself with al-Qaeda. Born in Somalia, a chronically
unstable country on the Horn of Africa, it has transformed itself from a
domestic insurgency into a regional terrorist group that has carried out attacks
in Kenya and Uganda. The network also has cooperated with al-Qaeda's franchise
in Yemen.

"Removing Godane from the battlefield is a major symbolic and operational loss
to al-Shabab," Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said in a
statement.

The State Department had offered a $7 million reward for information leading to
Godane's arrest. It identified him as a 37-year-old native of northern Somalia
who, among other aliases, went by the names Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr and Ahmed Abdi Aw
Mohamed.

Monday's drone strike was the most aggressive U.S. military operation in Somalia
in nearly a year, and it came as the Obama administration was already grappling
with security crises in Iraq, Syria and Ukraine.

Godane took public responsibility for the Sept. 21, 2013 attack on the Westgate
Mall in Nairobi in which Shabab gunmen killed dozens of people and held Kenyan
security forces at bay for days.

Counterterrorism officials and analysts have described Godane as a particularly
ruthless jihadi leader who eliminated several rivals within al-Shabab, either by
killing them or forcing them to go underground.

It was unclear who might succeed him as leader of the network. Although
al-Shabab often posts comments from the group on social media and gives
interviews with journalists in Somalia, it has been silent about whether he
survived the airstrike.

Although Godane had sworn allegiance to al-Qaeda and his group has been a menace
in East Africa, U.S. counterterrorism officials have been divided over how much
of a direct threat al-Shabab poses to the United States.

The State Department officially declared al-Shabab a terrorist organization in
2008. In a statement Friday, the White House said that Godane had "continued to
oversee plots targeting Westerners, including U.S. persons, in East Africa," but
did not give further evidence of specific attempts to kill Americans.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


