                             609 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 9, 2014 Tuesday 1:28 AM EST

America's resumption of 'the long war';
The U.S. has learned that the battle against radical Islamists continues whether
or not it participates.

BYLINE: Michael Gerson

LENGTH: 776 words


As the United States pivots back to the Middle East - in belated recognition
that its enemies never pivoted from their intention to establish a territorial
expression of radical Islamism - President Obama is more likely to change his
policy than to change his rhetoric. We are more likely, in other words, to see
"boots on the ground" in Iraq (already more than 1,000 troops are in supportive
roles) than we are to hear an admission that the administration's foreign policy
approach has shifted.

Obama now wants to "degrade" the Islamic State's capabilities, "shrink" its
territory, and ultimately "defeat 'em." (Even the locution has a nostalgic hint
of Texas.) This will require a comprehensive "economic," "political" and
"military" campaign and a shift to "offense." And yet, according to the
president, this "is similar to the kinds of counterterrorism campaigns that
we've been engaging in consistently over the last five, six, seven years."

No, it isn't. The last five, six, seven years have seen a consistent attempt to
narrow U.S. efforts to Special Operations raids and drone strikes while
retreating from geostrategic commitments (as in Iraq) or ignoring them (as in
Syria). "We must define our effort," Obama said last year, "not as a boundless
'global war on terror' but rather as a series of persistent, targeted efforts to
dismantle specific networks of violent extremists that threaten America."

So: Obama sought to take down terrorist networks. The terrorists sought to take
down countries, and actually secured large portions of two. The contrast in
ambitions was massive.

Now U.S. ambitions are being gradually, reluctantly and unavoidably expanded.
The effort now required in Iraq and Syria is not a counterterrorism operation.
It is a counterinsurgency campaign, conducted at a distance, after delays that
have dramatically limited  policy options. It will involve strengthening -
politically and militarily - at least four diverse proxies: the Kurds, the Iraqi
government, favorable Sunni tribes and the moderate Syrian opposition. It will
include U.S. troops and intelligence personnel in supportive but active roles -
locating targets, providing air and drone strikes, training and embedding with
local units.

The closest model is not, as Obama would have it, the raid on Osama bin Laden's
compound or drone strikes in Yemen. And it is not (as Obama correctly insists)
the Iraq war. It is more like the initial phase of the Afghan war, in which U.S.
bombs fell from the sky and CIA paramilitary officers directed Northern Alliance
battles on horseback.

This fight is itself embedded within a contest that our enemies, at least,
regard as a global war, reaching across the U.S. Central Command (Afghanistan,
Pakistan, Yemen),  Africa Command (Libya, Somalia, Mali, Nigeria) and the
Pacific Command (Indonesia, Philippines). And the former Australian Army chief
Peter Leahy recently called this "the early stages of a war which is likely to
last for the rest of the century. We must be ready to protect ourselves and,
where necessary, act preemptively to neutralize the evident threat. Get ready
for a long war."

This is exactly how Centcom commanders and others described the strategic
challenge following Sept. 11, 2001 - as "the long war." The United States has
found that this ideological, political and military struggle continues, whether
we participate or not. And periods of our inattention are periods of our enemy's
growth and success.

The United States' belated focus - long after the Islamic State began to exploit
Syrian chaos - has increased the degree of difficulty for the execution of any
U.S. policy. But for this much Obama deserves praise: He has begun preemptive
action in Iraq to neutralize an evident terrorist threat. The memories of 9/11
have not entirely faded from the affairs of the nation.

They are still fresh for me. I remember heading toward D.C. in Virginia and
seeing a plane flying low toward the Pentagon, so low I could see the windows.
Driving to the White House before dawn on Sept. 12, my car windows open,
smelling the Pentagon smoldering. The capital city empty, under cover of
helicopters and jets. The mourning and the memorials.

That danger gathered unmolested in some remote Afghan valley. The direct
successor to that threat now grows in a territory the size of New England, with
funding and military capabilities beyond the dreams of al-Qaeda. I don't really
care what Obama calls the global campaign against this enemy, as long as he is
truly determined to "defeat 'em." Though it would be helpful to remind
Americans: We fight 'em there, so we don't face 'em here.

michaelgerson@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


