                             603 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 2:50 PM EST

Here's what the expanding U.S. military footprint in Africa looks like;
The U.S. is building a new drone base in Agadez, Niger, again expanding its
presence in northern Africa.

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 285 words


It has been a busy 24 hours for U.S. military news coming out of Africa.

First, word came Monday afternoon that a CH-53E Super Stallion helicopter
carrying 17 Marines and eight sailors had crashed in the Gulf of Aden, off the
coast of Djibouti and Somalia. The troops were with the 22nd Marine
Expeditionary Unit deployed in support of operations in the Middle East, but
were returning to the USS Mesa Verde, an amphibious ship, from training in
Djibouti, Navy officials said.

Monday night, the Pentagon followed that by acknowledging a counter-terrorism
mission in Somalia. U.S. officials told The Washington Post that the mission
targeted Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr, widely known as Godane, who had taken control of
the militant group al-Shabab. The Somalian embassy in Washington said on Twitter
on Tuesday morning that  Godane and seven other militants had been killed:

Our Alliance has succeeded killing jihadi  Ahmed Abdi Godane leader of Somalia's
al Qaeda-linked militants and other seven senior members.

This morning in The Washington Post, Craig Whitlock also reports that the U.S.
military has opened another drone base in Niger, a landlocked Sahara nation in
western Africa. As the map above illustrates, it's part of the Pentagon's
expanding presence there, as France and the United States work together on
counter-terrorism operations in the region.

The new U.S. drone base will be in the city of Agadez, at the edge of territory
under the influence of militants with the group al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.
U.S. troops also are said to operate from a French base in Chad near Nigerian
territory where the Islamist group Boko Haram have abducted hundreds of men,
women and children in waves over the last year.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


