                             618 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 19, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

World Digest: Nov. 18, 2013

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 708 words


LIBYA          Military tries to push militias from capital

Libya's military swept into the capital Monday with dozens of pickup trucks
mounted withantiaircraft guns in an operation to drive out militiamen, and it
received a warm welcome from Libyans seething with anger against the numerous
armed groups running rampant in the country.

Libya is seeing its strongest public uproar yet against militias, which have
fueled chaos nationwide since the 2011 fall of longtime leader Moammar Gaddafi.
The heavily armed groups, some  made up of Islamist militants, have defied
control by the weak central government in Tripoli, carving out fiefdoms and
acting as a law unto themselves.

But the move to rein in militias risks a backlash leading to outright battles
between pro- and anti-government militias. Since many of the groups are rooted
in specific cities, any violence could pit city against city. Monday's sweep was
the most assertive yet by the army.

Essam al-Naas, spokesman for the Joint Operation Room, a security body under the
prime minister, said that as the military deployed, militias from the western
city of Misurata withdrew from four districts of the capital andreturned to
their city.

Libya's deputy intelligence chief, Mustafa Noah, also was freed Monday, a day
after he was seized by gunmen as he was leaving Tripoli's airport, a security
official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity in line with regulations.
It was unclear who had taken Noah, whose family hails from Misurata.

- Associated Press

AFGHANISTAN          Headless bodies identified as police

Two separate roadside bombs killed nine children in Afghanistan on Monday, while
six bodies found the day before in a southern province were identified as police
and not contractors as was initially reported, officials said.

A roadside bomb killed seven children from the same family in eastern
Afghanistan's Paktika province, said Mokhlis Afghan, a spokesman for the
governor. Three other children in the family were wounded. The children were
playing on a road near their home when the bomb exploded.

In the southern province of Zabul, two children were killed when their family's
vehicle hit a roadside bomb,  Deputy Governor Mohammed Jan Rasoolyar said.

He also said officials had identified the six bodies found Sunday, all
decapitated, as policemen. Confusion had arisen because they were in civilian
clothes.

- Associated Press

CANADA          Toronto mayor loses most of his powers

Toronto's City Council  voted Monday to strip scandal-plagued Mayor Rob Ford of
most of his powers after a heated debate during which he knocked over a female
council member.

The council voted overwhelmingly to cut Ford's office budget by 60 percent and
allow his staff to join the deputy mayor. Ford now effectively has no
legislative power. He retains his title and ability to represent Toronto at
official functions.

Toronto has been abuzz with the Ford melodrama since May, when news outlets
reported that he had been caught on video smoking crack cocaine.

During the debate, Ford paced and traded barbs with the public. At one point, he
charged across the chamber and knocked over council member Pam McConnell before
picking her back up. Another member asked him to apologize. Ford said he was
rushing to the defense of his brother,  council member Doug Ford.

- Associated Press

Iran announces new drone:Iran unveiled a new aircraft Monday that it says is the
biggest drone yet to be developed in the Islamic republic, capable of staying
aloft for up to 30 hours. Defense Minister  Hossein Dehghan said the
reconnaissance and combat drone Fotros has a range of 1,250 miles. That would
cover much of the Middle East, including Israel.

Bachelet wins first round of Chile election:Leftist candidate Michelle Bachelet
was the clear winner in Chile's presidential election  Sunday, although she will
have to wait until a second-round runoff next month to seal her victory.
Bachelet, who led Chile between 2006 and 2010 as its first female president,
clinched just under47 percent of the vote. Former labor minister Evelyn Matthei
of the ruling right-wing coalition was second with 25 percent.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


