                             617 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 18, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

Albuquerque voting on abortion limits

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 471 words


NEW MEXICO          Albuquerque votingon abortion limits

A city in one of the poorest states in the nation has become the abortion
debate's latest battlefield and a testing ground for whether abortion limits can
be imposed on the local level.

Early voting had begun in Albuquerque for an election Tuesday that will decide
whether to ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy.

Although similar bans have been passed by state legislatures, New Mexico's
largest city is believed to be the first municipality in the country to place
such an initiative on a local ballot.

The "Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Ordinance," which needs a majority to
pass, would have statewide impact because the only late-term abortion providers
in the state are in Albuquerque. Women living out of state fly in for this type
of care, said Micaela Cadena, policy director at Young Women United, which is
fighting the measure.

- Los Angeles Times

California          Warship hit by errantdrone returns to port

A Navy guided-missile cruiser hit by a malfunctioning drone during a training
exercise returned to San Diego, where investigators will assess the damage and
determine what went wrong, a Navy official said Sunday.

Two sailors were treated for minor burns after the USS Chancellorsville was
struck by the unmanned aircraft during radar testing Saturday afternoon off
Point Mugu in Southern California.

Lt. Lenaya Rotklein of the U.S. 3rd Fleet said the drone - which was 13 feet
long, one foot in diameter and had a wingspan of nearly six feet - hit the
ship's port, or left, side.

She said investigators at Naval Base San Diego are assessing the damage and
determining why the drone malfunctioned.

- Associated Press

VERMONT          Man charged in delayof treatment for sons

A man was charged with child cruelty after he walked his two sons more than a
mile to a friend's home after a car crash, delaying medical treatment for
injuries including broken bones, state police said.

Investigators said Justin Galenski's two sons, ages 4 and 9, did not receive
medical attention until the day after the crash on a snow-covered road the night
of Nov. 12. Police said Galenski and his sons walked to the home of a friend of
Galenski's, a registered nurse.

Police were contacted the following day by the boys' mother, who was concerned
about the delayed treatment. Injuries included concussions, a broken arm and a
broken clavicle, police said.

Galenski, 40, of Fairlee, was charged Saturday and is due in court next month.
He said Sunday that he loves his sons and that the crash was an accident. Police
said the vehicle had been removed by the time troopers arrived.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


