                             616 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                    November 13, 2013 Wednesday 8:13 PM EST

Hundreds attend funeral for TSA officer killed at LAX

SECTION: A section; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 607 words


NEW YORK          Bacon artwork sets auction record

Francis Bacon's three-paneled painting "Three Studies of Lucian Freud" became
the most expensive work of art ever sold at auction Tuesday when it soared to
$142.4 million at Christie's.

The 1969 triptych, which carried a pre-sale estimate of $85 million, eclipsed
the $119.9 million price of Edvard Munch's "The Scream," achieved in May 2012 at
Sotheby's. The previous record for a Bacon piece was $86.3 million, set in 2008.

The painting depicts the Dublin-born painter's friend and fellow artist Lucian
Freud on a chair.

Christie's did not disclose the identity of the buyer.

- Reuters

CALIFORNIA          Hundreds attend TSA officer's funeral

At a memorial service filled with tears, prayers and songs, the Transportation
Security Administration officer who was killed by a gunman at Los Angeles
International Airport was remembered Tuesday as a devoted public servant who
greeted traveler swith a grin and never passed up a chance to talk about his
children.

Gerardo Hernandez became the first TSA officer killed in the line of duty Nov. 1
when a man authorities say held a grudge against his agency pulled a rifle from
a bag and opened fire at the airport's Terminal 3. The man methodically targeted
TSA agents, wounding two others and also a schoolteacher before airport police
shot and captured him.

Some 500 people turned out Tuesday to honor Hernandez at the Los Angeles
Memorial Sports Arena, including the two agents who were wounded.

Those who attended included Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., Los Angeles
Police Chief Charlie Beck, Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca and Mayor Eric
Garcetti (D).

- Associated Press

NATIONAL SECURITY          Reaper drone crashes into Lake Ontario

A military drone crashed into Lake Ontario during a New York Air National Guard
training mission Tuesday.

State military officials said the MQ-9 Reaper had taken off from Wheeler Sack
Army Airfield at Fort Drum and was operating in approved airspace over the
eastern side of the lake when it was lost about 1 p.m. The aircraft was not
armed and there were no reports of injuries, the officials said.

The drone is used by the Air Guard's Syracuse-based 174th Attack Wing to train
Air Force pilots who use it on surveillance and attack missions globally. The
U.S. Coast Guard and local authorities were helping in the search for the
Reaper.

- Associated Press

2 former border agents sentenced:Two former U.S. Border Patrol agents who forced
a group of suspected drug smugglers to chew handfuls of marijuana and flee
shoeless into the chilly Arizona desert were each sentenced Tuesday to two years
in federal prison. A jury convicted Dario Castillo, 25, and Ramon Zuniga, 31, in
April of violating the civil rights of the four Mexican men, who were in the
United States illegally, in connection with the 2008 incident in Arizona.

Boy who received early Christmas dies of cancer:A boy whose last wish was to be
home for his favorite holiday has died, two weeks after his home town welcomed
him with a Christmas tree outside his window and a motorcycle-riding Santa
Claus. Doctors had told the family of Devin Kohlman, 13, that he didn't have
long to live, so residents of Port Clinton, Ohio, along Lake Erie, spent the
past few weeks giving him an early Christmas. They sang carols outside the
family's apartment and piled tons of shaved ice into drifting snow near his
window. Devin, whose brain cancer was diagnosed in the summer of 2012, died
Monday, family friend Roseann Hickman said.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


