                             615 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 8, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

A possible turning point in Pakistan

BYLINE: Daniel S. Markey

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 868 words


Last week, a U.S. drone strike killed Hakimullah Mehsud, one of Pakistan's most
bloodthirsty terrorists, in front of his family's farmhouse in North Waziristan.
In every respect, the logic behind the killing appears identical to that of past
U.S. attacks against top Pakistan-based terrorists, including Osama bin Laden.
Mehsud had American blood on his hands, and he would doubtless seize every
opportunity to kill again. His death would be at least a temporary setback for
the Pakistani Taliban, a loose collection of Pashtun militant groups, if only
because it would have trouble finding a new leader as supremely murderous as
Mehsud. Case closed.

In fact, the political and strategic circumstances of Mehsud's killing are a lot
more complicated. His death is a possible turning point. Yet it is not clear
that Washington will use it to advance greater U.S. purposes in Pakistan.
Handled poorly, this narrow counterterrorism success will come at a cost in
bilateral relations, regional counterterrorism operations and the endgame of
U.S. military operations in Afghanistan.

Unless the United States moves smartly, the killing of Mehsud is likely to have
about the same implications for U.S.-Pakistan relations as the U.S. raid on bin
Laden's compound. As I learned during a research trip to Islamabad a week after
bin Laden's death in May 2011, the Pakistani national debate moved astonishingly
quickly from shock to humiliation to anti-Americanism. After that, a series of
crises over the rest of 2011 took U.S.-Pakistan relations close to a full
rupture.

Today, Pakistani opposition politician Imran Khan is calling for his country to
close supply routes to landlocked Afghanistan, as it did for half of 2012. Khan,
like many Pakistanis, sees Mehsud's death as an American move to sabotage a
nascent peace process between the Pakistani Taliban and Islamabad. Senior
ministers have voiced outrage over the strike, which came on the heels of Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif's visit to Washington, where he made a point of publicly
demanding an end to the U.S. drone campaign in his country.

From this perspective, at least the timing of this latest U.S. drone strike
looks profoundly shortsighted. If, for instance, Washington had allowed the
peace talks to move ahead, they almost certainly would have failed on their own.
Mehsud's core demands - for Pakistan to be administered according to
Taliban-style law - cannot be reconciled with the nation's constitution or with
popular will. Sooner or later, that fundamental truth would have been exposed,
just as it was in an earlier, collapsed peace deal between Islamabad and the
insurgents who took over the Swat Valley in 2009. Because the Taliban
overreached, the army won a broad political consensus to move in and crush the
insurgency. U.S. officials might have let a similar process play out again, even
if that meant not taking a shot at Mehsud.

Then again, there are good reasons to believe that U.S. analysts doubted that
Pakistan's government ever planned to turn on the Pakistani Taliban. In many
ways, Islamabad seemed more inclined to temporize, perhaps by securing a new
arrangement that would push the Taliban's murderous activities into Afghanistan
as U.S. forces head for the exits. Conversations with senior Pakistani
intelligence officers lead me to believe this is almost exactly what some have
in mind for other prominent terror groups based in Pakistan, such as the Haqqani
network.

Such U.S. concerns are eminently reasonable, given the live-and-let-live
arrangements that Sharif's party appears to have struck with prominent
anti-Indian terror organizations, including Lashkar-e-Taiba (the group
responsible for the November 2008 attack on Mumbai). Moreover, Pakistan's top
general has, for several years, promised his U.S. counterparts a serious
military campaign in North Waziristan, with no signs of delivery. Given this,
the Obama administration can be forgiven for seeing little reason to hold fire
on Mehsud to save peace talks, even if sabotaging those talks was not
Washington's main motivation.

Now that Mehsud is gone, the United States' goal should be to drive a wedge
between Islamabad and the Pakistani Taliban, deeper than the one between the
United States and Pakistan. Judging by the shrill protests from Islamabad, this
will not be easy. It is not, however, likely to be accomplished by waiting for
the crisis to blow over. Instead, U.S. military and intelligence officers should
approach their Pakistani counterparts with a plan to press their military
advantage against the Taliban during its period of disarray. Although they may
be rebuffed at first, Islamabad might soon reconsider if the Taliban directs its
retaliatory fire against the Pakistani state, especially in Sharif's home base
of Punjab, as it has in the past. Then, in once again recognizing the need to
confront a common enemy, Washington and Islamabad may find themselves allies of
convenience, if hardly friends, and that would mean scoring a far greater
victory than Mehsud's death.

Daniel S. Markey is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and the
author of "No Exit From Pakistan: America's Tortured Relationship With
Islamabad."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


