                             611 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 7:30 PM EST

U.S. orders some of its diplomats out of Yemen;
With rebels in control of the capital, the State Department urged Americans to
leave.

BYLINE: Carol Morello

LENGTH: 455 words


The State Department on Thursday pulled some of its diplomats out of Yemen and
advised Americans already there to depart quickly, as the country plunged deeper
into turmoil with rebels in control of the capital, Sanaa.

Though the U.S. Embassy in Yemen remains open for the time being, the State
Department said concerns over the worsening security situation led to the
decision to make what it termed a "temporary reduction" in the levels of U.S.
government workers there.

"We are taking this step out of an abundance of caution and in response to
recent political developments and the changing, unpredictable security situation
in Yemen," the department said in a statement.

In a separate travel warning, the State Department sounded a more dire note,
calling the threat level in Yemen "extremely high." It cited ongoing
demonstrations around the country with the potential to turn violent and
cautioned that diplomatic personnel - restricted to only parts of the capital -
would have a limited ability to assist U.S. citizens in an emergency.

The warning urged Americans planning to visit Yemen to stay away and said U.S.
citizens living in Yemen should leave the country as soon as possible.

The travel warning specifically mentioned the threat of kidnappings, violent
crime and terrorist attacks on American citizens and companies by groups such as
al-Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen, known as al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.

The warning did not, however, mention either the U.S.-led airstrikes against
Islamist groups in Syria or the ongoing drone campaign the United States has
been waging against militants in Yemen. Though dozens of suspected al-Qaeda
militants have been killed, many in the region say that numerous civilians have
also died in drone strikes.

The State Department has previously ordered the departure of American diplomats
in Yemen amid deteriorating security. The embassy closed for almost five weeks
this spring after about 65 militants were killed in April in a series of drone
strikes in the countryside.

Complicating matters further, the volatile country, which sits alongside some of
the world's busiest sea lanes between the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, is beset
by sectarian battles between the Shiite rebels and the military, which is
dominated by Sunnis.

The conflict, which has been brewing for some time, escalated Monday when
rebels, who are part of the minority Houthis and seek more autonomy in their
provincial heartland, swept into Sanaa and took control of key parts of the
capital.

Since then, Yemen has freed two members of Lebanon's Hezbollah group and several
members of the Iranian National Guard who were suspected of providing training
and other support to the Houthis.

carol.morello@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


