                             624 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 23, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

2 activists in Mideast accused of terror links

BYLINE: Joby Warrick;Tik Root

SECTION: A section; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 1016 words


When Qatar's royal family was looking for advice on charitable giving, it turned
to a well-regarded professor named Abd al-Rahman al-Nu'aymi. The 59-year-old
educator had a stellar rsum that included extensive fundraising experience and
years of work with international human rights groups.

But one apparent accomplishment was omitted from the list: According to U.S.
officials, Nu'aymi also was working secretly as a financier for al-Qaeda,
funneling millions of dollars to the terrorist group's affiliates in Syria and
Iraq even as he led campaigns in Europe for greater freedoms for Muslims.

Nu'aymi was one of two men identified by Treasury Department officials last week
as major financial backers of al-Qaeda and its regional chapters across the
Middle East. Although U.S. officials routinely announce steps to disrupt
terrorist financing networks, the individuals named in the latest case are far
from ordinary. Both men have served as advisers to government-backed foundations
in Qatar and have held high-profile positions with international human rights
groups. The second man, a Yemeni, is heavily involved in his country's
U.S.-backed political transition.

Their alleged dual roles - promoting humanitarian causes and civil rights while
simultaneously supporting extremist groups - reflect a growing challenge for
counterterrorism officials attempting to monitor the torrents of cash flowing to
Islamist rebel groups in Syria, current and former U.S. officials say.

"Individuals with one foot in the legitimate world and another in the realm of
terrorist financing provide al-Qaeda with a cloak of legitimacy," said Juan
Zarate, a former Treasury Department official and author of "Treasury's Wars," a
book that describes U.S. efforts to penetrate terrorist financial networks.
Zarate said such cases greatly complicate the "financial diplomacy" involved in
attempting to disrupt terrorist support networks, especially private funding
from wealthy Persian Gulf donors seeking to help Syria's rebels.

Despite attempts by gulf states to crack down on jihadist financial networks,
former and current U.S. officials have described a surge in private support for
Islamist extremists in Syria, particularly in Qatar and Kuwait.

The Obama administration has repeatedly urged both countries to rein in private
donations to jihadists, while acknowledging that new tactics, including the
widespread use of Twitter and other social media, make fundraising more
difficult to track.

"It is essential for countries to take proactive steps to disrupt terrorist
financing, especially where al-Qaeda and its affiliates are concerned," David S.
Cohen, the Treasury Department's undersecretary for terrorism and financial
intelligence, said in announcing financial restrictions against Nu'aymi and the
Yemeni national, Abd al-Wahhab al-Humayqani. Cohen said the Obama administration
would continue to work with the gulf region's capitals to "ensure that
charitable donations are not used to support violence."

The administration's action last week named both men as "specially designated
global terrorists," a determination that allows U.S. officials to freeze their
financial assets and bar American citizens and companies from doing business
with them. Treasury Department documents alleged that both men used their
charity work to conceal efforts to raise millions of dollars for al-Qaeda and
other terrorist groups, from Syria to the Horn of Africa.

The naming of the two officials raised eyebrows in Qatar and Yemen, where
supporters viewed the allegations as politically motivated. Both men have been
prominent critics of U.S. counterterrorism policies, particularly the use of
drone strikes against terrorism suspects.

Nu'aymi, a Qatar University professor and former president of the Qatar Football
Association, was a founding member of a prominent charity - the Sheik Eid bin
Mohammad al-Thani Charitable Foundation, named for a member of the country's
ruling family. In recent years, Nu'aymi had gained renown as an international
activist, serving as president of Alkarama, a Geneva-based human rights
organization that works closely with the United Nations and major international
activist groups to advocate for Muslims' civil rights.

Alkarama lobbies on behalf of Islamist detainees around the world, and it
accuses Western and Arab governments of suppressing the rights of political
groups that promote Islamic rule for the Middle East. Recently, the group has
spoken out against U.S. drone strikes. Some of the group's former clients are
linked to Islamist militias seeking to overthrow Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad.

Humayqani is an Alkarama founding member and onetime adviser to Qatar on
charitable giving, according to his rsum. He is a founding member of Yemen's
conservative Rashad Union party and has served on the country's National
Dialogue Conference, a group established in the wake of the Arab Spring uprising
to advise the government on political and economic reforms. The U.S. government
strongly backs the National Dialogue with political and financial support.

Nu'aymi, in a response posted on Twitter last week, said the U.S. allegations
were in retaliation for his criticism of American policies, including drone
strikes in Yemen and U.S. support for the recent overthrow of Egypt's
democratically elected government. He said the U.S. claims about his fundraising
work were "far from the truth."

Humayqani was traveling and could not be reached for comment. A statement
released by his Rashad Union party condemned what it called "false accusations"
by the United States and urged Yemen's government to rally to his defense.

The allegations against Nu'aymi come at a time of increasing U.S. concern about
the role of Qatari individuals and charities in supporting extreme elements
within Syria's rebel alliance. One charity, Madid Ahl al-Sham, was cited by
Jabhat al-Nusra in August as one of the preferred conduits for donations
intended for the group, which has pledged loyalty to al-Qaeda leader Ayman
al-Zawahiri.

joby.warrick@washpost.com

Root reported from Sanaa, Yemen.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


