                              62 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      November 3, 2013 Sunday 8:13 PM EST

With drones, the sky's the limit

BYLINE: Olga Kharif

SECTION: ; Pg. G03

LENGTH: 751 words


Commercial drones will soon populate U.S. airspace, and venture capitalists like
Tim Draper are placing their bets.

Draper, an early investor in Hotmail, Skype and Baidu, is now backing
DroneDeploy, a start-up that is building software to direct unmanned aircraft on
land mapping and the surveillance of agricultural fields. Draper says he even
expects drones to one day bring him dinner.

"Drones hold the promise of companies anticipating our every need and delivering
without human involvement," Draper, 55, wrote in an e-mail. "Everything from
pizza delivery to personal shopping can be handled by drones."

Venture investors in the United States poured $40.9 million into drone-related
start-ups in the first nine months of this year, more than double the amount for
all of 2012, according to data provided to Bloomberg News by
PricewaterhouseCoopers and the National Venture Capital Association. Drones are
moving from the military, where they've been used to spy on and kill suspected
terrorists, to a range of civilian activities.

Congress has directed the Federal Aviation Administration to develop a plan to
integrate drones into U.S. airspace by 2015 and to move faster on standards for
drones weighing less than 55 pounds.

It's not just start-ups that are anticipating the changes. ConocoPhillips says
that drones could be used to monitor ice floes and marine mammals in the Arctic.
Entrants could also include established drone makers AeroVironment, Boeing's
Insitu unit and Israel Aerospace Industries in Tel Aviv, according to Bloomberg
Government.

Sales of civilian unmanned aerial vehicles, or UAVs, will reach $8.2 billion
within the decade, up from nothing today, according to Phil Finnegan, director
of corporate analysis at researcher Teal Group, which tracks aerospace and
defense. "There's going to be a lot of growth in this market," Finnegan said.

While the capital invested in drone-related start-ups has surged, it's still
concentrated in just a few companies. Three start-ups account for all of the
money raised in the first nine months of this year, compared with five in all of
2012.

Draper backed DroneDeploy through his Menlo Park, Calif.-based firm, Draper
Fisher Jurvetson. Airware, a start-up in Newport Beach, Calif., raised $13.3
million earlier this year from investors including Andreessen Horowitz, Google
Ventures and First Round Capital to develop customizable autopilots for UAVs
that cost about $4,500 to $7,500, according to the company's Web site.

Airware found it much easier to attract the attention of venture capitalists
this year after testing the product with customers, chief executive Jonathan
Downey said. "We'd looked at raising money last year, and it was very
different," said Downey, who plans to move the company to San Francisco in
January.

The business of drones still carries plenty of risks. UAVs will have to occupy
parts of the airspace not used by airplanes, and investors don't yet know what
the rules will be. Concerns over privacy are most notable given the history of
drones as tools used by the government and military.

The American Civil Liberties Union has warned of the possibility of a
"surveillance society" monitored  by drones. "The only way to avoid this
dystopian future and prevent mass, suspicionless searches of the general
population is to ensure that information collected by drones for one purpose
cannot be used for another purpose," Allie Bohm, a strategist for the ACLU,
wrote in an August blog post.

Andy Wheeler, a partner at Google Ventures, said drones are moving into the
mainstream because of the steep drop in the cost of sensors, which have been
mass-produced for smartphones. The plunge in costs helped persuade Google
Ventures to invest in Airware as well as another drone-related start-up, Wheeler
said, declining to say which one.

"We are talking orders of magnitude lower than military technology," Wheeler
said, referring to the prices for commercial equipment.

While DroneDeploy is building software and Airware is developing systems, some
start-ups are focusing on services. Matternet, funded by Andreessen Horowitz,
aims to use drones to deliver items such as mail and medical supplies.
(Bloomberg LP, the parent of Bloomberg News, is an investor in Andreessen
Horowitz.)

Firefighters and law enforcement officials are likely to be some of the early
beneficiaries of the drop in costs, said Kent Goldman, a partner at First Round
Capital in San Francisco.

"I see a bright future for non-military applications," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


