                             628 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 9, 2014 Thursday 8:14 PM EST

Fairfax County news in brief

SECTION: Metro; Pg. T19

LENGTH: 561 words


Virginia Tech to help testunmanned drones

Researchers at Virginia Tech are working with their counterparts at the
University of Maryland and New Jersey's Rutgers University to develop a
wide-ranging test program for the unmanned aircraft called drones.

"We expect unmanned aircraft systems will be extremely useful for agriculture,
utilities, search-and-rescue missions, disaster response and a number of
applications that will generate jobs, industry and add millions of dollars in
revenue to state economies," Gov. Robert F. McDonnell (R) said in a news
release.

Virginia Tech and Rutgers, with funding from their respective states and
private-sector partners in the industry, formed the Mid-Atlantic Aviation
Partnership. On Dec. 30, the Federal Aviation Administration approved the
partnership's application to test drones.

Virginia has provided $1 million in funding for the program, and Republican Gov.
Robert F. McDonnell's proposed budget for the next two fiscal years includes an
additional $1.6 million.

Public meeting Tuesday on

The National Park Service will hold a public meeting Tuesday on the
environmental assessment process for Langley Fork Park in McLean.

Langley Fork Park is on federally owned land but managed and maintained by the
Fairfax County Park Authority. The authority and the Park Service have proposed
a land swap that would transfer Langley Fork Park to the authority for an
equally valued portion of Langley Oaks Park.

The environmental assessment is a necessary precursor to the land swap.

The county park authority is conducting a master plan revision for Langley Fork
Park.

The meeting will be from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. at Franklin Sherman Elementary
School, 6633 Brawner St., McLean.

Route 123 bridge work

Fairfax City will begin construction this month to replace a bridge on Route 123
at Kenmore Drive. The bridge carries the key artery over Accotink Creek.

Late this month, northbound traffic on Chain Bridge Road will be detoured to
Whitehead Street, University Drive, Kenmore Drive and back to Chain Bridge.
Southbound traffic will not be detoured, but lanes will shift in the work zone.

Sidewalks in the work zone will be closed; pedestrians should follow the Chain
Bridge Road detour.

The detour will be in place during most of the construction project, which is
expected to last up to six months. City transportation officials suggest that
University Drive be used as an alternative north-south route to avoid the work
zone.

A map of the area and detour route will be posted on the city's Web site,
www.fairfaxva.gov.

Reston center seeks prom dresses for high school girls

The Reston Community Center is collecting used formal dresses, shoes, handbags,
scarves, shawls and other accessories for its annual Diva Central prom dress
giveaway.

The program allows needy high school girls in the county to "shop" for free
dresses and accessories to attend prom.

Program coordinators ask that donated items be in good condition and no more
than five years old and that they have been dry-cleaned. Donations are
tax-deductible. Drop off items at the Reston Community Center Hunters Woods,
2310 Colts Neck Rd., Reston, through Feb. 7. The Diva Central event will be
March 8.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


