                             639 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       May 17, 2014 Saturday 11:33 PM EST

Bench blockers

BYLINE: Editorial Board

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 497 words


TWO OF President Obama's judicial nominees are having trouble. But this time,
Democrats are behind much of the obstruction.

Michael Boggs, a Georgia state judge and former state legislator, is taking heat
from liberals for his previous stands on a slew of sensitive social issues.
David Barron, a Harvard law professor, has seen the approval of his nomination
folded into a broader fight about the use of drones to kill terrorism suspects.

Overheated opposition is wrong regardless of whether liberals or conservatives
are behind it. Unless more comes out that seriously implicates either man's
qualifications and temperament, the record does not suggest that these nominees
are unqualified to serve.

Mr. Boggs, who is nominated for a federal district court position in northern
Georgia, has been a judge for more than a decade, and he has a notable record on
criminal justice reform. But senators seem to be more interested in things he
said as a state lawmaker. In the legislature, he supported putting Confederate
imagery on Georgia's state flag, favored a measure that would list doctors who
performed abortions and said some obnoxious things about gay and lesbian rights.
In his confirmation hearing, he distanced himself from these positions. Even if
he had not, though, the focus should be on his judicial performance, not his
legislative history. "The best evidence of the type of judge I will be is the
record of the type of judge I have been," he said at his confirmation hearing
Tuesday. "I don't think that my legislative record that's more than a decade old
is indicative of what type of judge I will be."

If Mr. Boggs seems like an odd choice for Mr. Obama, it is because his
nomination was part of a broader deal with Republicans to fill seven judicial
vacancies, including two on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit. Now
that the president has nominated all seven, the deal does not bind individual
senators to vote for every one of them. Senators should, however, be bound by
the principle that qualified presidential nominees deserve their deference and
consent.

Mr. Barron, whom the president picked for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 1st
Circuit, seems to be in less trouble, but his nomination has still been hobbled
by concerns over memos he wrote at the Justice Department defending Mr. Obama's
policy on targeted drone killings. By various accounts, they are not nearly as
controversial as, say, the Bush-era "torture memos" were. Nevertheless,
activists and senators from both sides have been squabbling about getting full
access to the classified documents as they consider Mr. Barron's nomination,
which has been associated with the broader political battle about U.S. drone
policy. That conflation is not fair.

Senate Majority Leader Harry M. Reid (D-Nev.) has set a vote on Mr. Barron in
the coming days. Senators should confirm him. Mr. Boggs, meanwhile, has yet to
move out of the Judiciary Committee. He, too, should get the votes he needs.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


