                             630 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     February 11, 2014 Tuesday 8:14 PM EST

U.S. weighs strike against American alleged to be an al-Qaeda operative

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 879 words


The Obama administration is weighing whether to approve a lethal strike against
a U.S. citizen who is accused of being part of the al-Qaeda terrorist network
overseas and involved in ongoing plotting against American targets, U.S.
officials said.

The officials said no decision has been reached on whether to add the alleged
operative to the administration's kill list, a step that would require Justice
Department approval under new counterterrorism guidelines adopted by President
Obama last year.

U.S. officials have not revealed the identity of the alleged operative or the
country where he is believed to be located, citing concern that disclosing those
details would send him deeper into hiding and prevent any U.S. strike.

But Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee,
alluded to the case last week during a public hearing on security threats,
accusing the administration of adopting cumbersome counterterrorism policies
that have made Americans more vulnerable to attack.

"Individuals who would have been previously removed from the battlefield by U.S.
counterterrorism operations for attacking or plotting to attack against U.S.
interests remain free because of self-imposed red tape," Rogers said.

He added that the new constraints on drone strikes are "endangering the lives of
Americans at home and our military overseas in a way that is frustrating to our
allies and frustrating to those of us who engage in the oversight of our
classified activities."

Al-Qaeda's core group in Pakistan is closely tied to militant organizations that
have carried out cross-border assaults against U.S. forces in Afghanistan. The
CIA has carried out hundreds of strikes against the groups in Pakistan.

That core group is known to include at least one American, Adam Gadahn. But he
is widely considered a spokesman and media figure for al-Qaeda, not an operative
whose role in plotting would meet the criteria for placement on U.S. target
lists. U.S. counterterrorism officials in recent months have also voiced concern
about the potential for American recruits to join al-Qaeda affiliates in
Somalia, Yemen and Syria.

The prospect of again targeting an American - first reported Monday by the
Associated Press - puts Obama in the position of having to revisit one of the
most controversial issues of his presidency. Last year the White House
acknowledged that four U.S. citizens had been killed in drone strikes during
Obama's time in office. Only one of them - Anwar al-Awlaki, a U.S. native who
became a leader of al-Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen - had been intentionally
targeted.

The disclosure came amid mounting pressure on the administration from civil
liberties groups that questioned the legality of killing an American without due
process in court, as well as the secrecy surrounding such decisions. Officials
at the American Civil Liberties Union renewed those objections Monday.

"The targeted killing of an American being considered right now shows the
inherent danger of a killing program based on vague and shifting legal
standards, which has made it disturbingly easy for the government to operate
outside the law," said Hina Shamsi, director of the ACLU's National Security
Project. "This new report comes as the administration continues to fight against
even basic transparency about the thousands of people who have died in this
lethal program, let alone accountability for the wrongful killings of U.S.
citizens."

Spokesmen for the White House, CIA and Justice Department declined to comment.

In a speech last May, Obama defended the government's authority to kill
Americans accused of plotting with al-Qaeda but said doing so was a measure of
last resort that should face special scrutiny from the Justice Department.

"The targeting of any American raises constitutional issues that are not present
in other strikes," Obama said. But he also said that when a U.S. citizen "goes
abroad to wage war against America" and can't be captured, "his citizenship
should no more serve as a shield than a sniper shooting down on an innocent
crowd should be protected from a SWAT team."

The policies Obama approved last year allow counterterrorism strikes beyond
active war zones only when the target is thought to pose an imminent and
continuing threat to U.S. persons and when there is a "near certainty" of no
civilian casualties.

There has been no indication from administration officials that the guidelines
imposed new constraints on targeting Americans, other than requiring a ruling
from the Justice Department, which officials said was done before Awlaki was
killed in 2011.

So it is unclear what Rogers was referring to in his remark on "self-imposed red
tape." At the same hearing, he cited "a growing risk aversion within our
intelligence agencies as al-Qaeda has morphed and spread throughout Yemen,
Syria, the Levant and Africa." A spokesman for Rogers declined to elaborate on
his comments.

Beyond the CIA drone campaign in Pakistan, the United States has also carried
out strikes in Yemen and Somalia.The latter involve the U.S. Joint Special
Operations Command, which operates Predator and Reaper remotely piloted aircraft
from a base in Djibouti.

millergreg@washpost.com

Karen De Young and Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


