                             637 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       April 22, 2014 Tuesday 2:28 AM EST

Yemen says strikes on al-Qaeda killed 55

BYLINE: Ahmed Al-Haj

SECTION: A section; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 576 words


SANAA, Yemen - Yemeni forces, reportedly backed by U.S. drone strikes, hit
al-Qaeda militants for a second straight day Monday in what Yemeni officials
said was an assault on a major base of the terrorist group hidden in the
country's remote southern mountains. The government said 55 militants were
killed.

The sprawling base was a rare instance of permanent infrastructure set up by
al-Qaeda's branch in the country, Yemeni security officials said. It includes a
training ground, storehouses for weapons and food, and vehicles, they said,
speaking on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to
release details to the news media.

The assault appeared to be a significant escalation in the U.S. and Yemeni
campaign against al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the terrorist group's
powerful branch in the southern Arabian nation. The United States has been
hitting al-Qaeda positions in the country heavily with drone strikes for two
years, trying to cripple the group after it was driven out of several southern
cities it had taken over in 2011.

But the group proved to be highly resilient, spreading across the country and
working from mountain areas. In a show of the group's boldness, a video recently
posted on Islamist militant Web sites showed the group's leader, Nasir
al-Wahayshi, meeting openly with a gathering of dozens of militants in the
southern province of Abyan.

The base is in a remote mountain valley called Wadi al-Khayala in the rugged
Mahfad region at the border between Abyan and the  provinces of Shabwa and
al-Bayda.

The first strikes came Sunday in an assault that a high-level government
security committee said targeted the group's training grounds. The Interior
Ministry said it lasted several hours. Yemeni officials and tribal leaders said
new strikes, thought to include U.S. drone hits, came Monday. An  airstrike
Saturday in al-Bayda killed nine militants.

The ministry said in a statement Monday that the strikes Sunday had killed at
least 55 militants including three prominent figures. It identified the three as
Mohammed Salem Abed Rabbo al-Mashibi, Fawaz Hussein al-Mahrak and Saleh Said
Mahrak. It said that identification of the dead was continuing and that
non-Yemeni fighters were among those killed. It said the strikes were in Wadi
al-Khayala, Lodiya and Ramtha.

In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman said he could not comment on any specific
actions.

"But as you know, we have a very strong and collaborative relationship with the
Yemeni government. We work closely together with them on various initiatives in
the counterterrorism realm," said Army Col. Steve Warren.

A spokesman for the CIA declined to comment.

The escalation came after the return from the United States of Yemen's defense
minister, Maj. Gen. Mohammed Nasser Ahmed, and his commanders following a
two-week visit.

Washington ramped up its fight against Yemen's branch of al-Qaeda after
unsuccessful bomb plots targeting Americans, including an attempt to bring down
a U.S.-bound airliner with explosives hidden in the would-be suicide bomber's
underwear, and a  plot to send mail bombs hidden in the toner cartridges of
printers on planes headed to the United States.

The group's fighters overran several towns and cities in southern Yemen in 2011,
taking advantage of the political chaos amid a popular uprising against
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was later driven from power.

- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


