                             635 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      April 16, 2014 Wednesday 2:57 AM EST

Video shows al-Qaeda figures meeting in open

BYLINE: Greg Miller

SECTION: A section; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 494 words


A video that recently surfaced on Islamist militant Web sites shows a large
group of al-Qaeda fighters - including the terrorist network's second in command
- taking part in a brazen open-air gathering, apparently unconcerned about the
prospect of being struck by a U.S. drone.

U.S. officials said that the video appeared to be recent and authentic and that
analysts at the CIA and counterterrorism agencies are scrutinizing it for clues
to potential plots. The officials declined to say why there had been no U.S.
strike or whether U.S. spy agencies were even aware of the gathering before the
video emerged.

A CIA spokesman declined to comment.

At one point in the footage, al-Qaeda's leader in Yemen, Nasir al-Wuhayshi,
issues a warning that the organization remains focused on attacking the United
States.

"We must eliminate the cross," Wuhayshi said, according to a translation of the
video, adding that "the bearer of the cross is America."

Wuhayshi appears without a mask in the video, meeting and speaking with dozens
of robed militants. It is one of his most provocative appearances since the
United States began a campaign of airstrikes against the al-Qaeda affiliate in
Yemen in 2010.

The faces of some other figures in the recording are digitally obscured, raising
concern that the organization was seeking to protect the identities of recruits
from Western nations or others potentially being groomed to carry out attacks.

U.S. counterterrorism officials regard the al-Qaeda affiliate in Yemen as the
network's most potent threat to the United States. The group has been
responsible for a series of attempted attacks, including a failed effort to blow
up a Detroit-bound airliner on Christmas Day in 2009.

Wuhayshi is seen as a potential successor to Ayman al-Zawahiri, who has led
al-Qaeda since its founder, Osama bin Laden, was killed in 2011. Wuhayshi's
prominent role in the video may have been part of an effort to establish a
broader following and secure his eventual claim to al-Qaeda's leadership.

The recording, which appeared on CNN on Tuesday, depicts a gathering of men,
many brandishing black flags and rifles, against a rugged and mountainous
backdrop.

The footage is reminiscent of scenes from al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan
in the late 1990s, but the group's affiliate in Yemen has generally avoided such
displays.

The militants take part in exercises and assemble to hear speeches from leaders,
making no apparent effort to disguise the gathering or avoid detection by drones
. The United States has carried out eight airstrikes this year in Yemen, after
26 in 2013.

The CIA and the U.S. Joint Special Operations Command have for several years
operated parallel drone programs in Yemen.

But the U.S. military's armed flights have been suspended since an apparently
errant strike in December killed as many as a dozen people traveling in a
wedding-related caravan of vehicles.

greg.miller@washpost.com

Julie Tate contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


