                             638 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 13, 2014 Tuesday 4:01 AM EST

World Digest: May 12, 2014

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 732 words


South SUDAN          Presidential election to be postponed

South Sudan's government said Monday that a presidential election scheduled for
next year would be postponed for two or three years to tackle the issue of
reconciliation among its people.

South Sudan was plunged into violence in December when President Salva Kiir
accused his former deputy, Riek Machar, of trying to oust him in a coup.
Ethnic-based violence has raged since, leaving thousands dead.

The two met in Ethiopia on Friday and signed a peace deal, but violence again
flared over the weekend. No new fighting was reported Monday, a military
spokesman said.

Meanwhile, U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called for a special tribunal for
South Sudan, saying there are grounds to believe that crimes against humanity
have been committed in the ongoing conflict.

- Associated Press

AFGHANISTAN          21 killed as Taliban begins spring fighting

The Taliban unleashed a wave of attacks that killed 21 people in Afghanistan,
making a show of strength to start the spring fighting season. The annual surge
in violence poses a new test for Afghan security forces, who for the first time
will face the onslaught largely on their own as international combat forces
prepare to withdraw.

On Monday, three insurgents attacked a provincial Justice Ministry building in
Jalalabad. They fatally shot two police guards and stormed the building.
Security forces rushed to the scene, and a gun battle ensued. Five civilians
were killed.

In other attacks, insurgents killed nine police officers at a checkpoint in
Helmand province. A rocket struck a market in Parwan province, killing two
civilians. Militants attacked police checkpoints on the outskirts of Ghazni,
killing two women and a police officer.

- Associated Press

Exit polls signal that Modi may be India's next leader:As India wrapped up its
multi-phase national elections, exit polls indicated that opposition leader
Narendra Modi was on course to become the next prime minister. Modi's Bharatiya
Janata Party and its allies were forecast to win a majority in Parliament.
Official results are expected Friday.

Suspected U.S. strike kills 6 al-Qaeda militants in Yemen: A suspected U.S.
drone strike in southern Yemen killed six al-Qaeda militants, military and
security officials said. The drone hit a car with al-Qaeda fighters in Marib
province, the officials said. Last year and in January, drone strikes killed
more than 12 suspected al-Qaeda militants in the same area. The United States
considers Yemen's branch of al-Qaeda the most dangerous in the world.

Rail company, 3 employees charged in Quebec oil train blast: Three employees and
a railway company involved in last summer's massive explosion of a runaway oil
train that incinerated much of a small town in Quebec, killing 47 people, have
been charged with criminal negligence, prosecutors announced late Monday. More
than 60 oil tankers derailed in the downtown district of Lac Megantic last July.

15 dead in Congo soccer stadium stampede:A stampede at a soccer stadium in
Kinshasa, Congo's capital, killed at least 15 people after angry fans threw
rocks from the stands, prompting security officers to fire tear gas, which
caused crowds to flee in panic, officials and witnesses said. The stampede
occurred toward the end of a match Sunday between two Congolese teams. At least
21 people were injured, authorities said.

Court orders Turkey to pay Cyprus over invasion:The European Court of Human
Rights ordered the Turkish government to pay the equivalent of $124 million in
compensation to Cyprus over human rights abuses committed during and after
Turkey's invasion of the island in 1974. Turkey sent troops to Cyprus 40 years
ago after a brief Greek Cypriot coup staged by supporters of unification with
Greece.

At least 14 killed as migrant boat sinks: A boat crowded with migrants sank in
the Mediterranean just beyond Libya's territorial waters, leaving at least 14
people dead, according to the Italian navy, which helped rescue more than 200
survivors.

Israeli arrested on U.S. request over Iran arms trade: Authorities in Israel
arrested a local man sought by the United States on suspicion of illegal arms
trading with Iran. The man was arrested while attempting to leave the country.
Israel said he will be extradited to the United States.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


