                             634 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       March 14, 2014 Friday 4:10 AM EST

Amazon raising the price of Prime

BYLINE: Amrita Jayakumar;Hayley Tsukayama

SECTION: A section; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 726 words


The cost of convenience is going up.

Amazon announced Thursday that it was raising the price of its Prime membership
service by $20, to $99 a year, the first hike since the program was launched in
2005. Prime members - among the company's most loyal customers - receive free
two-day shipping on select items and access to a library of instant, streaming
video as well as books.

The reaction to Amazon's decision is something of an experiment that the retail
industry will watch closely. Will the e-commerce giant convince existing Prime
customers - some of whom have a caffeine-like addiction to the service - that
it's worth the higher price tag? Will it modify its services to offer shoppers
more bang for their buck? Or will it alienate them as it turns its focus toward
profitability? Its success or failure could prove a model to other retailers
offering subscription services.

On Amazon's discussion board, customer angst was quickly apparent. "I'll not be
renewing my Prime. Not worth $99 a year for me. It's been fun, but fun and
necessary are 2 different things," wrote one commenter named Tickled Dog.

"It is something I'm going to have to think hard about before I let it renew
again," wrote another named Sorwen.

It's rare for Amazon, which was founded by Washington Post owner Jeffrey P.
Bezos and has been content to be a loss leader, to raise the cost of a product.
But the company's shipping expenses have long eaten into its bottom line,
analysts say. In fact, even increasing Prime's membership fees may not be enough
to boost its profits.

"While raising Prime pricing and pitching 'drone delivery' solutions make good
headlines, shipping losses remain a burden on profits," Colin Gillis, a
technology analyst at BGC Partners, wrote in a research note Thursday. (Amazon
said last year that it was developing drones to deliver packages in as little as
30 minutes.)

In its fourth-quarter earnings report, Amazon posted a profit of $239 million,
after two successive quarters of losses.

The retailer said Prime has at least 20 million members, so a $20 price increase
gives it about $400 million more to put toward infrastructure and content costs.
Members make up about 45 percent of all Amazon customers and spend about twice
as much, according to a report by Consumer Intelligence Research Partners, a
research firm.

The price hike is likely to make Prime customers spend even more to get their
money's worth, said Josh Lowitz, the research firm's partner and co-founder.

"This may dissuade some lower-value casual shoppers, but those who stay with it
will have a subtle encouragement to spend more," he said.

Amazon hinted at a possible price increase in January, and on Thursday it
reaffirmed that the logistical costs of Prime had forced its hand.

"Even as fuel and transportation costs have increased, the price of Prime has
remained the same. If you consider things like inflation and fuel costs, a Prime
membership valued at $79 in 2005 would be worth more than $100 today," Amazon
spokeswoman Julie Law said in an e-mail.

The extra revenue is also critical as the company builds out its range of
in-house products, such as the Kindle line of e-readers and tablets, and ramps
up its investment in original content to compete with streaming services such as
Netflix.

Speaking of Netflix, Amazon is not the first major retailer to raise prices on a
popular service.

When Netflix suddenly raised the cost of its video streaming service by about 60
percent in 2011, the company faced an instant backlash. More than 800,000
subscribers abandoned the site in a single quarter, forcing the company to
restore its original fee. Wholesale giant Costco had a better result after it
raised its membership fee by 10 percent in 2012, its first increase since 2007.
Customers continued to shop there, and the company posted a profit the next
year.

Amazon's U.S. price hike follows a similar move in Europe this year, when the
company increased membership costs by more than 60 percent for British and
German customers, expanding its video offerings in the process.

The retailer's stock price was flat Thursday at $371.51.

amrita.jayakumar@washpost.com

hayley.tsukayama@washpost.com

More business news:

Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg: Washington is 'a threat' to the Internet

Here's why Amazon Prime's price may go up

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


