                              64 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 26, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drone Exemptions for Hollywood Pave the Way for Widespread Use

BYLINE: By BROOKS BARNES

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 773 words


LOS ANGELES -- The commercial use of drones in American skies took a leap
forward on Thursday with the help of Hollywood.

The Federal Aviation Administration, responding to applications from seven
filmmaking companies and pressure from the Motion Picture Association of
America, said six of those companies could use camera-equipped drones on certain
movie and television sets. Until now, the F.A.A. has not permitted commercial
drone use except for extremely limited circumstances in wilderness areas of
Alaska.

Put bluntly, this is the first time that companies in the United States will be
able to legally use drones to fly over people.

The decision has implications for a broad range of industries including
agriculture, energy, real estate, the news media and online retailing. ''While
the approval for Hollywood is very limited in scope, it's a message to everyone
that this ball is rolling,'' said Greg Cirillo, chairman of the aviation
practice at Wiley Rein, a law firm in Washington.

Michael P. Huerta, the administrator of the F.A.A., said at least 40 similar
applications were pending from companies beyond Hollywood. One is Amazon, which
wants permission to move forward with a drone-delivery service. Google has
acknowledged ''self-flying vehicle'' tests in the Australian outback.

''Today's announcement is a significant milestone in broadening commercial
use,'' Anthony R. Foxx, secretary of transportation, told reporters in a
conference call.

Under the six waivers granted on Thursday -- a seventh, for a company called
Flying-Cam, is still under review -- the companies can use camera-equipped
drones on outdoor movie and television sets that are closed to the public. The
equipment must be inspected before each flight, fly no higher than 400 feet and
be operated by a technician with a pilot's license. The F.A.A. must be notified
of filming.

Night use is prohibited, at least for now.

Some aviation-safety advocates and other watchdog groups have opposed the
waivers for Hollywood, worrying about air traffic situations like drone crashes
in populated areas. Privacy has also been a concern. Mr. Foxx said on Thursday
that he determined that the waivers did ''not pose a risk to national airspace
users.''

Studios like Sony Pictures Entertainment and Paramount Pictures have already
been using drones in overseas shoots for movies like ''Transformers: Age of
Extinction'' and ''Skyfall.'' Filming in Bulgaria, Millennium Films and
Lionsgate recently used a drone-mounted camera for portions of ''The Expendables
3.''

Studios, battling a severe slump at the domestic box office, are looking to
unmanned flying cameras to create ever more dazzling footage. Hollywood has also
cited significant cost savings from foregoing helicopter filming and improved
safety; three people were killed last year when a helicopter crashed while
filming a Discovery Channel show. Studios also say drone filming will keep
production at home.

''By creating a climate that further encourages more movie and TV production in
the U.S., today's decision also supports job creation,'' said Christopher J.
Dodd, chairman of the Motion Picture Association. Mr. Dodd, a former senator
from Connecticut, added that the decision was ''a victory for audiences
everywhere as it gives filmmakers yet another way to push creative boundaries.''

The six film companies receiving approval are Aerial Mob, Astraeus Aerial,
HeliVideo Productions, Pictorvision, Snaproll Media and Vortex Aerial.

Among major companies, Amazon has perhaps been the leading proponent of drone
use, but it is far from alone. On Friday, the German logistics company DHL is
expected to begin using a drone to deliver supplies to residents of the island
of Juist. It is the first time such a device has been authorized for regular use
in Europe, the company said.

And entertainment companies are racing to use drones in more than the movies.

Cirque du Soleil, the Canadian operator of acrobatic shows, on Monday released a
video that explores storytelling on stage using drones called ''quadcopters.''
The video depicts an electrician surrounded by 10 drone-powered floating lamps;
he then appears to conduct their movement in the air -- a bit like the way
Mickey Mouse interacts with the dancing brooms in Disney's ''Fantasia.''

In August, Disney applied for three drone patents related to outdoor theme park
shows. Based on the applications, the company appears to want to use drones to
fly projection screens into the air and to move huge marionettes. The company,
which has declined to comment, submitted an example of a flying version of Jack
Skellington from ''The Nightmare Before Christmas.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/26/business/media/drone
-exemptions-for-hollywood-pave-the-way-for-widespread-use.html

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Yahoo's remaining stake in  Alibaba, which went public  this
month, is a top asset. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FLYING-CAM) (B7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


