                             645 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        July 1, 2014 Tuesday 2:53 AM EST

200 more troops sent to Iraq

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Thomas Gibbons-Neff

SECTION: A section; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 742 words


President Obama has authorized another 200 U.S. troops to secure the American
Embassy in Iraq as well as Baghdad's international airport, bringing the total
U.S. deployments to Iraq this month to 775.

In a letter to Congress on Monday, his third in the past two weeks, Obama said
the new deployments were "a prudent measure to protect U.S. citizens and
property."

He said the force was "equipped for combat" and would "remain in Iraq until the
security situation becomes such that it is no longer needed."

A Pentagon statement said that the additional personnel arrived in Baghdad on
Sunday, along with "a detachment of helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles,"
or drones, "which will bolster airfield and travel route security."

On June 16, Obama authorized 275 troops to protect the embassy. Although most
were sent immediately to Iraq, about 100 remained in Kuwait. Those 100 have now
been deployed along with the 200 new troops.

Separately, Obama also authorized the deployment of 300 troops to Iraq to train
and assist Iraqi forces fighting Islamist militants and to set up joint
operation centers in Baghdad and in northern Iraq. Those troops are tasked with
assessing the situation on the ground, and the capabilities of both the Iraqi
army and the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).

The State Department also said Monday that it is relocating additional personnel
from the embassy to consulates in Basra, in the south, and Irbil, in the north,
following initial relocations in mid-June.

The embassy "remains open and will continue to engage daily with Iraqis and
their elected leaders," State Department spokesman Jen Psaki said in a
statement. Psaki said a "substantial majority" of embassy officials "will remain
in place" and that there are no plans to evacuate the embassy.

But other officials said that the new military deployments were intended to
protect the embassy and other facilities and to ensure escape routes if
evacuation becomes necessary.

The current U.S. assessment is that Baghdad itself is not in immediate danger
from advancing ISIS forces. Fighting continued Monday in Tikrit, about 100 miles
northwest of Baghdad, and there were reports of mortar attacks outside a revered
Shiite shrine in Samarra, about 35 miles south of Tikrit. At least nine people
were wounded, a Samarra city official told the Associated Press.

Iraq's newly elected parliament is due to hold its first meeting Tuesday, and
U.S. officials have pressed the majority Shiites, and Sunni and Kurdish
minorities, to quickly choose a government to unite the country as it confronts
the militants.

Although the Iraqi constitution sets a timetable lasting for at least six weeks
to pick the prime minister, president and parliamentary speaker, U.S. officials
would like to see all three chosen this week. The Obama administration has said
it is up to Iraqis to decide whether they want to retain Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki in office, but it has made clear that it views Maliki, a Shiite, as
divisive.

Sunnis and Kurds have said they will not participate in another government
headed by Maliki, who has been prime minister since 2006.

Maliki's government has asked the United States for air support against ISIS, a
request that Obama has said he will consider only if Iraq takes steps toward
more inclusive governance. The Pentagon has increased intelligence cooperation
with Iraq and is flying 30 to 35 surveillance missions daily with drones and
manned aircraft. But although the administration approved sales of F-16 jets and
Apache helicopters, those shipments have been delayed amid congressional
objections.

Meanwhile, other countries have come to Maliki's aid. Iran has reportedly sent
military equipment and is also flying surveillance drones over Baghdad. On
Sunday, Russia said it was sending warplanes and military experts, some of which
arrived over the weekend.

Psaki, at a State Department briefing, said the administration did not have a
problem with the Russian sales. "Iraq has purchased military equipment from a
range of countries in the past, including Russia, including the Czech Republic,
South Korea and others to fulfill their legitimate defense needs."

U.S. sales, she added, have been "expedited in recent days. And certainly we are
not surprised that Iraq would take steps to work with other countries in the
region, as they have for some time, to gain the equipment that they need."

deyoungk@washpost.comthomas.gibbons-neff@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


