                             653 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 19, 2014 Tuesday 2:46 AM EST

Arches and Canyonlands national parks in Utah ban drones

SECTION: A section; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 444 words


California          Marine wife's body found in mine shaft

The body of the missing, pregnant wife of a U.S. Marine has been found deep in
an abandoned mine shaft in Southern California, where her husband had been
stationed, and Alaskan authorities have arrested her alleged lover on suspicion
of homicide.

The remains of Erin Corwin were found Saturday 140 feet down a mine shaft on
federal land near Twentynine Palms after authorities spent nearly two months
searching 300 square miles in the remote area east of Los Angeles, San
Bernardino County Sheriff John McMahon said. Corwin was 19 when she disappeared,
the sheriff said.

Her alleged lover and former neighbor, Christopher Brandon Lee, was arrested at
about 9 p.m. Sunday in Anchorage on suspicion of homicide under an extradition
warrant from California, said Jennifer Castro, communications director for the
Anchorage Police Department.

- Associated Press

Utah          National parks ban unmanned aircrafts

Drones are now officially banned in Arches and Canyonlands national parks in
southeastern Utah.

Kevin Moore, acting chief ranger for the two parks, says the unmanned aircrafts
disrupt wildlife and are an intrusion on visitors looking for tranquility. The
ban also extends to Hovenweep and Natural Bridges national monuments.

In June, Park Service Director Jonathan B. Jarvis directed all parks to take
steps to prohibit the use of the increasingly popular aircraft that are often
used to take photos and videos.

The Grand Canyon in Arizona and Zion in Utah have already changed their rules to
ban drones.

- Associated Press

Okla. police officer charged: A Tulsa police officer was charged Monday with
first-degree murder in the off-duty shooting death of his daughter's boyfriend
earlier this month. Shannon Kepler was charged in the Aug. 5 death of19-year-old
Jeremey Lake. Kepler, a 24-year veteran of the force, also was charged with one
count of shooting with intent to kill because prosecutors say he shot at his
daughter during the alleged confrontation in which Lake was killed.

Calif. girl dies in Yellowstone: An 8-year-old girl has died after falling about
550 feet while hiking in Yellowstone National Park. The National Park Service
says the accident occurred Sunday morning in the Grand Canyon of Yellowstone. It
identified the victim as Zahra Allahyari of Poway, Calif. According to the Park
Service, the girl and members of her family were hiking down a trail on the
north side of the canyon to the Brink of the Lower Falls overlook. The agency
says the child apparently stepped off the trail and lost her footing.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


