                              65 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             April 8, 2014 Tuesday

Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 779 words



HIGHLIGHT: While flying a drone is really difficult, when you finally get the
hang of it you can take some gorgeous photos and videos.


 Yep, I crashed another one.

Over the past two weeks, testing out a new drone from DJI called the "Phantom 2
Vision Plus," I managed to fly it into the San Francisco Bay.

It did not float.

When I got my hands on another DJI drone, I immediately flew that one into a
tree. I then banged into a few walls. I chased myself down the street and I
almost hit myself with it. Finally, as the video above shows, I crashed it into
concrete in a New York City park.

Flying a drone is really, really difficult. It's like backing up an
eighteen-wheeler in a blind alley, or landing a Boeing 747 in a crosswind. Well,
at least it felt like that to me.

When I was able to finally figure out the flying part - note to self: moving the
controls left will fly the drone right, and vice versa - the photos and videos
that the Phantom 2 Vision Plus took were gorgeous.

For photographers and videographers, the latest drones are opening up an
entirely new genre of visual storytelling that once required a helicopter or
huge crane. It won't be long before these flying cameras are included in
people's camera bags like tripods, flashes and lenses are today.

The Phantom 2 Vision Plus is similar to DJI's other offerings, designed as a
quadrocopter with four propellers, but this new model has a number of features
specifically designed for photographers.

While drones in the past have required people to buy a GoPro or other
third-party camera to capture images, DJI has started to build its own camera
systems into the drones with the hopes of adding more controls for the pilot.
All with the goal of capturing better images.

Eric Cheng, director of aerial photography for DJI, said one of the benefits of
the new Phantom over previous models is the increased image stabilization, which
eliminates a past problem called "jellying," where videos can look like they are
wobbling, just like Jell-O.

The company was able to do this by taking most of the components out of the
camera and sticking them inside the actual drone, drastically reducing the
weight and wobble of the camera.

The new drone has a built-in GPS unit so if you lose it, you know where it went
down - unless it's in the San Francisco Bay. The Phantom 2 Vision Plus can fly
as high as 1,000 feet or about one-fifth of a mile. It can also go 800 meters
away from you, or almost half a mile. But these heights and distances aren't
advisable because you can no longer see your drone.

The new Phantom comes with a built-in 14-megapixel camera that can also record
1080p video.

This drone really excels at letting the user control the camera, with a free app
that comes with an array of camera settings. The app, called DJI Vision, allows
you to control the camera from your smartphone so you can swing it up and down
and side to side.

The app also lets a user control the actual camera in midflight, telling it to
start shooting HD video or to capture photos in high resolution, or RAW, by just
pressing a few buttons. If you want to shoot gorgeous high-resolution video,
simply click the video capture button, the same way you snap videos on your
iPhone.

Amit Gupta, the founder of the online photography store Photojojo, said the
Phantom drones "feel like you have a giant tripod in the sky." He said the
company is seeing a lot of interest from photographers about drones and will
eventually start renting them out.

"The great thing about the Phantoms is that they have a built-in GPS unit, so
you can tell it to stay somewhere, even in the wind, and it won't move," Mr.
Gupta said.

Yes, if you're thinking what I'm thinking, it's perfect for those people who
want to take high-end selfies.

All of this fancy technology comes at a price: The new Phantom drone can be
preordered from DJI's website for $1,299.

While it's definitely worth the investment for photographers and hobbyists, I
would advise first buying an inexpensive practice drone that you can break
without worry.

Mr. Cheng of DJI recommends that people buy a Blade Nano QX, $100, or Syma X1,
$33, to get used to the controls of the drone before taking out the expensive
model. Once you feel comfortable you can graduate to the Phantom.

"Drones are really easy to fly until something goes wrong," Mr. Cheng said.
"Then people panic and usually end up crashing."

Take it from me, to know what to do when something goes wrong, practice
beforehand. If not, you could fly your brand new $1,300 drone into a tree, a
wall or even a large body of water.


     ·    Disruptions: A Tiny Camera for the Stratosphere
     ·    Picking a Bag for a Camera
     ·    Daily Report: GoPro, Known for Extreme Videos, Aims to be a Media
          Company
     ·    A Small, Versatile Way to Record Your Life
     ·    A Lesson Learned About the Intensity of Camera Enthusiasts


LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


