                             657 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     September 6, 2014 Saturday 3:15 AM EST

Somali militant's death verified

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A section; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 800 words


In a major setback foral-Qaeda's affiliate in East Africa, the Obama
administration said Friday that it had confirmed the death of a key Somali
militant leader who had been targeted in an airstrike this week.

The White House and Pentagon released statements assertingU.S. responsibility
for killing Ahmed Abdi Godane, the leader of al-Shabab, a Somali jihadist
movement that has become an increasing threat to neighboring countries,
including Kenya and Uganda. Godane had bragged of masterminding an audacious
assault by gunmen on a Nairobi shopping mall last year, killing dozens while
keeping local security forces at bay for days.

After receiving intelligence on the elusive Godane's whereabouts, the U.S.
military sent drones and other aircraft on Monday to an al-Shabab camp near the
southern port of Barawe. They unloaded several Hellfire missiles and other
munitions, flattening the camp and destroying a nearby vehicle. But with no U.S.
troops on the ground to pick through the wreckage, Godane's fate was not
immediately clear.

The Pentagon did not reveal in its statement how it was able to confirm Godane's
death. A senior defense official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because
of the sensitivity of the issue, said the conclusion was drawn from "a series of
indicators, based on intelligence," but declined to be more specific.

The U.S. military has occasionally carried out drone strikes and commando raids
in Somalia, but not with the same frequency that the Pentagon and CIA have
hunted terrorism suspects in Afghanistan, Pakistan or Yemen.

The mission to kill Godane came 11 months after Navy SEALs raided a seaside
house in Barawe in an attempt to capture another al-Shabab leader. In that case,
the commandos were forced to withdraw after a gunfight erupted, putting civilian
bystanders at risk.

Monday's drone strike in Somalia occurred even as Obama and his national
security advisers have been preoccupied with what they describe as a bigger and
more pressing terrorism threat: the emergence of the Islamic State, a jihadist
network that now controls large portions of Syria and Iraq.

On Friday, Obama cited Godane's death as evidence that his deliberate and
measured approach to confronting the networks is paying off, despite criticism
from some lawmakers in Congress and even some allies that he has been too
cautious.

"We have been very systematic and methodical in going after these kinds of
organizations that may threaten U.S. personnel and the homeland," Obama told
reporters at the NATO summit in Wales. "But, have no doubt, we will continue and
I will continue to do what is necessary to protect the American people."

Under Godane's direction, al-Shabab, which means "the youth" in Arabic, formally
affiliated itself with al-Qaeda in 2012. The group had risen over the last
decade to take control of much of Somalia, a chronically unstable country on the
Horn of Africa. It has lost ground in recent years, however, beaten back by the
intervention of African troops, many of them paid and trained by the U.S.
government.

"Al-Shabab changed significantly under his leadership, including prioritizing a
more global agenda while losing control of large swaths of territory within
Somalia," said Jon Temin, head of the Africa program at the U.S. Institute of
Peace. "It is too soon to declare the demise of al-Shabab, but the group will
now face difficult decisions about how to replace a brutal but effective
leader."

Counterterrorism officials said Godane had consolidated power within al-Shabab
by eliminating several rivals, either by killing them or forcing them to go into
hiding. As a result, they said it was unclear who might succeed him.

"He was a strong leader of al-Shabab and had taken care of rivals pretty
effectively," Matt Olsen, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said
during a briefing with reporters at the agency's headquarters. Because of the
leadership void and Godane's role in personally shaping plots, Olsen said
al-Shabab "may not be as active in carrying out attacks."

Although Godane had sworn allegiance to al-Qaeda and his group has been a menace
in East Africa, U.S. counterterrorism officials have been divided over how much
of a direct threat al-Shabab poses to the United States.

The State Department had previously offered a $7 million reward for information
leading to Godane's arrest. It identified him as a 37-year-old native of
northern Somalia who, among other aliases, went by the names Mukhtar Abu Zubeyr
and Ahmed Abdi Aw Mohamed.

In a statement Friday, the White House said that Godane had "continued to
oversee plots targeting Westerners, including U.S. persons, in East Africa," but
did not give further evidence of specific attempts to kill Americans.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

Greg Miller contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


