                             669 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 29, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Lament of the Expatriate

BYLINE: By PAMELA DRUCKERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 826 words


PARIS -- A few years back I took the ultimate expatriate plunge: I started doing
psychotherapy in French. I figured that, as part of the deal, I'd get free
one-on-one French lessons. And I hoped that if I revealed my innermost thoughts
in French, I might finally feel like an ordinary Parisian -- or at least like an
ordinary Parisian neurotic.

I soon realized this was a doomed enterprise. Each week I'd manage to vaguely
sketch out my feelings and describe the major characters in my life. But it was
hard to free associate when I was worried about conjugating verbs correctly.
Sometimes I'd just trail off, saying, ''Never mind, everything's fine.''

I'm aware that there are worse things to be than an American in Paris. You could
be, for example, a Congolese in the Democratic Republic of Congo. But as I spend
my 10th Thanksgiving here, permit me a moment of reflection. Because
Thanksgiving prompts the question that expatriates everywhere face: Shouldn't I
be going home?

The Americans in Paris tend to fall into three categories. There are the
fantasists -- people nourished by Hemingway and Sartre, who are enthralled with
the idea of living here. The moneyed version of this person lives as close as
possible to the Eiffel Tower. The Bohemian version teaches English or tends bar,
to finance his true vocation: being in France.

Then there are the denialists -- often here for a spouse's job -- who cope with
living in Paris by pretending they're not in Paris. They tap into a parallel
universe of Anglophone schools, babysitters and house painters, and get their
French news from CNN.

Finally there are people like me, who study France and then describe it to the
folks back home. We're determined to have an ''authentic'' French experience.
And yet, by mining every encounter for its anthropological significance, we keep
our distance, too.

No matter how familiar Paris becomes, something always reminds me that I don't
belong. The other evening, as I chastised the lady who had cut in line at the
supermarket, I realized she was grinning at me -- amused by my accent. During
conversations in French, I often have the sensation that someone is hitting my
head. When surrounded by Parisians, I feel 40 percent fatter, and half as funny.
Even my shrink eventually took pity and offered to do the sessions in English.
(It turns out she's fluent.)

The question of whether to stay is especially resonant for Americans in Paris,
because many feel that they live here by accident. Not many foreigners move to
Paris for their dream job. Many do it on a romantic whim. Expatriates often say
that they came for six months, but ended up staying for 15 years. And no one is
quite sure where the time went. It's as if Paris is a vortex that lulls you with
its hot croissants and grand boulevards. One morning, you wake up middle-aged --
still speaking mediocre French.

I wasn't sure how long I'd live here, but I did expect my stay to follow a
certain expatriate narrative: You arrive; you struggle to understand the place;
you finally crack the codes and are transformed; you triumphantly return home,
with a halo of foreign wisdom and your stylish bilingual children in tow.

But 10 years on, I've gone way off that script. Those stylish children threaten
to mutiny if I even mention the possibility of moving. I've got a French
mortgage, and I'm on the French equivalent of the P.T.A. It's like being a
stranger in a very familiar land. I haven't cracked the codes, but I no longer
feel entirely out of sync: When the whole country goes into mourning after a
beloved singer or actor dies, these days I actually know who the guy was.

Sometimes I yearn to be in a place where I don't just know more or less what
people are saying, but know exactly what they mean. But I'm no longer fully in
sync with America either. Do people there really eat Cronuts, go on juice fasts
and work at treadmill desks?

The thought of becoming an ordinary American again scares me. We expatriates
don't like to admit it, but being foreign makes us feel special. Just cooking
pancakes on Sunday morning is an intercultural event. I imagine being back in
the United States and falling in with a drone army of people who think and talk
just like me -- the same politics, the same references to summer camp and '70s
television.

But the fact is, those drones are my people. I end up gravitating toward them in
Paris, too. The biggest lesson I've learned in 10 years is that I'm American to
the core. It's not just my urge to eat turkey in late November. It's my
certainty that I have an authentic self, which must be expressed. It's being so
averse to idleness that I multitask even when I'm having my head shrunk. And
it's my strange confidence that, whether I stay or go, everything will be fine.

Pamela Druckerman is the author of ''Bringing Up Bébé: One American Mother
Discovers the Wisdom of French Parenting.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/28/opinion/druckerman-an-american-neurotic-in-par
is.html

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY MELINDA BECK)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


