                             661 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                   September 24, 2014 Wednesday 12:54 AM EST

Stalwart liberals, outflanked by Obama

BYLINE: Dana Milbank

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 795 words


The anti-Obama left was out in force. All 22 of them.

As the president stood on the South Lawn to announce the bombing campaign in
Syria, liberal demonstrators gathered on Pennsylvania Avenue on the other side
of the White House to protest the man they thought was their ally.

"When you were elected president, people had such hope for a change," Malachy
Kilbride of the National Campaign for Nonviolent Resistance proclaimed through a
handheld amplifier. "What we got was a government that continued the policies of
the Bush administration! You are NOT the people's president, and the voices of
the people are not being heard."

The liberal activists' list of grievances was long: drone warfare, insufficient
action on climate change and wages, "failed economic policies," bending to
corporate interests. But the roll call of activists was short: Obama starts a
war, multiple antiwar groups schedule a joint demonstration with plenty of
advance warning - and only 22 people show up?

It was the latest display of how Obama has neutralized the left.

He has disappointed liberal constituencies on immigration, on climate change, on
Guantanamo Bay and targeted killings, and now on Syria. Yet this month's
Washington Post-ABC News poll shows him with 69 percent support among liberals,
87 percent among African Americans and 75 percent among Democrats. Liberals
supported airstrikes in Iraq and Syria (64 percent and 54 percent,
respectively), as did Democrats (67 percent and 60 percent).

"If George W. Bush were launching wars with Congress out of town, oh, it would
be flooded," longtime liberal activist David Swanson said, looking across mostly
empty Pennsylvania Avenue "They would be screaming."

Swanson, who voted for Obama in 2008 before switching to the Green Party, said
liberals who condemned Bush look the other way when Obama does the same thing
because "he's more eloquent, he's more intelligent, he's African American, he
bills himself as a constitutional scholar."

Essentially, they view him as a lesser evil than the Republican alternative. "He
can get away with some abuses and worse and be forgiven because he engages in
wars more eloquently and reluctantly," Swanson said, "but the people who die in
the wars are just as dead and the people who suffer from the sabotaging of
climate agreements have their climate just as destroyed." (There were large
climate-change demonstrations in New York this week, but those weren't really
anti-Obama.)

The 22 activists' clothes and signs spanned the gamut of liberal causes: "Ground
the Drones." "Don't Nuke the Climate." "Don't Frack with U.S." "Stop U.S. Wars
for Profits." Some wore orange jumpsuits and black hoods, leftovers from the
Bush-era protests.

Ubiquitous activist Medea Benjamin of Code Pink tried to give her small antiwar
band a pep talk. "The American people were on our side just a couple of months
ago," she said. "The support is going to start evaporating. . . . We need to
accelerate that."

I asked Benjamin, who like Swanson voted for Obama in 2008 before turning Green,
why so few on the left oppose Obama. "He's totally defanged us," she said,
citing his party, his affability - and his race. "The black community is
traditionally the most antiwar community in this country. He's defanged that
sentiment within the black community, or certainly voicing that sentiment."

Benjamin noted that the two leaders of the Congressional Progressive Caucus
split on last week's Syria vote. "If it were under Bush, there would be no split
at all and they would all be against this," she said.

Instead, it was a sparse crowd outside the White House on Tuesday. The Secret
Service, in a show-of-force after last week's fence-jumping incident, closed
Pennsylvania Avenue near the White House for a while, and the demonstrators were
pushed back to Lafayette Square, where, they were told, they could not use their
amplifier.

Finally, the restrictions were lifted, and the demonstrators returned to their
previously scheduled street theater. They tried, and failed, to deliver a letter
to Obama at the guard house. Then 10 of them pretended to die in a drone strike;
a few covered themselves in "blood"-spattered sheets, and one moaned in fake
pain.

But the Secret Service and Park Police, unimpressed, took their time arresting
the die-in participants. During the wait, some of the deceased shifted positions
and started talking among themselves, while others rose from the dead to grant
interviews to reporters, who far outnumbered the demonstrators.

After nearly an hour of this, agents moved in calmly and cuffed the remaining
five protesters - to the relief of the demonstrators. It was beginning to look
as if a liberal activist couldn't get arrested in Obama's Washington.

Twitter: @Milbank

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


