                             667 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 22, 2013 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Eclecticism Intact After a 17-Year Interlude

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; MUSIC REVIEW;
Pg.

LENGTH: 475 words


Mazzy Star was a throwback to a throwback when it performed at Terminal 5 on
Wednesday night, touring behind its first album in 17 years. When the band
emerged in 1990, its singer and lyricist, Hope Sandoval, and its guitarist and
composer, David Roback, wrote songs that looked back to the 1960s, using
selective memories of folk-rock and psychedelia to define its own sparse,
pensive songs. Now -- when newer bands from Beach House to the xx have also
embraced the still-waters-run-deep aesthetic -- Mazzy Star harks back to its
earlier self.

The band may well be a little more self-conscious now about its own influence.
''In the Kingdom,'' from the new album ''Seasons of Your Day'' (Rhymes of an
Hour), mentions ''listening to a band play a song that changed me.'' But Mazzy
Star had a tightly defined musical strategy from the start.

The three albums Mazzy Star released in the 1990s used the strumming and picking
of folk-rock, the basic chords and drones of garage-rock, and a finely
calibrated vocabulary of reverb and guitar effects in songs that never move
faster than medium tempo and often stay much slower. In a voice that's both
transparent and reserved, Ms. Sandoval sang about separations, regrets and
intimations of mortality. ''Everybody seems so far away from me/Everybody just
wants to be free,'' she sang in Wednesday night's opening song, ''Look On Down
From the Bridge.''

For the length of its set on Wednesday night, Mazzy Star managed to suspend time
in all but one aspect. Despite the efforts of the club's security staff, the
band couldn't entirely prevent the use of cellphones, prompting Ms. Sandoval to
break her onstage reticence to complain about ''those jackass flash phones you
all have.'' The band performed in dim light, with members' faces in shadow; a
video screen showed starscapes, rippling coastal waters or old stereoscope
images. There was just enough visual information to keep the focus on the songs.

And the songs arrived with calm deliberation: austere, unhurried, decisively
impassive. The set transpired in wavelets, working from gently strummed songs
toward more electric drones and quieting down again. The music nearly silenced
the big room for the delicate picking and desolation of ''Into Dust''; roiled
and smoldered with jazz undercurrents in the Doors-style ''She Hangs Brightly''
and ''So Tonight That I Might See''; and brought a calm Velvet Underground
swagger to ''Blue Flower'' and balanced urgent strumming and whispery yearning
in ''California,'' a song from the new album.

Pedal steel guitar hovered over the folk-rock of ''Disappear,'' as Ms. Sandoval
sang, ''I'll never be what you want me to be/No, I can't disappear.'' But she
was exactly what Mazzy Star fans have wanted her to be: back and unchanged.
Mazzy Star has applied the hovering, meditative stasis of its music to its
career.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/22/arts/music/mazzy-star-tours-behind-its-new-alb
um-seasons-of-your-day.html

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


