                             674 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 18, 2013 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amid Chinese Rivalry, Japan Seeks More Muscle

BYLINE: By MARTIN FACKLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 921 words


TOKYO -- Taking Japan a step further from its postwar pacifism, Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe approved a new five-year defense plan on Tuesday that calls for the
acquisition of drones and amphibious assault vehicles to strengthen the nation's
military as it faces the prospect of a prolonged rivalry with China over islands
in the East China Sea.

While Mr. Abe described the spending plan as ''proactive pacifism,'' it
continues a trend started earlier this year when Mr. Abe began to reverse a
decade of military cuts to help offset China's rapid military buildup and the
relative decline of American influence in the region.

He is building on moves by previous prime ministers to inch Japan toward what
many here call a more ''normal'' nation that can defend itself. While Mr. Abe,
an outspoken conservative, has long wanted to wean the country from what he and
other nationalists consider excessive pacifism and an unhealthy negativity about
its World War II-era past, the tensions with China have made a skeptical public
more willing to accept an expanded military.

The spending plan was approved by the cabinet in tandem with a new 10-year
defense strategy and a broader national security strategy that call for Japan to
create a more dynamic military force, loosen self-imposed restrictions on
exporting weapons, and nurture a stronger sense of patriotism among its
citizens.

Under the new strategy, Japan will continue to build closer ties with the United
States, whose 50,000 military personnel stationed here still form the basis of
Japan's national security. But it will also acquire weapons meant to increase
its own capabilities -- acquisitions that would have once been unthinkable for a
nation that viewed its military with suspicion after its disastrous defeat in
World War II.

Japan will ''build a comprehensive defensive posture that can completely defend
our nation,'' according to the security strategy. ''China is attempting to alter
the status quo by force in the skies and seas of the East China Sea and South
China Sea and other areas based on assertions that are incompatible with the
established international order.''

Political analysts say that China's assertive stance in the dispute over the
East China Sea islands has made Japan's once proudly pacifist public more
willing to accept an expanded role for the nation's military, called the
Self-Defense Forces. China's claims in the South China Sea have also put it at
odds with several countries in Southeast Asia that say they own some of the
territory in question.

The islands at the center of Japan's standoff with China are known as the
Senkaku in Japanese and the Diaoyu in Chinese. Japan has controlled the islands
for decades, but China now says that was part of an imperial land grab.

The new security strategy calls for Japan to continue to raise its regional
profile by building security ties with other Asian nations, though it is unclear
how a stronger Japanese military will be greeted by neighbors such as South
Korea, where memories of Japan's early-20th-century empire-building are still
raw.

The spending plan announced Tuesday will raise the military budget by 1.2
trillion yen, or $11.7 billion, over the next five years, to about 24.7 trillion
yen. While that is an increase of almost 5 percent, it is still far below the
annual double-digit increases in China's military spending.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Japan had the
fifth-largest military budget in the world last year. China had the second
largest, behind the United States.

Much of the new spending will go to strengthen Japan's ability to monitor and
defend southwestern islands, including those in dispute with China. Toward that
end, Japan will station more early-warning aircraft in Okinawa and buy three
unarmed Global Hawk drones for surveillance.

The spending plan also includes the acquisition of beach-assault vehicles and
American Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft to equip a recently created Marine
Corps-style amphibious infantry unit that can defend and recapture remote
islands.

The 10-year military strategy approved on Tuesday calls on Japan to create a
more mobile military that can deal with contingencies on far-flung islands, as
well as so-called gray-zone conflicts that might involve small numbers of
terrorists or paramilitary attackers. It maintains the army's current troop
level of about 160,000, reversing earlier plans to reduce that number.

The strategy also calls on Japan to study whether it should buy or develop
long-range strike capability, like cruise missiles, that would allow it to
destroy a threat like a North Korean ballistic missile before it was launched.

Japan has so far eschewed such clearly offensive weapons in order to maintain
the defensive nature of its military, whose existence already pushes the limits
of a postwar Constitution that bars the nation from possessing ''land, sea and
air forces, as well as other war potential.''

Mr. Abe wants to go even further by stretching the definition of self-defense to
include action taken on behalf of allies under attack -- for example, allowing
Japan to shoot down a North Korean ballistic missile heading toward the United
States.

That doctrine, known as collective self-defense, has run into stiff public
opposition, including from a small Buddhist political party within Mr. Abe's own
governing coalition. On Tuesday, the top government spokesman, Yoshihide Suga,
said consideration of collective self-defense would be put off until next year
at the earliest.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/18/world/asia/japan-moves-to-strengthen-military-
amid-rivalry-with-china.html

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Members of the Japanese infantry at a troop review ceremony on a
base in Asaka, near Tokyo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ISSEI KATO/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


