                             678 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 24, 2013 Tuesday
                        The International New York Times

Pakistan's Persecuted Christians

BYLINE: By AKBAR AHMED

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; OpEd; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg.

LENGTH: 953 words


LAHORE, Pakistan -- If ever there was a target for the Pakistan Taliban, I
thought to myself, this would be it.

Besides the 750 graduating students and more than 2,000 guests gathered on the
campus of Forman Christian College on Nov. 30 were the university's American
rector and two of Pakistan's five provincial governors. Senior officials in
Lahore had already warned the public to be vigilant. The police had information
that the Taliban had dispatched suicide bombers to the city to take revenge for
the recent killing of their leader, Hakimullah Mehsud, in a United States drone
strike. Their targets would be senior government officials and foreigners,
especially Americans.

Forman is Pakistan's leading Christian educational institution, now celebrating
its 150th anniversary. Only 600 of its 6,000 students are Christian; what's
remarkable is how fully integrated into campus life they are.

Like many non-Christian Pakistanis, I owed my education to Christian teachers,
both at Forman and at my previous school, Burn Hall in Abbottabad, which was run
by Roman Catholic priests. We loved and respected our Christian teachers, and
they us. We never doubted that harmony and cooperation between faith groups were
not only possible, but also completely normal. It was the reality of our lives.

I had returned after half a century to my old college (now a chartered
university) to receive an honorary doctorate. Once there, I found myself
transported back to one of the happiest periods of my life. It was a different
Pakistan and it was a time of hope. Christians were very much part of the fabric
of the nation.

Times have changed. Today, Forman is an island of tranquillity for Christians in
a troubled sea. With increasing frequency, Christians have been attacked and
their churches vandalized.

No one was taking lightly the seriousness of the threat at the commencement. I
was told there were snipers on all the vantage points and security officers in
plain clothes all over the campus. Yet, as if to insist on the normalcy of
university life, the rector announced a new center with the express purpose of
bridge building between different cultures and faiths.

Many Pakistanis are unaware of the role Christians have played in the nation's
history. Although the Christian population is barely three million, or 1.6
percent of the population -- as compared with 180 million Muslims (more than 95
percent) -- Christians have had a considerable impact, especially in education.
Many of Pakistan's most prominent leaders -- including the current prime
minister, Nawaz Sharif, the assassinated prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, and
former President Pervez Musharraf -- went to Christian schools. Christians also
educated Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who founded Pakistan in 1947. Under Pakistan's
Constitution, Christians were guaranteed equal rights.

The targeting of Christians comes amid a widespread breakdown of public order.
The ordinary citizen -- hearing stories of gangs breaking into homes and
kidnapping people -- thinks only of survival. Groups like the Pakistani Taliban
have challenged government authority to the point where the rule of law barely
exists in parts of the country like the tribal areas of the Northwest.

While militant groups are frequently the culprits in attacks on Christians, a
general anger against the United States has caused large numbers of people to
target Christians, whom they associate with America, as scapegoats.

Christians have been especially vulnerable in cases concerning the blasphemy
laws, which easily convert into a tool of oppression against them. Cases like
that of the 11-year-old Christian girl arrested last year after being accused of
burning pages of the Quran in Islamabad gain nationwide publicity -- easy causes
célèbres for those who are opposed to United States foreign policy in Pakistan
or who believe that Islam is under siege from the West.

This, in turn, makes it very difficult for public officials to intervene, even
if they are inclined to do so. Government promises to reconstruct the homes of
Christians destroyed by mobs and distribute aid are rarely carried out.

Those Pakistanis who do speak up for Christians have themselves become targets
of violence. In 2011, a governor of Punjab Province who criticized the blasphemy
laws was killed by his own bodyguard, who was then hailed as a hero. Senior
politicians and the Pakistani elite have been complicit in the sectarian
hostility because they fear that any of them could meet the same fate.

Perhaps the worst blow to date was the deadly assault on a historic church in
Peshawar earlier this year, in which 78 people were killed and 130 wounded.
Little wonder, then, that there is widespread fear and uncertainty among
Christians. There are rumors of entire families fleeing the country, many
stranded in halfway stations like Thailand, awaiting official papers to
emigrate.

The situation of the Christians will improve only if the causes of Pakistan's
instability are addressed. These include the breakdown of law and order, the
dangerous gap between rich and poor, the ever rising prices of wheat and sugar,
the lack of jobs, and the conduct of the American war on terror in the region.

Pakistanis also need to be reminded of their own history of religious tolerance.
What they perhaps do not realize is that the protection and rights of the
Christian community are more than a constitutional obligation: The situation of
Pakistani Christians is a barometer of the health of the nation. Today, the
signs are not good.

Akbar Ahmed, the Islamic Studies chairman at the American University in
Washington, is the author of ''The Thistle and the Drone: How America's War on
Terror Became a Global War on Tribal Islam.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/24/opinion/pakistans-persecuted-christians.html

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


