                             676 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 20, 2013 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan: Military Strikes Kill At Least 23 in Northwest Area

BYLINE: By IHSANULLAH TIPU MEHSUD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 335 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- At least 23 people suspected of being militants were
killed and 12 were wounded on Thursday when Pakistani Army troops carried out
shelling and ground raids in Mir Ali, the second largest town of the restive
northwestern tribal district of North Waziristan, according to government
officials.

The shelling and raids appeared to be in retaliation for a suicide bombing on
Wednesday that killed at least five soldiers in North Waziristan.

A Pakistani security official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said
that the battle Thursday lasted for several hours.

Local tribesmen disputed the official account and said that at least 25
civilians had been killed by the military, including women and children.

''People have starting migration to other places in North Waziristan,'' said Jan
Alam, a local elder. ''Many shops in Mir Ali bazar have been burned and smoke is
still coming out. Who will compensate for our losses?''

The suicide bombing on Wednesday was one of the worst attacks on the security
forces in recent months. The bomber rammed his vehicle into a military
checkpoint, killing at least five soldiers and wounding 22.

Ansar-ul-Mujahedeen, a Taliban faction affiliated with Tehreek-e-Taliban
Pakistan, claimed responsibility for the suicide bombing.

''We claim responsibility for the attack. It was carried out to avenge the
martyrdom of our respected leader, Hakimullah Mehsud, in a U.S. drone strike,''
Abu Baseer, a spokesman for Ansar-ul-Mujahedeen, said by telephone.

Mr. Mehsud, the leader of the Pakistani Taliban, was killed in an American drone
strike on Nov. 1.

Pakistani government officials have claimed that Mr. Mehsud had agreed to talks
with the government and that his death jeopardized a nascent peace process.

North Waziristan is one of seven tribal districts of Pakistan's semiautonomous
tribal region, where there is a high concentration of Taliban and Al
Qaeda-affiliated militants.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/20/world/asia/pakistani-army-kills-23-suspected-o
f-being-militants.html

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


