                              68 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 9, 2014 Sunday 8:14 PM EST

Yemenis question U.S. drone strategy

BYLINE: Abigail Hauslohner

SECTION: A section; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 1403 words


In Yemen, questions and anger over U.S. drone targets

Critics say the attacks, which have killed civilians, often target people who
could be arrested instead.

SANAA, Yemen - A drone-fired U.S. missile struck a car southeast of here on a
winter night last year, killing two alleged al-Qaeda operatives who lived openly
in their community. But it also killed two cousins who were giving the men a
ride and who the Yemeni government later said were innocents in the wrong place
at the wrong time.

That incident, and other strikes that have followed, helped fuel anger here over
civilian casualties from U.S. drone attacks and what critics say is an even less
scrutinized problem: the targeting of suspects who are within the reach of the
law.

The U.S. drone campaign in Yemen is aimed at rooting out al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP), which U.S. officials have called the most active and deadly of
the organization's wings. Drones have carried out at least 80 attacks since the
start of 2011, according to the Long War Journal, which tracks U.S.
counterterrorism efforts.

As the strikes continue, public outrage is rising in Yemen, where many people,
including government officials, argue that the attacks increase sympathy for
al-Qaeda. In December, after a drone attack killed more than a dozen people in a
rural wedding convoy, Yemen's parliament passed a non-binding motion to ban the
strikes.

Drones are "a tool for killing outside of the law," said Ali Ashal, a member of
parliament who represents a district where U.S. cruise missiles killed 41 people
in 2009 but missed their alleged target, a high-ranking al-Qaeda officer who
Ashal said was "moving freely throughout the area and would pass by
checkpoints."

But the Yemeni government, riven by power struggles and corruption, relies on
U.S. funding for support and allows the attacks. Yemeni politicians and experts
say the government - which has struggled with domestic turmoil, weakened state
institutions and deepening poverty since the 2011 uprising that ended President
Ali Abdullah Saleh's rule - appears less inclined than ever to set limits on
U.S. drones.

Yemen's foreign minister, Abu Bakr al-Qirbi, told Reuters in September that
drone strikes were a "necessary evil" in the country's fight against terrorism
and a "very limited affair." At least four strikes have been carried out this
year, according to local media.

The drone program in Yemen, where most strikes take place in remote areas, is
cloaked in secrecy. Members of the president's office declined to be interviewed
about it, as did Yemen's National Security Agency and its defense and interior
ministries. The Pentagon also declined to comment.

The Obama administration has defended armed drones as precise tools that limit
civilian casualties and risk to U.S. military personnel, and it has said it is
investigating the attack on the wedding convoy. Asked about that strike in
December, a State Department spokeswoman told reporters that the United States
takes "every effort to minimize civilian casualties in counterterrorism
operations."

Attacks as political tools?

Amid an absence of transparency, there is wide speculation in Yemen that drones
- and the intelligence from Yemen that at least partly informs targets selected
by the CIA or Pentagon - are used as tools of politics and convenience.

Many politicians, activists and analysts think Yemeni security agencies prefer
to identify suspects as eligible drone targets rather than arrest them - to
avoid a messy legal process or a confrontation with a well-armed population in
which tribal loyalties run deep.

What's more, a shadowy battle for power and influence has gripped Yemen since
Saleh ceded control to his deputy, Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi, in 2011. Saleh
remains a powerful political force whose loyalists are said to crowd security
agencies, and his rivals accuse him of manipulating intelligence on terrorist
threats to eliminate enemies.

The murky political atmosphere has opened "the possibility that at different
times, the United States is sort of being played - that different people give
them intelligence and then ask the U.S. to carry out a strike - and then it
turns out that the U.S. targeted a political rival," said Gregory Johnsen, a
Yemen expert and author of "The Last Refuge: Yemen, al-Qaeda, and America's War
in Arabia."

Congress has been troubled enough by seemingly poor targeting and civilian
casualties - such as the Yemen wedding deaths - that it has sought to block
President Obama's plan to shift control of the drone campaign from the CIA to
the Pentagon.

The alleged targets of the U.S. missile strike that killed Ali Saleh al-Qawili,
a schoolteacher, and his cousin, Selim Hussein Ahmad, a university student, on
Jan. 23, 2013, were hardly fugitives.

Rabia Laheb, a local councilman and an active supporter of al-Qaeda, and Naji
Saad, a powerful general's bodyguard, were well-known members of Saleh's tribe
and home town, 12 miles outside the capital, according to residents of their
community. They passed regularly through checkpoints, and the road they traveled
on the night they were killed was dotted with checkpoints, too, relatives of
Qawili and residents said.

Why they were not detained is unclear. But they had turned against Saleh in
Yemen's 2011 popular uprising, and some in their community think that may have
made them drone targets.

Residents said Laheb had held meetings for al-Qaeda at his home. Two months
before his death, a drone strike killed his close associate and suspected AQAP
commander Adnan al-Qadhi. The watchdog organization Human Rights Watch said
Qadhi "could have been captured rather than killed."

In a speech on U.S. drone and counterterrorism policy in May, Obama said strikes
are taken only when there is "near-certainty that no civilians will be killed or
injured," and he emphasized that the United States prefers to capture rather
than kill terrorism suspects. But legal and military experts say it is rarely so
simple.

In countries such as Yemen, the United States is unwilling to risk troops by
sending in commando units, experts say. Critics of U.S. drone operations have
also accused the Obama administration of leaning on killing suspects since
announcing plans to end detentions at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, because there is no
obvious place to put captured ones.

Local authorities, on the other hand, may be too corrupt or incapable of doing
the job themselves, experts say. In Yemen, repeated prison breaks have
diminished confidence in security forces.

But another obstacle is diplomatic. States such as Yemen may allow the United
States to carry out airstrikes but would generally prohibit boots on the ground,
said Matthew Waxman, a professor of national-security law at Columbia
University. "If we could rely on those governments to do the capturing, we
would, but these are generally situations where they can't or they won't,"
Waxman said.

Civilian toll

Critics say one result is civilian casualties. According to the Long War
Journal, at least 116 people were killed in U.S. airstrikes in Yemen last year,
about 15 percent of them civilians. Other monitoring groups cite higher figures.

Two months after the airstrike that killed Qawili and Ahmad, Yemen's Interior
Ministry apologized in a letter to their families, saying that the cousins were
innocent and that it was "their fate" to die that night. The men who paid them
for a ride, the government said, were members of al-Qaeda.

The letter provided little solace to Qawili's brother, Mohamed Ali Saleh
al-Qawili, an Education Ministry bureaucrat. He formed a support group for drone
victims' families last year, and he said his quest for answers has proved
illuminating. "The bottom line is that they do not even go to the trouble of
investigating, or seeing who is in a car, when [an intelligence] report is
provided," he said of the U.S. government.

Qawili said he was astonished by how many other Yemenis he met whose kin had
become targets or collateral damage when their vehicles were moving in the
vicinity of Yemeni army and police checkpoints, where they might have been
arrested.

"This is a useless war," he said. "And every time they kill an innocent person,
they motivate the families to join al-Qaeda."

abigail.hauslohner@washpost.com

Ali Almujahed contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


