                             682 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2014 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Senator Signals Support for Sending Helicopters to Iraq

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 512 words


WASHINGTON -- A powerful Senate Democrat signaled Wednesday that he might allow
the transfer of AH-64 Apache helicopters to Iraq as the government in Baghdad
struggles to recapture key territory seized by Islamic extremists in the western
part of the country.

The senator, Bob Menendez of New Jersey, the chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, has blocked the lease and sale of the powerful attack helicopters for
months while seeking assurances that Iraq would not use them to attack civilians
and that the government in Baghdad would take steps to stop Iran from using
Iraqi airspace to ship arms to Syria's military.

Mr. Menendez received a three-page letter last week from Prime Minister Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq responding to his concerns and received an urgent call
from the State Department on Tuesday promising a further response. Although
committee officials said the answers so far do not go much further than Mr.
Maliki or the administration have in the past, Mr. Menendez was convinced that
they are serious about dealing with the concerns given the latest strife in
Anbar Province.

''The administration is now addressing concerns first raised in July that
required responses before this sale could proceed,'' said Adam Sharon, the
senator's spokesman. ''Provided these issues are sufficiently addressed,
Chairman Menendez will be ready to move forward.''

The Obama administration has proposed selling 20 to 30 of the helicopters to the
Iraqi government, but, because it could take years for them to be built, it has
also asked to lease up to 10 aircraft in the interim. Administration officials
said the Apaches could be useful in targeting fighters affiliated with Al Qaeda
like those who have taken over parts of Fallujah and Ramadi in recent days. But
even if Mr. Menendez dropped his objections, it could take until April to
deliver them, and officials noted that pilots would still need to be trained.

Moreover, other senators remain concerned. ''I think we have to be very
careful,'' said Senator Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, the ranking Republican on
the Intelligence Committee. ''All of that could fall into the wrong hands.''

The administration is separately planning to provide an additional shipment of
Hellfire missiles as early as this spring, seeing them as effective at denying
Al Qaeda a haven in Anbar. In addition, the administration plans to send Iraq 10
ScanEagle surveillance drones in coming weeks and 48 Raven surveillance drones
later in the year. Those come on top of Aerostat surveillance balloons provided
to Iraq in September and three additional Bell IA-407 helicopters sent last
month.

Still, even some senior Democrats who support reinforcing Iraqi troops said Mr.
Maliki ultimately bore the burden for crafting a long-term political solution
with Sunnis in restive Anbar Province.

''You could tactically go in with enough force to displace Al Qaeda, but the
long-term success is based on the politics,'' said Senator Jack Reed of Rhode
Island, a senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee. ''Maliki has to help
himself out.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/09/us/politics/senator-signals-support-for-sendin
g-helicopters-to-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


