                             683 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hold Up, We're Not Through With 2013

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 937 words


Let's postpone 2014 for the length of a Playlist -- a handful of deserving 2013
albums that almost got away.

Mum

SMILEWOUND

In a recording career that dates back to 2000, the mutable Icelandic band Mum
has long been fond of tinkly keyboards, shallow synthetic percussion, hovering
sustained strings, Minimalistic repetition, airy lead vocals and brilliant track
titles (like, on this album, ''When Girls Collide'' and ''Eternity Is the Wait
Between Breaths''). But until ''Smilewound'' (Morr Music), its sixth album, Mum
hadn't aligned those elements so consistently into pop songs, with upfront
vocals (from a recently returned founding member, Gytha Valtysdottir) and
clear-cut verses and refrains. Mum's pop is more an experiment in structure than
a capitulation to the market. The songs are the opposite of bangers: They're
skeletal, understated and seemingly demure until the lyrics emerge, like those
in ''Candlestick'': ''Should've crushed your teeth and your nose/But I kind of
like your face.'' When Mum collaborates with a longtime pop hit maker -- none
other than Kylie Minogue -- in ''Whistle,'' she is pulled into Mum's own realm
of quiet, crystalline tension.

Kuenta i Tambú

TAMBUTRONIC

Sooner or later, every Caribbean rhythm will probably get digitally pumped up
for the global club circuit. Tambú, from the Dutch island of Curaçao, gets its
turn on ''Tambutronic'' (Jiga Musica) by Kuenta i Tambú, which is performing
Sunday night at Globalfest at Webster Hall. Tambú -- a hip-shimmying dance and
genre named after its central drum -- is music of ritual (like Brazilian
camdomblé and Cuban Santería), protest and partying created by African slaves
and their descendants. It survived a 350-year ban in Curaçao, and is still
heavily regulated there. Its beat comes from hand drum and iron percussion --
often a hoe blade, used like both a bell and a scraper -- and its lyrics, as in
other Afro-Caribbean styles, have often held political statements, coded or not.
Kuenta i Tambú, based in Amsterdam and founded by a percussionist from Curaçao,
goes more for sass and impact than preservation. Programmed beats join or
replace hand percussion, synthesizers swoop, and tambú's intricacies are often
traded for a soca-like beat mixed with four-on-the-floor, as women chant taunts
like ''Show me where your light switch is,'' ''I know I'm better than you,'' or
''Don't move like jackhammer.'' Those internationalized tracks are fun on their
own terms -- similar to Diplo's productions -- and they're bait, perhaps, for
the snippets of traditional and fused tambú that punctuate the album.

Tom McDermott

BAMBOULA

Tom McDermott, a pianist and composer from St. Louis who settled in New Orleans
more than 20 years ago, steeped himself in the local lore from the classical
compositions of Louis Moreau Gottschalk to the Mardi Gras mambos of Professor
Longhair. He also delved further into Latin America -- to Argentine tango and to
Brazilian choro, a cousin of ragtime -- and elsewhere. ''Bamboula'' (Minky) is a
compilation drawn largely from Mr. McDermott's previous albums. The album is
named after a Gottschalk melody that gets a tambourine-tapping
choro-meets-traditional-jazz treatment; Mr. McDermott also thoroughly revamps
two Scott Joplin pieces. But the other 13 ingenious miniatures, played by small
groups that often include Evan Christopher on clarinet, are Mr. McDermott's own:
compositions that can simultaneously invoke Chopin and habanera or New Orleans
slow drag and Parisian bal-musette, complete with accordion. The pianist and
songwriter Van Dyke Parks chose the tracks, and they reflect his fondness for
nostalgia gone surreal -- seemingly antiquarian settings where strange twists
and turns occur -- and for chromatic rambles that end up making sense. Mr.
McDermott's time-warped parlor music turns out to be as wily as it is elegant.

James Holden

THE INHERITORS

Swoopy, wobbly, sometimes distorted analog sounds fill the second album by the
British electronic musician James Holden, ''The Inheritors'' (Border Community).
He's a devotee of modular synthesis: hooking up oscillators, filters and other
temperamental gizmos to generate sounds that can't be programmed. The album
begins with rustic, hypnotic tracks: drones with ever-changing layers that might
also include a panpipe, a violin or saxophones among the electronics, hinting at
a travelogue. Later, the harmony starts to move, with tinges of Baroque music,
before the rhythms multiply and meditation gives way to high-pressure propulsion
-- especially in ''Gone Feral'' and the title track of ''The Inheritors,'' which
both stack up little loops that blip, tap and throb from every register. The
final tracks subside back toward drones, making the whole album a long,
satisfying arc.

Tricky

FALSE IDOLS

Repeatedly canceled United States tour dates last year robbed Tricky of some
attention for his latest album, ''False Idols'' (K7). It circles back partway to
the ominous desolation of his 1995 debut, ''Maxinquaye.'' Tricky's productions
are rigorous about using a minimum of parts to construct a song. He maintains a
vacuum around the riff, beat and vocals: usually whispery women shadowed by
Tricky's burned-out husk of a voice. What's new is Tricky's willingness to offer
enough melody and structure to make more of his songs approach pop --
particularly morose love songs like ''Nothing Matters,'' sung by Nneka, and ''If
Only I Knew,'' sung by Fifi Rong -- and his growing fascination with mortality
and spirituality in songs like ''Tribal Drums'' and ''We Don't Die.'' He's not
mellowing, much less cheering up. He's getting more strategic.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/12/arts/music/2013-albums-from-mum-kuenta-i-tambu
-tricky-james-holden.html

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The band Kuenta i Tambú, based in Amsterdam but specializing in
idioms from Curaçao, performs Sunday at Webster Hall. Its most recent album is
''Tambutronic.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRETT RUSSEL)
Tom McDermott, left, with Van Dyke Parks, who chose the songs for Mr.
McDermott's album ''Bamboula.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PARKS)
In 2013, the Icelandic band Mum (from left, Sigurlaug Gisladottir, Gunnar Orn
Tynes, Gytha Valtysdottir and Orvar Poreyjarson Smarason) released
''Smilewound.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY BALDUR KRISTJANSSON)
 Tricky, above, collaborates with Nneka and Fifi Rong on his album ''False
Idols.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADRIAN THAWS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


