                             681 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Guns Will Not Save Iraq

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 651 words


President Obama has done the predictable thing by sending more weapons to Iraq
to counter an alarming rise in violence. But arms alone will not solve a problem
that has its roots in the political alienation of Sunnis and other minorities
and the undermining of democratic processes, especially by Prime Minister Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki.

The bloodshed has reached catastrophic proportions. More than 8,000 Iraqis died
in 2013, including 952 members of the Iraqi security forces. Over all, it is the
highest death toll since 2008 and shatters a trend that in 2012 prompted a top
administration official to assert that ''Iraq today is less violent'' than ''at
any time in recent history.''

The deadly surge is attributed to Al Qaeda's regional affiliate, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria, a Sunni group that is a potent force in northern and
western Iraq. Its predecessor, Al Qaeda in Iraq, waged the insurgency that
brought the country near civil war in 2006 and 2007 before suffering big defeats
from Iraqi Sunni tribal groups and American forces. Since the United States
withdrew at the end of 2011, the group has gained strength against Iraqi
security forces that are incapable of fully protecting civilians, and it has
taken in foreign fighters from neighboring Syria and the region. American
officials say that Islamic State is deliberately trying to tear the country
apart.

Mr. Maliki sought help from Mr. Obama at the White House in November, a
turnabout after he failed to reach a deal to keep a small number of American
troops in the country after 2011 for training and intelligence gathering.

Some 75 Hellfire air-to-ground missiles, to be fired at militant camps with the
C.I.A. providing targeting assistance, were delivered to Iraq last week and 10
reconnaissance drones are expected to follow in March. The Obama administration
also plans to provide 48 other reconnaissance drones and the first of an order
of F-16 fighter jets. It is pushing a reluctant Congress to lease and eventually
sell Apache helicopter gunships to Iraq.

The United States has a strategic interest in Iraq's stability, which is
undoubtedly at risk, making increased counterterrorism cooperation and
intelligence-sharing essential. But even the most lethal weapons will not have
much positive effect if Mr. Maliki and other Iraqi leaders bicker rather than
unite the country around shared goals through credible democratic processes. Mr.
Maliki has been central to the disorder, wielding power in favor of his Shiite
majority brethren at the expense of the minority Sunnis, stoking sectarian
conflict and enabling a climate in which militants could gain traction.

American officials say Mr. Maliki and other Iraqi officials finally understand
the dangers of the growing extremism and the fact that a security-only approach
will not bring stability. They say that Iraqi security forces have lately been
more successful against the militants and that Mr. Maliki and his government
have shown more willingness to work cooperatively with Sunnis, resolve oil
disputes with the Kurds and put in place a new agreement aimed at promoting
civil and social peace. Given his authoritarian duplicity, it is hard to be
optimistic. On Tuesday, more than 40 Sunni lawmakers submitted their
resignations from Parliament and Sunni ministers threatened to withdraw from the
Cabinet after Mr. Maliki's security forces dismantled a camp used by Sunnis
protesting second-class treatment by the Shiite-led government.

As it doles out weapons, intelligence and advice, the Obama administration needs
to press Mr. Maliki and other Iraqi leaders to do those things, to ensure that
the election in April is free and fair and to commit finally to adopting laws
that will address Sunni grievances. It also needs to be prepared to halt or
withhold deliveries of weapons if they are misused or if Mr. Maliki continues to
put his own interests over his country's.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/01/opinion/more-guns-will-not-save-iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


