                             687 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Forces' Killings of Civilians Rose in 2013

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 994 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- The Afghan government's share of blame for civilian
casualties rose drastically last year, largely reflecting an intensification in
the ground conflict between insurgents and Afghan troops, according to a new
report from the United Nations released Saturday.

The report highlighted how significantly the nature of the conflict has changed,
as American and NATO forces handed over most of the responsibility for security
to the Afghans last year.

Despite a series of high-profile complaints by President Hamid Karzai, the
United Nations' 2013 Report on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict
said that only 3 percent of civilian casualties were caused by international
forces last year.

At the same time, a decline in civilian deaths seen in 2012 was reversed, with
2,959 killed last year -- nearly the same as the civilian toll in the war's
worst year, 2011, the United Nations said. Over all, civilian casualties,
totaling 8,615, were up by 14 percent last year over 2012.

While the Taliban insurgents and their allies continued to cause by far the most
civilian casualties -- three-fourths of the total in 2013 -- the report
expressed concern about the rapid rise in the number of civilians killed in
ground fighting between government and insurgent forces, as well as the increase
in deaths attributed to government forces.

Civilian casualties caused by pro-government forces increased 59 percent last
year, while those arising from ground engagements rose 128 percent, the report
said.

Among the 3 percent of civilian casualties caused by international military
forces, the single biggest factor was airstrikes, according to data in the
report. It cited 182 civilian deaths and injuries caused by 54 airstrikes last
year. Of those, 19 were drone attacks, which more than tripled the civilian
casualties from such strikes over 2012. Previously, drone strikes in Afghanistan
were rare compared with those in neighboring Pakistan.

While quick to criticize the Americans for episodes that killed civilians, Mr.
Karzai has been far less outspoken on such actions by the insurgents and his own
government's forces, said Hadi Marifat, a Kabul spokesman for the Center for
Civilians in Conflict, an advocacy group.

''He has been selectively highlighting cases of civilian casualties for
political lobbies externally, but quite reluctant to criticize the casualties
caused by the Taliban, and that is a concern for all of us; there is a need to
depoliticize this issue,'' Mr. Marifat said.

Adela Raz, a spokeswoman for Mr. Karzai, said his office had condemned deadly
attacks carried out by insurgents as well as by international forces. She said
Mr. Karzai ''has always said that civilian casualties should not only be
decreased but completely ended.'' She added, ''The president's position in this
regard has always been clear.''

The International Security Assistance Force, as the American-led coalition is
called, issued a statement praising the United Nations report, but adding that
its ''training mission includes instilling a culture of civilian casualty
reduction within Afghan security ministries.'' I.S.A.F. said 7,500 Afghan
security personnel had been trained since 2012 in detecting and counteracting
improvised explosive devices, which, as in previous years, remain the single
largest killer of civilians, according to the United Nations.

Last year, the second biggest killer of civilians became ground engagements --
the year before, that dubious distinction went to suicide attacks -- another
indicator that government forces and insurgents were fighting many more ground
battles than they had in the past, with civilians often caught between them.

''Afghan security forces' lead responsibility for security brings with it
increased responsibility for civilian protection,'' Jan Kubis, the United
Nations head in Afghanistan, said in a statement about the report.

At a news conference, Mr. Kubis directed his harshest criticism at the Taliban
insurgents and the civilian deaths they caused.

''I would like to stress the overwhelming majority is because of the activities
and acts of the antigovernment elements, and these are the only elements that
are targeting civilians, directly targeting civilians,'' he said. ''This is a
major difference between them and those that are, unfortunately, killed in
action, for example, of pro-government forces against antigovernment elements.''

The Taliban have justified attacks on places like restaurants and mosques by
saying the presence of pro-government figures there justified the killing of
civilians.

A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabiullah Mujahid, complained in a statement
emailed to journalists that the United Nations had not given the insurgents an
advance copy of the report, but asserted that such reports in the past had been
''prepared by the U.S. Embassy in Kabul but released under the name of the
United Nations.''

''Our mujahedeen have been seriously ordered by his excellency the emir of the
faithful that they are required to avoid civilian casualties,'' Mr. Mujahid
said, referring to Taliban leader, Mullah Muhammad Omar, by an honorific title.
He also called the report ''one-sided.''

The report documented numerous instances, however, in which the insurgents
deliberately hit civilian targets. It said the Taliban publicly claimed
responsibility for 153 attacks that caused civilian casualties last year, three
times the number of such claims in 2012. The 2013 attacks killed 302 civilians.

In addition, the insurgents continued a trend to increased numbers of targeted
attacks on such noncombatants as elders, election workers and mullahs.

Attacks on mullahs and religious sites tripled in 2013, with 27 episodes
claiming 18 lives, including mullahs and religious scholars killed for
expressing pro-government views, the report said.

Mr. Kubis said the Taliban's attacks on civilians ''might border on war
crimes.'' He continued, ''They will be held accountable sooner or later.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/world/asia/report-on-afghan-deaths-shows-shift
-in-conflict.html

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An exhibit in December of photos of war victims over the last
three decades of Afghan conflict, at the ruins of Darulaman Palace. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY MAURICIO LIMA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


