                             688 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

James Bridle

BYLINE: By KATE MURPHY.

Kate Murphy is a journalist in Houston who writes frequently for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; DOWNLOAD; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 497 words


James Bridle is a British writer and artist whose work focuses on technology and
how it shapes culture and societies. He is the creator of Dronestagram, on the
photo-sharing site Instagram, which supplies images of the locations of drone
strikes as they occur.

READING Right now, ''Seeing Like a State,'' by James C. Scott, which is a
history of how states organize information -- how they developed land-use
schemes, drew up maps, did taxes, etc. It's a multi-century look at how these
systems have shaped the world much the way technology is doing now.

''Bunker Archaeology,'' by Paul Virilio, is about the German Atlantic Wall,
which was this massive series of bunkers the Germans built during World War II
all along the French coast. I particularly love it because I used to go on
summer holidays to the Channel Islands and played in these big old Nazi bunkers
as a kid. Discovering that my favorite philosopher had written this whole
treatise on them was kind of amazing.

And ''Kill Decision,'' by Daniel Suarez, is a novel about drones. All his novels
are very extreme versions of technological advances and crack-like page-turners.
I'm sort of jealous because I wish I'd written it myself. But his books are far
too fun for me to have written.

LISTENING I tend to like electronic music because it's where some of the more
avant-garde sound is coming from. For me, it's the broadest genre possible. My
latest obsessions are Holly Herndon, the Range and Machinedrum. I'm also
listening to what comes up from the recommendations of the online record store
Boomkat. They have this brilliant thing, 14tracks.com, where every couple of
weeks they select 14 tracks and you can buy the lot for 6 quid. And
thisismyjam.com is a site where you post the one track you care about right now.
It stays up for a week and then it goes away again. Like any social site, you
follow and have followers.

WATCHING At the moment I'm working my way through the backlog of presentations
from this year's Chaos Communication Congress and the Transmediale and Lift
conferences -- great talks by Trevor Paglen, Olia Lialina, Eleanor Saitta and
others. I've also recently realized how many great art films are available
online: Matthew Barney's ''Drawing Restraint 9,'' Harun Farocki's ''War at a
Distance'' and Lynn Hershman Leeson's ''Women Art Revolution'' are all essential
watches.

FOLLOWING I maintain a ridiculous number of my own blogs and follow countless
others. This is made easier by Stellar.io, a following service where you see
everyone's favorites like a tweet or a photo. If you are following lots of
people, it's a good way of filtering down a bunch of stuff while still having a
broad view of what's happening online.

SCANNING My latest acquisition is a software-defined radio -- a $10 USB stick
with an aerial, which lets me listen to the radio traffic and positioning
beacons of planes passing over my house. I live under the main flight path into
Heathrow, so there's always something going on.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/16/opinion/sunday/james-bridle.html

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY  STEVE FORREST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


