                             680 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 28, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Libya Frees 4 Americans Assigned To Embassy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK; Michael R. Gordon
reported from Washington, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Buffalo. Suliman Ali
Zway contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Thom Shanker from
Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 562 words


WASHINGTON -- Four American military personnel assigned to the United States
Embassy in Tripoli, Libya, were detained Friday and then released after being
held for hours by the country's Interior Ministry, American officials said.

The four were believed to have been reviewing potential evacuation routes for
diplomats when they were detained, according to the initial reports received by
officials in Washington. The State Department spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said they
were working on ''security preparedness efforts'' when they were taken into
custody. The area where they were said to have been detained is not far from the
main road to the Tunisian border from Tripoli, the capital.

After running into a problem at a checkpoint -- many of which are run by local
militias -- they were detained and later moved to the Ministry of the Interior,
said administration officials who asked not to be identified because they were
discussing internal reports.

Photographs of two American passports and embassy identity cards were later
disseminated on Twitter. It was not known if the passports belonged to any of
the four military personnel.

The buzzing sound of drones filled Tripoli's sky for hours as rumors spread
through the capital that four Americans were missing. Drones are not usually
heard in Tripoli, although the sound is familiar in Benghazi.

The episode took place in a town just southwest of the historic Roman ruins at
Sabratha and about an hour's drive from Tripoli, Ms. Psaki said. The area is not
known for anti-Western extremists or other obvious threats. In part because it
is a tourist area, the district around Sabratha skews relatively liberal and
friendly to Westerners.

Since the attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi that killed Ambassador
J. Christopher Stevens on Sept. 11, 2012, employees of the American Embassy have
operated with extraordinary caution.

But two years after the toppling of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, security remains
tenuous even in and around Tripoli. Libya's transitional government has not yet
managed to assemble a credible national army or police force. Many families or
clans around the country keep heavy weapons, as do autonomous local militias
formed during and after the Libyan uprising.

Rigorous security rules preclude any movements outside the heavily fortified
embassy compound without advance planning and an armed guard. The compound is
locked at night, and no one is permitted to enter or exit.

Counterterrorism has become a central focus of the work there, and the compound
brims with well-armed security officers.

The area where the Americans were said to have been detained is controlled
mainly by local tribes, not the central government, which is relatively weak
even in its own capital. And in the Libyan context, it is easy to imagine that a
foreigner with a diplomatic passport and a gun who was stopped at a checkpoint
would be presumed to be a spy and therefore detained.

The brief detention of the Americans is an experience they share with Prime
Minister Ali Zeidan. He was kidnapped from his room in a luxury hotel a few
weeks ago, but then released hours later.

In the absence of a strong central government, Libyans have demonstrated both a
propensity to use the threat of force to try to settle disputes but also a knack
for working through networks of neighbors and clans to try to avoid such
standoffs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/28/world/africa/libya.html

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


