                             685 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2014 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Despite Growing Military Budget, an Undercurrent of Skepticism

BYLINE: By SAM TANENHAUS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; THINK BACK; Pg.

LENGTH: 278 words


The continuing debate over military spending originated as a debate, at the time
of the nation's founding, over whether America should have a military at all. At
the time even conservatives like John Adams and Alexander Hamilton, both partial
to strong central government, had their doubts.

''The people of America may be said to have derived an hereditary impression of
danger to liberty, from standing armies in time of peace,'' Hamilton wrote in
The Federalist, and this was after he had come around to the idea, pointing out
that conditions in America, with its representative system that invested power
in the elected members of the legislature, differed from those in England, with
its long history, ended only in 1688, of almost ''unlimited'' authority
exercised by the monarchy.

Implicit in the founders' debate was the possibility, based on the colonial
experience, that the army might be used at home -- against dissident citizens.
And in fact at times the military has been used in this way: during
Reconstruction and during the great civil rights conflicts of the 1950s and
'60s.

The issue resurfaced again when questions were raised about the Obama
administration's drone policy. Senator Rand Paul leapt to public prominence when
he raised the possibility during his filibuster last March that drones might be
used against noncombatant citizens and demanded assurances from the attorney
general, Eric H. Holder Jr., that they would not be.

In response, Mr. Holder sent a letter to Mr. Paul. ''Does the president have the
authority to use a weaponized drone to kill an American not engaged in combat on
U.S. soil?'' Mr. Holder asked. ''The answer to that is no.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/15/us/politics/despite-growing-military-budget-an
-undercurrent-of-skepticism.html

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


