                             699 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Forecasting the Next Big Moves in Tech

BYLINE: By NICK BILTON.

Email: bilton@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; BITS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 843 words


Silicon Valley is starting to feel a little less exuberant these days.

Some big start-ups are having trouble raising money. Others are delaying plans
to go public. Hot new technologies like Bitcoin have been struggling.With all
the nervous chatter out there -- Where is this going? What's next? -- I called
on Marc Andreessen, who has lived through a bubble or two (or three).

Mr. Andreessen, a prominent venture capitalist, has been at the epicenter of the
technology business here for two decades. In the early 1990s, he was a
co-founder of one of the first major web browsers, Netscape. He went on to start
Ning, an early social site. Now, in addition to being voluble on Twitter, he
sits on the board of Facebook, eBay and Hewlett-Packard.

I got 28 minutes with him. But Mr. Andreessen speaks so quickly, it felt like an
hour and a half.

Saying ''bubble'' to a venture capitalist around here is like saying
''homework'' to a teenager. They roll their eyes and try to shoo you away. So
rather than ask if we are in the middle of another -- ahem -- bubble, I asked
Mr. Andreessen why some young companies can't seem to raise all the money they
want.

His answer: conditions ebb and flow. And right now, they are ebbing for some
companies. But for others, capital is still available.

''We have not seen any pullback so far on private investment,'' Mr. Andreessen
said. ''Actually, what we're seeing is more of the opposite right now. We're
seeing a lot more institutional money -- in particular from the hedge fund world
-- crossing over'' into tech investing.

But what about companies that can't find their way to the stock market, like Box
and Square?

Mr. Andreessen pointed to 1997 and 1998, when the market for initial public
stock offerings was briefly derailed by the Asian financial crisis. Before long,
investor interest revved up again, and the Nasdaq stock market was flying high.
(A few years later, of course, it came crashing down.)

So if a start-up can't go public just now, it's no big deal. ''The nature of the
public market is that it is manic depressive,'' Mr. Andreessen said. ''It gets
excited, it gets depressed.''

Speaking of feeling down, I asked Mr. Andreessen a question I often hear from
people outside Silicon Valley: Why can't other places build their own
valley-style tech hubs? People in cities ranging from Dublin to Berlin to New
York often ask what they are doing wrong.

Mr. Andreessen said new valleys will eventually emerge. But they won't be
Silicon Valley copycats.

Over the past couple of years, venture firms have invested in start-ups in Los
Angeles, New York, Chicago and all over China. Los Angeles, for example, is home
to Snapchat, Tinder, Whisper, Oculus VR and Beats, some of the big tech stories
of the year. Mr. Andreessen said another hot place is Atlanta, the home of
Georgia Tech.

But he offers a caveat.

''My personal view is that Silicon Valley will continue to take a
disproportionate share of the No. 1 positions in great new markets, and I think
that's just a reflection that the fact that the valley works as well as it
does,'' Mr. Andreessen said.

There is a caveat to his caveat.

In Mr. Andreessen's view, there shouldn't be 50 Silicon Valleys. Instead, there
should be 50 different kinds of Silicon Valley. For example, there could be
Biotech Valley, a Stem Cell Valley, a 3-D Printing Valley or a Drone Valley. As
he noted, there are huge regulatory hurdles in many of these fields. If a city
wanted to spur innovation around drones, for instance, it might have to remove
any local legal barriers to flying unnamed aircraft.

So what kind of valley would Marc Andreessen build? He is a big believer in
digital currencies like Bitcoin, as well as in virtual reality. He says
enterprises like Bitcoin will change the world on the scale that web browsers
did. And before long, virtual reality will be, well, reality.

Don't believe him? Mr. Andreessen recalled similar skepticism in May 1994 when
he was showing media and telecommunications executives this bizarre development
called a web browser.

''They pretty much told us we were out of minds and to go away,'' he said. Five
years later, Netscape was sold to AOL for $4.2 billion.

Finally, I couldn't end my discussion without asking him about Twitter. Over the
past several months Mr. Andreessen has become a mantle on the social network,
known for his long stream of tweets that have become known as the ''Marc
Andreessen Tweetstorm.''

So Mr. Andreessen, why the long tweets?

''My view is that 140 characters doesn't make sense anymore,'' he said. ''If it
was me, I'd immediately raise the limit to 300 or 400 characters.''

But if that doesn't happen, he's incredibly bullish on the service just the way
it is. ''The counterargument is that there is magic to the limitation,'' he
said, laying out a number of virtues around the limited character lengths. ''If
Twitter doesn't adapt, I would not view them as being stupid. I just hope they
change it because it would be a lot better for me.''

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL:
http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/05/18/marc-andreessen-on-the-future-of-silico
n-valleys-and-the-next-big-technology/

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Marc Andreessen is a big believer in digital currencies like
Bitcoin, and in virtual reality. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRED PROUSER/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


