                             697 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

White House Details Thinking on Cybersecurity Flaws

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 910 words


WASHINGTON -- In a rare insight into the government's thinking on the use of
cyberweapons, the White House on Monday published a series of questions it asks
in deciding when to make public the discovery of major flaws in computer
security or whether to keep them secret so that American intelligence agencies
can use them to enable surveillance or an attack.

The discussion came not in a presidential policy directive or a speech, like the
kind President Obama gave when describing the criteria for conducting drone
attacks, but in a blog post on the White House website. The item was posted by
Michael Daniel, the White House cybersecurity coordinator, and appeared to be
distilled from a far more detailed classified document giving guidance to the
National Security Agency, the F.B.I. and others who often exploit flaws in
Internet security.

Mr. Daniel repeated the N.S.A.'s declaration several weeks ago that ''we had no
prior knowledge of the existence of Heartbleed,'' a security vulnerability that
created widespread fears that passwords or other delicate information
transmitted by millions of computer users may have been revealed. But he
acknowledged that the Heartbleed incident had cast a light on a balancing test
the White House has until now declined to discuss in any detail: When should the
government reveal flaws that it discovers, and when should it use them for its
still-unacknowledged ''stockpile'' of flaws that would help it penetrate foreign
computer networks?

It is a heated issue inside the N.S.A. and the Pentagon. The United States made
use of four so-called zero-day vulnerabilities -- flaws that had been known for
zero days to the outside world -- to attack and disable elements of Iran's
nuclear program in an operation called Olympic Games. The United States and
Israel, which mounted that campaign, have never acknowledged their involvement,
and most of the time such vulnerabilities are exploited for more routine
actions, especially the interception of email or other Internet traffic.

But the intelligence agencies, along with the F.B.I., have argued that giving up
a key weapon in that arsenal would amount to unilateral disarmament. The White
House seems to agree.

''In the majority of cases, responsibly disclosing a newly discovered
vulnerability is clearly in the national interest,'' Mr. Daniel wrote, because
of the need to keep Internet transactions, on which the world economy heavily
depends, as secure as possible. ''This has been and continues to be the case.''

But he spent the rest of his blog entry describing what conditions might lead to
a decision not to publish the details of a flaw -- perhaps for a short time,
perhaps for much longer. ''Disclosing a vulnerability can mean that we forego an
opportunity to collect crucial intelligence that could thwart a terrorist
attack, stop the theft of our nation's intellectual property, or even discover
more dangerous vulnerabilities that are being used by hackers or other
adversaries to exploit our networks,'' Mr. Daniel wrote, describing the review
that has taken place at the White House in the past few months.

''This is an acknowledgment of the need to do offensive cyber, both espionage
and attack,'' said Jack Goldsmith, a Harvard law professor who served in the
Bush administration and has written extensively on the legal rationales for the
use of cyberweapons. ''What's notable is that the White House has now agreed
that these issues have to be considered at a higher level, that often it's a
hard call, and it's not an issue that should just be left to the N.S.A. or the
F.B.I.''

Mr. Daniel wrote that the administration has now ''established a disciplined,
rigorous and high-level decision-making process for vulnerability disclosure.''
He did not say who would participate, or whether the hardest questions would be
bounced to the president, much as he sometimes reviews the details of drone
strikes or other covert operations that could have diplomatic implications. Mr.
Daniel did not say who runs that process, but administration officials say it is
largely directed by the National Security Council, and often by Mr. Daniel
himself.

That group would weigh at least nine questions that Mr. Daniel enumerated.

The first was: ''How much is the vulnerable system used in the core Internet
infrastructure, in other critical infrastructure systems, in the U.S. economy,
and/or in national security systems?'' That seemed to suggest that a
vulnerability that had potentially wide impact on the American economy, its
utilities or the cellphone networks, for example, would be more important than
one with narrow implications.

Another question for the group to consider, he wrote, was how much harm ''an
adversary nation or criminal group'' could do with the vulnerability and whether
it would be possible to know that such a nation or group was exploiting it. In
the case of Heartbleed, the government was apparently unaware of the flaw, even
though it had existed for roughly two years.

Other questions turned to the issue of whether intelligence agencies think the
information is necessary, for surveillance or an attack, and whether there are
other ways to get it. Among the most interesting questions on the list was this
one: ''Could we utilize the vulnerability for a short period of time before we
disclose it?''

That suggests an option to allow the White House to split the difference between
its intelligence needs and the principle of public disclosure.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/29/us/white-house-details-thinking-on-cybersecuri
ty-gaps.html

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Michael Daniel (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/A.F.P. -- GETTY
IMAGES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


