                             690 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amid Escalating Violence, Israeli Strike Kills 3 Militants in Gaza

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN; Fares Akram contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 810 words


JERUSALEM -- An Israeli airstrike in the southeast Gaza Strip on Tuesday morning
killed three Palestinian militants who the Israeli military said had fired a
mortar at its soldiers patrolling near the border, hours after a pilotless
Israeli surveillance drone crashed nearby.

The two unrelated incidents in Gaza, where an uptick in cross-border violence
over the past two months has threatened a fragile cease-fire with Israel, came
amid growing outrage over Monday's fatal shooting by an Israeli soldier of a
Jordanian judge of Palestinian origin at the Allenby Bridge, which links Jordan
and the West Bank.

Even before the Gaza airstrike, Nabil Abu Rudeineh, a spokesman for President
Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority, issued a statement that condemned
Israel for ''a dangerous escalation that will lead to the destruction of what
remains of the peace process'' and could lead to ''pushing toward dangerous
situations that couldn't be controlled.''

In Jordan, several hundred protesters called for the ouster of the Israeli
ambassador and the cancellation of Jordan's 20-year-old peace treaty with Israel
during a march from a courthouse to the Parliament.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, attempting to quell the tension
with Jordan -- Israel's closest regional ally and a key player in the Middle
East peace process -- issued a statement on Tuesday expressing regret over the
killing of the judge and agreeing to establish a joint Israeli-Jordanian
investigation team.

''In light of our commitment to the peace treaty, Israel has already shared with
Jordan the results of its preliminary investigation,'' Mr. Netanyahu said in the
statement, which offered Israel's ''sympathy to the people and government of
Jordan.''

The statement came after an angry demonstration on Monday outside the Israeli
Embassy in Amman, the Jordanian capital. Jordan's foreign minister had summoned
the ranking Israeli diplomat earlier in the day for a reprimand and to request
the joint investigation.

''I hope we will begin to see, starting from tomorrow, a step-by-step
diminishing of the tension,'' Gilad Noll, the political officer at the embassy,
said by telephone Tuesday.

''I think they want to allow the people to let off some steam,'' Mr. Noll said
of the Jordanian government. ''But there is no justification for putting the
relations between us and Jordan in danger. The relations are too important for
both parties.''

Mr. Netanyahu had earlier expressed skepticism about the American-led peace
talks with the Palestinians, after Mr. Abbas reiterated his opposition to
recognizing Israel as a Jewish state on Monday night during a meeting of his
Fatah Revolutionary Council.

''We are moving away from an agreement,'' Mr. Netanyahu told members of his
political party on Tuesday, according to Twitter posts by Ofir Gendelman, his
spokesman.

''The Palestinians aren't showing any sign of willingness to reach a practical
and fair deal.''

Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israel Defense Forces, said the
deadly airstrike in the Gaza Strip occurred a few minutes after militants from
Islamic Jihad fired at Israeli troops conducting routine operations ''just on
the western side of the fence'' -- inside Gaza.

''It was just the rapid response required to take the threat out of the
equation,'' Colonel Lerner said in an interview. ''Ultimately, there is a price
to pay: If you attack our soldiers, you're putting yourself at risk.''

The Health Ministry in Gaza identified the dead men as Ismail Abu Jouda, 23;
Shaer Shanab, 24; and Abdel Shafi Abu Muammar, 33.

Their deaths brought to 13 the number of Gazans killed this year by Israeli
fire. Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of the Islamic Jihad movement in Gaza,
said in a statement that the three were affiliated with the group.

The group's spokesman, Abu Ahmed, said that the 15-month-old cease-fire with
Israel that ended eight days of violence in 2012 ''has aged'' and that Gaza's
militant groups ''should study the truce seriously again.''

Witnesses and officials in Gaza said Israeli tanks, bulldozers and troops were
operating inside the border fence, which Palestinians consider a violation of
the cease-fire agreement.

Some reported increased Israeli military movement in the area after Hamas, the
militant Islamic party that controls Gaza, issued a statement saying it had
recovered a pilotless Israeli aircraft that crashed about 8 a.m. because of
mechanical problems.

Colonel Lerner said that the crash of the surveillance drone had nothing to do
with the fatal airstrike, and that the Israeli troops whom the Islamic Jihad
members fired at had been conducting routine activities.

He said the surveillance aircraft was a Skylark ''microdrone,'' approximately
one yard by two yards, which soldiers carry and deploy as an intelligence tool
that allows them to ''see over the hill or around a corner.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/12/world/middleeast/israeli-strike-gaza.html

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Palestinians  bury the body  of an Islamic Jihad  militant  who
was killed  in an Israeli airstrike  in the  Gaza Strip.  Tuesday's  deaths
brought  to 13 the number  of Gazans  killed this year  by Israeli fire.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY IBRAHEEM ABU MUSTAFA/REUTERS)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


