                             696 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Balloon Lets Builders Check Out Future Towers' Views

BYLINE: By ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 525 words


A big white balloon appeared in New York this week. First on the Lower East
Side, then uptown, where 57th Street meets the East River.

The balloon, it turns out, frequently visits the city on business: Its job is to
photograph potential views for architects and real estate developers.

''We've taken photos from every new skyscraper in the city,'' said Curt
Westergard, the president of Digital Design and Imaging Service, a company based
in Falls Church, Va.

That is, before the buildings were built.

Mr. Westergard's balloons became popular after Sept. 11, as new laws were
enacted that placed more restrictions on urban airspace. It is illegal to fly
drones commercially over urban areas, and most commercial helicopters are not
allowed to hover at low elevations.

The balloon, which was in New York this week to take pictures at two locations,
is 12.5 feet across and travels in a trailer that opens on top, like a
jack-in-the-box. When the box opens, a mast guides the balloon, and a winch
slowly releases it into the air.

The balloon, one of five of its kind owned by Mr. Westergard's company, stays
tethered to the ground, its height precisely controlled by a laser range finder.

Its owners call the balloon Lucy, after its seamstress. Lucy has gone as high as
1,376 feet -- the height of what became 1 World Trade Center's observation deck.

From slightly lower elevations, the balloon has captured views from the future
bedrooms of buildings like One57, the slender, icy-blue high-rise under
construction on West 57th Street near the foot of Central Park.

''It's sort of like the buttons in an elevator,'' Mr. Westergard said. ''Where
do you want to go? Let's go to the penthouse.''

The photos inform both design and pricing. ''We're constantly providing
information,'' he said. ''We know what's a great floor and what's a terrible
floor.''

He added: ''The city isn't static; all these things are rising at different
rates and everyone's trying to get ahead. They're adjusting each floor as they
go.''

Mr. Westergard said the information could be rather specific: ''How high do I
need to go to see the Statue of Liberty? Here you can see her hand, but here you
can see her gown.''

His tethered balloons have been put to other uses, too. They count crowds at
events where helicopters might interrupt speeches -- like the 50th anniversary
commemoration of the March on Washington at the Lincoln Memorial last year, and
the 2009 presidential inauguration.

Mr. Westergard, a registered landscape architect turned designer and inventor,
has other plans for the balloons. He wants to use them outside cities to hang
nets where drones can rest, prolonging their time in the air.

On the Upper East Side, no one seemed to panic at the sight of a slightly
antiquated-looking, ovular balloon hovering overhead on Monday morning.

A private chauffeur, Chris Kluczyk, spotted it near Sutton Place. ''It was going
up and down,'' he said. ''I couldn't tell you what it said.''

Most people paid the balloon no mind, Mr. Westergard said.

''They either had their heads in their phones, or they straightened their
jackets and patted their hair. They thought they were being filmed.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/24/nyregion/balloon-lets-builders-check-out-futur
e-towers-views.html

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   An aerial shot taken from a big balloon that is used to scout
views of the Manhattan skyline for future skyscraper projects. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
AIRPHOTOSLIVE.COM)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


