                             692 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Ship, in Plain View but Shrouded in Mystery, Looks Very Familiar to U.S.

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 831 words


WASHINGTON -- Iran is building a nonworking mock-up of an American
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier that United States officials say may be
intended to be blown up for propaganda value.

Intelligence analysts studying satellite photos of Iranian military
installations first noticed the vessel rising from the Gachin shipyard, near
Bandar Abbas on the Persian Gulf, last summer. The ship has the same distinctive
shape and style of the Navy's Nimitz-class carriers, as well as the Nimitz's
number 68 neatly painted in white near the bow. Mock aircraft can be seen on the
flight deck.

The Iranian mock-up, which American officials described as more like a barge
than a warship, has no nuclear propulsion system and is only about two-thirds
the length of a typical 1,100-foot-long Navy carrier. Intelligence officials do
not believe that Iran is capable of building an actual aircraft carrier.

''Based on our observations, this is not a functioning aircraft carrier; it's a
large barge built to look like an aircraft carrier,'' said Cmdr. Jason Salata, a
spokesman for the Navy's Fifth Fleet in Bahrain, across the Persian Gulf from
Iran. ''We're not sure what Iran hopes to gain by building this. If it is a big
propaganda piece, to what end?''

Whatever the purpose, American officials acknowledged on Thursday that they
wanted to reveal the existence of the vessel to get out ahead of the Iranians.

Navy and other American intelligence analysts surmise that the vessel, which
Fifth Fleet wags have nicknamed the Target Barge, is something that Iran could
tow to sea, anchor and blow up -- while filming the whole thing to make a
propaganda point, if, say, the talks with the Western powers over Iran's nuclear
program go south.

Iran has previously used barges as targets for missile firings during training
exercises, filmed the episodes and then televised them on the state-run news
media, Navy officials said.

''It is not surprising that Iranian military forces might use a variety of
tactics -- including military deception tactics -- to strategically communicate
and possibly demonstrate their resolve in the region,'' said an American
official who has closely followed the construction of the mock-up.

But while Iran has tried to conceal its underground nuclear-related sites, the
Iranian Navy has taken no steps to cloak from prying Western satellites what it
is building pierside at the busy shipyard. ''The system is often too opaque to
understand who hatched this idea, and whether it was endorsed at the highest
levels,'' said Karim Sadjadpour, an Iran expert at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.

Iran has sought to exploit captured or pirated American military technology in
the past. Last year, Iran's political and military elite boasted that their
forces had shot down an American intelligence-gathering drone, a remotely
piloted Navy vehicle called ScanEagle that they quickly put on display for the
Iranian news media.

Navy officials responded that no drones had been shot down by enemy fire,
although the Pentagon acknowledged at the time that it had lost a small number
of ScanEagles, likely to engine malfunction.

Iranian Navy officials could not be immediately reached for comment as the
country prepared to celebrate its New Year festivities on Friday. American
intelligence officials cited a photograph taken on Feb. 22 in Bandar Abbas and a
brief description in Persian of the vessel on a website for Iran's Ministry of
Industry, Mines and Trade.

For now, Navy analysts and American intelligence officials say they are not
unduly concerned about the mock ship. But the fact that the Iranians are
building it, presumably for some mysteriously bellicose purposes, contrasts with
the fact that the Iranians stepped back from their typically heavy anti-American
posture during a recent naval exercise in the gulf.

Until recently, Iranian fast-attack boats have harassed American warships, and
the government in Tehran has deployed remotely piloted aircraft that carry
surveillance pods and that may someday carry rockets.

With Iran's multiple political bases of power, the government's purposes can be
hard to decipher. After the temporary nuclear agreement was reached in November
between the world powers and the moderate government of Iran's president, Hassan
Rouhani, it was unclear to American officials whether Iran's hard-line Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps might try to provoke a conflict with the United
States Navy to undercut the accord.

The navy of the Revolutionary Guards consists of fast-attack speedboats with
high-powered machine guns and torpedoes, and crews that in the past employed
guerrilla tactics, including swarming perilously close to American warships.

When the mock-up will take its maiden voyage -- if it ever does -- is anyone's
guess, analysts said. The vessel is nearing completion, they said, and will
presumably be shipped by rail on tracks that run through the shipyard, to its
destiny in the Persian Gulf just a few hundred yards away.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/21/world/middleeast/a-ship-being-built-in-iran-lo
oks-awfully-familiar-to-the-us.html

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


