                              69 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Use of Drones for Killings Risks a War Without End, Panel Concludes in Report

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 987 words


WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration's embrace of targeted killings using
armed drones risks putting the United States on a ''slippery slope'' into
perpetual war and sets a dangerous precedent for lethal operations that other
countries might adopt in the future, according to a report by a bipartisan panel
that includes several former senior intelligence and military officials.

The group found that more than a decade into the era of armed drones, the
American government has yet to carry out a thorough analysis of whether the
costs of routine secret killing operations outweigh the benefits. The report
urges the administration to conduct such an analysis and to give a public
accounting of both militants and civilians killed in drone strikes.

The findings amount to a sort of report card -- one that delivers middling
grades -- a year after President Obama gave a speech promising new guidelines
for drone strikes and greater transparency about the killing operations. The
report is especially critical of the secrecy that continues to envelop drone
operations and questions whether they might be creating terrorists even as they
are killing them.

''There is no indication that a U.S. strategy to destroy Al Qaeda has curbed the
rise of Sunni Islamic extremism, deterred the establishment of Shia Islamic
extremist groups or advanced long-term U.S. security interests,'' the report
concludes.

The panel includes a number of former Pentagon and C.I.A. officials and is
jointly led by retired General John P. Abizaid, the former head of United States
Central Command, and Rosa Brooks, a fellow at the New America Foundation and a
law professor at Georgetown University. Other members of the group are Philip
Mudd, a former deputy director of the C.I.A.'s Counterterrorism Center; Jeffrey
Smith, who served as the C.I.A.'s general counsel during the Clinton
administration; and John B. Bellinger III, the legal adviser to the National
Security Council and the State Department during the administration of George W.
Bush.

The report will be publicly released on Thursday morning by the Stimson Center,
a nonpartisan Washington think tank. The New York Times was given a copy of the
report in advance of its release.

Caitlin Hayden, a White House spokeswoman, said, ''I'm not in a position to
comment on a report that hasn't been released yet, but we look forward to
reviewing it.''

''The administration is exploring ways we can provide more information about the
United States' use of force in counterterrorism operations outside areas of
active hostilities, including information that provides the American people with
a better understanding of U.S. assessments of civilian casualties,'' she said,
adding that the United States needs to preserve ''the ability to continue those
operations.''

The report challenges some widespread criticisms of armed drones. Arguing that
they should neither be ''glorified nor demonized,'' it said there was strong
evidence that civilian deaths from armed drone strikes are far fewer than from
traditional combat aircraft. The panel also said there was little reason to
conclude that drones create a ''PlayStation mentality'' -- turning war into a
video game that eliminates the psychological costs to drone pilots.

In fact, the report said, because drone pilots watch their targets sometimes for
days and weeks before pulling the trigger -- and then see them blown up on a
high-resolution video screen -- they are more susceptible to post-traumatic
stress than pilots of manned aircraft.

The panel instead reserves the bulk of its criticism for how two successive
American presidents have conducted a ''long-term killing program based on secret
rationales,'' and how too little thought has been given to what consequences
might be spawned by this new way of waging war.

The Obama administration has been reluctant to make public any of the legal
underpinnings of the targeted killing program. As part of Freedom of Information
Act lawsuits brought by the The Times and the American Civil Liberties Union, a
federal appeals court this week released a redacted version of a 2010 Justice
Department memo that blessed as legal the effort to kill Anwar al-Awlaki, the
radical Muslim cleric and American citizen who died in a 2011 C.I.A. drone
strike in Yemen. One section of the memo, a compilation of evidence to support
administration claims that Mr. Awlaki had become an operational terrorist who
posed a direct threat to Americans, remained redacted.

Some of the panel's recommendations have already been embraced -- although not
yet adopted -- by the Obama administration. One of the recommendations, shifting
responsibility from the C.I.A. to the Pentagon for the bulk of drone operations,
was first discussed by White House officials last May although the C.I.A.
continues to carry out drone strikes in Pakistan and Yemen. It is unclear when,
if ever, the C.I.A. will be taken off the mission of firing missiles from armed
drones.

The panel's recommendation that the government release information about drone
victims follows a provision the Senate Intelligence Committee included in its
authorization bill last year demanding that the Obama administration give an
annual report about the number of militants and civilians killed and injured in
drone strikes. But intelligence officials fought the provision and Senators
quietly stripped it from the bill in April.

The report raised warnings that other countries might adopt the same rationale
as the United States has for carrying out lethal strikes outside of declared war
zones. Using an example of a current crisis, it said that Russia could use armed
drones in Ukraine under the justification that it was killing anti-Russian
terrorists and then refuse to disclose the intelligence that served as the basis
for the strike.

''In such circumstances,'' the report asked, ''how could the United States
credibly condemn Russian targeted killings?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/26/world/use-of-drones
-for-killings-risks-a-war-without-end-panel-concludes-in-report.html

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


