                             691 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Three Faces of President Obama

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1127 words


BARACK OBAMA is surely the first president to be accused of acting in foreign
policy like Pollyanna, John Wayne and Henry Kissinger in the same month.

Ever since Russian President Vladimir Putin's land grab in Crimea, conservatives
have denounced President Obama as a man who doesn't appreciate what a merciless,
Hobbesian world this really is. He's a Pollyanna -- always looking for people's
good side. Meanwhile, liberals have been hammering Obama for what they say is
his trigger-happy drone habit, having ordered the targeted killing by air of
hundreds of individuals; he's John Wayne, seeking vigilante justice against
those who have harmed, or might be planning to harm, the United States. And,
just to round things out, Obama has been accused by critics on the left and
right of being a Kissingerian hyperrealist who is content to watch the Syrian
regime crush its people, because, as tragic as that is, American interests there
are minimal.

It can't be easy being Pollyanna, John Wayne and Henry Kissinger all at once. So
who is Obama -- really -- on foreign policy? I'd say less Pollyanna than his
critics claim, more John Wayne and Henry Kissinger than he'd admit, but still
undefined when it comes to the greatest leadership challenges in foreign policy
-- which go beyond Crimea but lurk just over the horizon.

If Obama has been a reluctant warrior in Crimea, it's because it's long been
part of Russia and home to a Russian naval base, with many of its people
sympathetic to Russia. Obama was right to deploy the limited sanctions we have
in response to Putin's seizure of Crimea and try to coolly use diplomacy to
prevent a wider war over Ukraine -- because other forces are at play on Putin.
Do not underestimate how much of a fool Putin will make of himself in Crimea
this weekend -- in front of the whole world -- and how much this will blow back
on Russia, whose currency and stock markets are getting hammered as a result of
Vladimir's Crimean adventure.

Putin has organized, basically overnight, a secession referendum on Crimea's
future -- without allowing any time for the opposition to campaign. It's being
held under Russian military occupation, in violation of Ukraine's Constitution,
with effectively two choices on the ballot: ''Vote 1 if you want to become part
of Russia,'' or ''Vote 2 if you really want to become part of Russia.'' This is
not the action of a strong, secure leader. By Monday, it should have its own
Twitter hashtag: #Putinfarce.

And if Obama has been a Kissingerian realist in his reluctance to dive into the
Syrian civil war, or Ukraine, it's because he has learned from Iraq and
Afghanistan that the existence of bad guys in these countries doesn't mean that
their opponents are all good guys. Too many leaders in all these countries
turned out to be more interested in using their freedom to loot rather than
liberate. Where authentic reformers emerge in Syria or Ukraine we should help
them, but, unlike Senator John McCain, most Americans are no longer willing to
be suckers for anyone who just sings our song (see dictionary for Hamid Karzai),
and they are now wary of owning the bailouts and gas bills of countries we don't
understand.

As for John Wayne Obama, ''the quickest drone in the West,'' every American
president needs a little of that in today's world, where you now have legions of
superempowered angry people who wish America ill and who have access to rockets
and live in ungoverned spaces.

So I have no problem with Obama as John Wayne or Henry Kissinger. If you want to
criticize or praise him on foreign policy, the real tests fall into two
categories: 1) How good is he at leading from behind on Ukraine? And 2) How good
is he at leading from in front on Russia, Iran and China?

There is probably no saving Crimea from Putin in the short term, but we do not
want to see him move beyond Crimea and absorb the parts of eastern Ukraine where
the Russophones reside. We should be ready to offer arms to the Ukraine
government to prevent that. But let us never lose sight of the fact that the key
to keeping more of Ukraine out of Russia's paws will depend on the ability of
Ukrainians to come together in a way that is inclusive of both the majority that
sees its future with the European Union and the minority of Russophones who
still feel some affinity for Russia.

If the Ukraine drama pits a united Ukraine -- seeking a noncorrupt democracy
tied to Europe -- against a Putin trying to forcibly reintegrate Ukraine into a
Russian empire, Putin loses. But if Ukrainians are divided, if hyper-nationalist
parties there dominate and pro-Russians are alienated, Putin will discredit the
Ukraine liberation movement and use the divisions to justify his own
interventions. Then our help will be useless. We can't help them if they won't
help themselves. Ukrainians have already wasted a quarter-century not getting
their act together the way Poland did.

The big three issues where Obama must lead from the front are: changing the
character of Russia's government, preventing Iran from getting a nuke and
preventing a war in the South China Sea between Beijing and Tokyo. I will save
China and Iran for later.

But regarding Russia, I vehemently opposed NATO expansion because I held the
view then, and hold it today, that there is no big geopolitical problem that we
can solve without Russia's cooperation. That requires a Russia that does not
define its greatness by opposing us and recreating the Soviet empire, but by
unleashing the greatness of its people. It is increasingly clear that that will
never be Putin's Russia, which stands for wholesale corruption, increasing
repression and a zero-sum relationship with the West. Putin is looking for
dignity for Russia now in all the wrong places -- and ways. But only Russia's
people can replace Putinism.

The way the United States and European Union help, which will take time, is by
forging new energy policies that will diminish Europe's dependency on Russian
gas -- the mother's milk of Putinism. But we Americans also have to work harder
to make our country a compelling example of capitalism and democracy, not just
the world's cleanest dirty shirt when it comes to our economy and not just the
best democracy money can buy when it comes to our politics.

The most important thing we could do to improve the prospects of democracy in
the world ''is to fix our democracy at home,'' said Larry Diamond, a democracy
specialist at Stanford University. ''The narrative of American decline and
democratic dysfunction damages the luster of democracy in the world and the
decisions of people to feel it is a model worth emulating. That is in our power
to change. If we don't reform and repair democracy in the United States, it is
going to be in trouble globally.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/16/opinion/sunday/friedman-the-three-faces-of-pre
sident-obama.html

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Pro-Russian  protesters  rallied  recently in  Simferopol,
Ukraine, in  the Crimea  region. The  divisions in  Ukraine make  it complicated
for the West  to get  involved. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SERGEY PONOMAREV FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (SR11)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


