                             695 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Earnings and Sales From Google Disappoint

BYLINE: By DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 843 words


SAN FRANCISCO -- Alexander the Great is said to have wept because he ran out of
kingdoms to conquer. Google is eager to avoid such a miserable fate.

Its core digital advertising business is so dominant that analysts are
questioning just how much it can continue to grow. So Google is unleashing its
vast cash hoard on robotics, artificial intelligence, smart thermostats and,
just this week, high-altitude drone satellites.

The only thing all these acquisitions have in common is a focus on the future --
often, the distant future.

The risk in thinking about what will be big in 2050, however, is that you can
lose sight of 2014.

Google's first-quarter earnings report, released after the market closed on
Wednesday, surprised Wall Street. The company has traditionally gushed profits
without breaking a sweat. Now it takes more of an effort.

One big reason was a problem of several years' standing: Internet users are
migrating to mobile devices, but ads on phones and tablets still do not have the
familiarity and appeal they do on bigger computers. And they are not as
profitable for Google. Google's ad volume jumped 26 percent in the quarter,
which sounds good but is less than expected, while the amount advertisers pay
dropped 9 percent, which sounds bad and is.

There were other potentially worrisome notes. Operating expenses were 35 percent
of revenue, compared with 31 percent in the first quarter of 2013. One reason:
acquiring companies at a rapid clip entails specialist fees and other costs.

Then there were real estate and construction costs, as Google races with Amazon
to build out the computing cloud for potential customers. The company needs a
lot of data centers. That raised capital expenditures to $2.35 billion, up from
$1.2 billion in 2013. Google said it expected expenditures to remain high.

Revenue was ostensibly impressive for the quarter, rising 19 percent, to $15.42
billion, but that was about $100 million short of expectations. Net income was
$3.45 billion, and earnings per share were $5.04, compared with $4.97 in 2013,
slightly weaker than forecast.

The stock, which was up strongly earlier in the day, immediately fell 5 percent
before partly recovering. Google split its shares this month, a move that
solidified the founders' control over the company.

''The issue with Google is, you want to support the management in their efforts
to find new revenue streams, but you don't want them to act careless with
shareholder capital,'' said Colin Gillis of BGC Partners.

Google's efforts to find those new streams have intensified recently. It
acquired several robotic companies, including Boston Dynamics, maker of BigDog,
Cheetah and other mechanical creatures. It bought Nest Labs, which developed an
innovative thermostat, for $3.2 billion.

And just this week it bought Titan Aerospace, which makes drone satellites.
Google said Titan, which was founded in 2012 and has about 20 employees, could
help bring Internet access to millions and help solve problems like
deforestation. The purchase price was not disclosed but is believed to be around
$75 million.

With $59 billion in cash in the bank and a well-oiled machine that every quarter
generates billions more, Google can clearly afford to buy all sorts of
companies. Generally Wall Street has indulged these acquisitions, even the
unusual ones.

''All the crazy stuff like robotics is the best thing for the company,'' said
Gene Munster, an analyst with Piper Jaffray. ''Investors feel like it's a
company that going to continue to find ways to grow. It's a big contrast with
Apple, whose investors are begging them to do more crazy stuff.''

Mr. Gillis is more skeptical. ''Do you trust Google's management as
visionaries?'' he asked. The analyst questioned the Nest purchase. Making
thermostats does not fit in with Google's core advertising operation, he said.
Neither do the robots.

In absolute terms, Google is doing very well. Here is one way to measure its
heft: The company is projected to increase its digital ad revenue this year by
more than $5 billion, which is more than the total ad revenue of Yahoo or
Microsoft.

The only viable threat to Google comes from Facebook, whose ad revenue is
forecast by eMarketer to jump 50 percent this year. Facebook's revenue is about
a quarter of Google's.

Google's position on the decline in its profits for mobile ads? Don't worry
about it.

''I believe in the medium to long term that mobile pricing has to be better than
desktop,'' Nikesh Arora, Google's senior vice president and chief business
officer, said on a conference call with analysts. His reasoning is that knowing
where the customer physically is will command a premium.

The ''holy grail,'' he added, will be when they start their campaign on the site
instead of merely concluding it there.

One analyst noted on the call that Google had 10 percent of the worldwide
advertising market.

''That tells me there's 90 percent more opportunity around the world,'' Mr.
Arora said. ''We don't constrain ourselves and our thinking. We'd like more than
we have in every market out there.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/17/technology/google-revenue-jumps-but-misses-for
ecasts.html

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Google's revenue rose 19 percent, to $15.42 billion, but was
$100 million short of expectations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES)
(B2)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


