                             701 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Troops Move on Militants in Tribal Area of Pakistan

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and
Declan Walsh from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 703 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Pakistani soldiers seized control of a neighborhood
dominated by foreign Islamist militants in the North Waziristan tribal district
on Thursday as part of the most concerted military operation in the area in
several years, a senior security official said.

Over 1,000 troops, backed by tanks and helicopter gunships, moved after dawn
into a neighborhood on the edge of the district's main town, Miram Shah, that
had become a sanctuary for Uzbek and Chinese fighters, said the official, who
spoke on the condition of anonymity.

Residents said an intense two-hour artillery bombardment preceded the operation,
during which Pakistani-made surveillance drones hovered overhead.

But the troops met little resistance because most residents of the area, known
as Matches Camp, had evacuated their homes a day earlier after being warned to
leave by the authorities. ''No one is left there now,'' said the security
official.

It was the second day of muscular military operations in North Waziristan, a
tribal district along the Afghan border that is largely controlled by Pakistani
Taliban and foreign fighters.

On Wednesday, Pakistani jet fighters and helicopter gunships pounded targets in
Miram Shah and Mir Ali, a nearby town that is also a militant hub. The military
said 81 people, mostly militants, died in the airstrikes and related ground
fighting.

The fighting was among the most aggressive actions in years by the Pakistan Army
in an area that is better known as the principal target of C.I.A. drone strikes
in Pakistan, and whose large militant population is a periodic source of tension
between Pakistani and American officials.

Analysts cautioned that the surge in fighting did not appear to be the start of
a much-anticipated military offensive across North Waziristan -- a longstanding
demand of American officials. But it did appear to spell an effective end to
faltering peace talks between the government and the Pakistani Taliban.

''The talks will fizzle out if this campaign continues,'' said Talat Masood, a
retired general and political analyst. ''The military leadership feels the
militants aren't serious about talking -- and I think the civilian leadership is
starting to see that too.''

The talks, which were instigated in February by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif,
have stalled amid violent Taliban infighting, continuing Taliban suicide attacks
in the major cities, and tensions with the military over how much to concede to
the militants.

A major military operation in North Waziristan would require support from Afghan
and NATO forces across the border, said Mr. Masood, and that is unlikely before
the second round of Afghanistan's presidential election on June 14.

In a statement, the Pakistani military described Thursday's assault on Matches
Camp -- named for a derelict match factory in the area -- as a response to
attacks on army installations in Miram Shah a day earlier.

But several officials said the assaults also targeted ethnic Uighur fighters
allied with the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, a Chinese Islamist separatist
group whose presence in Pakistan has long been the cause of Chinese government
complaints.

On Thursday, at least 31 people were killed and 94 injured in explosions at a
market in Urumqi, the capital of the Xinjiang region of western China, in what
Beijing termed a ''terrorist attack.'' There was no claim of responsibility, but
the Chinese authorities have blamed the East Turkestan group for similar
attacks.

The Uighur fighters, who are dotted across militant havens in Waziristan, are an
embarrassment to Mr. Sharif, who sees China as a crucial economic and military
partner for Pakistan. On Thursday his brother Shahbaz Sharif, the chief minister
of Punjab Province, signed an agreement with Chinese officials in Shanghai for
the construction of a commuter train line in Lahore.

The army said it defused two improvised explosive devices and lost four men -- a
major and three soldiers -- during Wednesday's operations.

As always, no independent confirmation of the death tolls was available. Few
reporters remain in North Waziristan, and human rights groups say that those who
do are subject to harassment and intimidation from militants and the military.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/23/world/asia/pakistani-troops-take-control-of-mi
litant-dominated-area.html

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


