                             700 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Six Hours at a Festival, the Sound of Extremes Colliding

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 749 words


''Hardcore Activity in Progress,'' a one-night, 15-act concert Friday at the
Knockdown Center in Maspeth, Queens, represented an idea. The idea was the sound
of extremes -- going for it, boundary-testing, hardness -- across musical
languages. So, for instance, there was the noise band Wolf Eyes, the cello
improviser Okkyung Lee, the grindcore group Napalm Death, the rapper Gunplay,
the post-minimal piano rhapsodist Lubomyr Melnyk, the free-jazz trio the Thing,
and the electronic musician Tim Hecker, presented in overlapping sets, in three
different parts of a 50,000-square-foot former door-frame factory.

As an idea, the concert, part of the month of activities put on by the Red Bull
Music Academy New York, was not a concession, or an easy sell. It had the allure
of a challenge: Single-night, single-venue, can-you-take-it? aesthetic
scrimmages like this become landmarks, victories for the cause of listening
widely. They don't happen often enough. However this one turned out, it would be
memorable. Right?

It's still a good idea, but it might be remembered for negative reasons. A
flood-warning rainstorm pushed water indoors, where it pooled up near the main
stage. A recent ruling by the state liquor authority prevented the sale of
alcohol in the building. (That is a loss, because aggressive, not particularly
pleasant music -- and six-hour, wander-around concerts in stand-up venues -- go
rather well with alcohol.) There was an unreasonable amount of security for what
was more or less an art experiment.

And the sound at the Knockdown Center was basically garbage: echoey, booming,
diffuse, nonsensical. It also wasn't great at last year's Red Bull Music Academy
event in the same space, ''Drone Activity in Progress,'' but that concert had a
few other things going for it -- the novelty of the just-opened space, and the
music itself, drone and noise and power-electronics, either carefully conceived
or more energetic. Anyway, on Friday, some good sets -- by the Thing and Ms.
Lee, for instance -- were impeded by poor acoustics or competing rackets coming
from nearby. And some bad sets were made worse.

It could be argued that the overlapping and bleed-through between two of the
three stages, and the aesthetic clashes therein, amounted to the point of the
night, the added value. It sounds cool in theory anyway. On Instagram, before
his set, Mr. Hecker wrote ''Interzone between Napalm Death and Gunplay,'' and
posted a 10-second video with sound, shot from a space between the stages where
those two acts were playing simultaneously. That is as good a representation of
the concert as this review will ever be. It also restricts the concert to 10
seconds, rather than a quarter of a day.

The thing about self-conscious hardness in music is that it often puts attack
before tone. Attack as the main priority can get boring quickly, because it's
impersonal; it's rhetorical. Tone is the self, human and complex, the opposite
of boringness. The two don't have to be mutually exclusive.

But tell that to Wolf Eyes, who played a kind of hard, dithering Dada, for
guitar, voice, electronics and drum machine -- a joke that never gets funnier.
Or Napalm Death -- formulaic, just fine, but monochromatic and rhythmically
lumpy. Or Gunplay, whose hardness lived a little in his voice but more in his
subjects: money in ''Finals,'' drive-by shootings in ''Drop Da Tint.'' Or
Clipping, a trio from Los Angeles, spewing out coldly rapped hyper-syncopations
over backgrounds of digital static. Or the singer Yoshiko Ohara, whose solo
project is not extreme so much as deeply dull: she sits in a chair, back turned
to the audience, harmonizing indistinctly against an ambient jumble.

Mr. Melnyk, after Ms. Ohara and before Napalm Death, had a half-hour to himself
in the building's central space, playing an amplified baby-grand piano on a
riser. His set was an outlier and a redeemer; his music, made of wide, rapid,
rolling arpeggios, keeps to simple rhythms and comes close to vapidity, but it
creates overtones and a sustained high, and didn't have to bother with
aggression per se. It had greater concerns.

The same went for possibly the best performance I saw all night: a solo set by
the electric guitarist Reg Bloor, who speed-strummed and power-riffed on her Les
Paul through a harmonizing pedal, playing loud, structured, harmonically complex
pieces, centering on strange chords, sometimes evoking Jimmy Page, sometimes an
orchestra. It was committed and complex, and never let up.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/19/arts/music/hardcore-activity-in-progress-batte
rs-the-knockdown-center.html

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Hardcore Activity in Progress  The rapper Gunplay, top,
fulminated about money and drive-by shootings in his set at the Knockdown
Center. The cellist Okkyung Lee, above left, was hindered by poor acoustics. The
post-minimal pianist Lubomyr Melnyk, above right, kept it simple. (PHOTOGRAPHS
BY DAVE SANDERS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


