                             708 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

ISIS Storms the Barricades, Justices Unite, and Republicans Sing

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES.

Francis X. Clines is an editorial writer for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; QUICK HISTORY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1049 words


ISIS? What is ISIS? Much of the world labored to answer this question as the
Iraqi Army and government continued to reel backward from the scorched earth
assault of Sunni Arab militant extremists marching under the banner of ''the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.''

This is ISIS, the fierce insurgency dedicated to the wholesale ratcheting up of
the Middle East's already considerable instability. In a matter of weeks, the
movement has so successfully blitzed through western and northern Iraq that it
effectively took control of the nation's entire western border, with intimations
of de facto statehood in its swagger.

The success and uncompromising violence of ISIS war stratagems against the
Shiite government in Baghdad has the Obama administration, its allies and even a
few enemies scrambling to stiffen Iraq's resolve. The United States urgently
proposed formation of a new unity government, one that would necessarily have to
include enough credible representation for the nation's beleaguered Sunni
minority to finally blunt ISIS momentum.

Drastic reform was far from a certainty this weekend, however, as Baghdad
politicians groped for some fast compromise in advance of the meeting of
Parliament scheduled for Monday to take up the threat to the nation. The Shiite
whose party holds the most votes in Parliament, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal
al-Maliki, was showing no appetite for concessions. Even some past supporters
had to admit that Mr. Malaki could never lead a reformed government, considering
how harshly he had treated Sunnis in the past, with sweeping arrests of their
political leaders and abuse of their communities. As politicians searched for a
solution, localized fallout from the ISIS push grew bloody. Community atrocities
between Sunnis and Shiites were reported to be on the rise -- an echo of
sectarian vengeance during the huge American incursion in Iraq a decade ago.

Hardly consulted in the political frenzy in Baghdad was ISIS, whose leaders had
previously made known a grand plan that looks well beyond remapping Iraq. Their
stated goal is to obliterate the existing Middle Eastern borders drawn as
spheres of influence by Western colonial powers after World War I. They aim to
undo ''the partitioning of Muslim lands by Crusader powers.'' Middle East
scholars are not surprised at the militant push toward fresh partitions of the
region, particularly as the clashing forces of the 2011 Arab uprisings continue
to play out.

As the ISIS machine is finally taken seriously, ironies abound, none greater
than Syria, Iran and the United States suddenly appearing to be fighting a
common enemy. Not side by side, but with limited, separate support including
armed drones and an estimated 300 commandos and military advisers President
Obama dispatched to take a noncombat measure of the situation; Iranian
surveillance drones and other war aid; and border raids on ISIS camps by Syrian
jet fighters. ''The momentum is with ISIS,'' one Western official warned. ''They
grow and grow every day.''

A world away, the White House maintained its resistance to calls to return to
the Iraq battlefield. It's been two and a half years since President Obama had
American forces withdrawn from a conflict that cost the lives of more than 4,400
American soldiers and, as demonstrated by the rising threat from ISIS, failed to
ensure long-term stability.

Phones and Primaries

Domestic issues of modern life seemed the preferred distraction for Americans,
including preoccupation with their smartphones' inviolability. Reassurance was
offered in the Supreme Court's unanimous mandate that the police need warrants
to search the cellphones of people they arrest.

The Supreme Court wound down to summer with other decisions, including a
unanimous ruling that struck down the president's power to make appointments to
government during brief congressional recesses. If there was a burning global
issue intruding on the domestic front last week, it tended toward the World Cup
and how far the American soccer team could get now that it had managed to
qualify for the elimination round despite a loss to Germany. As usual, the
soccer tournament provided something of a global sigh of relief, an exuberant
distraction from the world's lethal routine. The worst form of violence on the
football pitch was the shoulder bite one player inflicted on another. (The
underside of the nationalism driving the tournament was evident, of course, as
Uruguayans raged at the banning of their superstar, despite his history of
biting rivals.)

In politics, Americans continued to watch the primary elections for signs of
whether the Tea Party was waxing or waning in its knack for driving the
Republican Party ever more rightward. The value of the federal government itself
and its relationship to the states was at issue in the Republicans' primary
runoff in Mississippi. The longtime incumbent, Senator Thad Cochran, had to come
from behind to prevail by standing his party's race-based ''Southern strategy''
on its head with its traditional appeal to white bias. Mr. Cochran turned in
desperation to liberal black Democrats to vote, as is permitted in the G.O.P.
primary, and help protect the rich pipeline of federal aid the senator
engineered to keep the state afloat. They did come over and vote, and the
senator won.

They Shall Overcome

By grand coincidence on election Tuesday, the congressional power who benefited
most from the Cochran victory, the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell,
could be seen in Washington holding hands and swaying uncertainly in a
bipartisan line of lawmakers singing ''We Shall Overcome.'' The song had nothing
to do with overcoming Senator McConnell's Tea Party antagonists. It was a scene
of celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, a
milestone for the nation that, not so incidentally, saw Republicans react by
conjuring their Southern strategy to corner the votes of whites, not blacks.

Bloggers termed the sight of Mr. McConnell cringe-worthy as ''We Shall
Overcome'' rang out and he held gingerly to a swaying Democrat. His fellow
Republican, House Speaker John A. Boehner, managed to half-mumble along as
Democrats bellowed out every word. Mr. McConnell mainly offered his signature
grin of sufferance, but perhaps he was humming along.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/29/opinion/sunday/isis-storms-the-barricades-just
ices-unite-and-republicans-sing.html

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Supporters of Senator Thad Cochran cheer the news that he
defeated State Senator Chris McDaniel, a Tea Party-backed challenger, in the
Republican primary runoff. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS TODD/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


