                              70 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           January 15, 2014 Wednesday
                              WED REGIONAL Edition

No drones to be allowed for hunting in Colorado

BYLINE: Scott Willoughby

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 784 words


In the futuristic fight to ban the use of drones for scouting and hunting
wildlife in Colorado, it's difficult to discern where satire ends and reality
begins.

For now, at least, it appears Colorado sportsmen no longer need to fear
distraction by all the buzzing and whining in the air. And they won't have to
worry about any actual drones, either.

Colorado's Parks and Wildlife Commission on Friday unanimously approved a
measure prohibiting the use of unmanned aircraft, or drones, as an aid in
scouting, hunting and taking of wildlife, pre emptively putting to rest an issue
that many perceive as a looming threat to the ethics of "fair chase" hunting.

The state already bans the use of manned aircraft to scout game within 48 hours
of hunting. Although there have been no reported incidents of hunters making use
of drone technology to locate and hunt game animals in Colorado, the rapid
development of drone technology for everything from wildlife management to
doorstep package delivery had sportsmen and state officials on high alert in
anticipation of such use.

"Who would have thought there might be any support for the use of drones in
scouting and hunting purposes?" said Paul Navarre, an avid big game hunter from
Fort Collins. "The phrase 'build it and they will come' surely is a possibility
in this age of high tech. And we surely are a land of inventors, private and
corporate. We are also in a land where the current generation has become
accustomed to high tech devices to make their lives easier at home or in the
field."

While the vast majority of Colorado sportsmen chiming in on the topic fall in
step with Navarre and the PWC, at least one organization has deemed the measure
presumptuous, relying upon satire and theater of the absurd to make its point.

Calling itself the National Association of Drone Sportsmen, or NADS, the group
hastily organized by conservative political and media strategist Steve Gill of
Nashville, Tenn., has described the measure as "regulatory overreach in an
attempt to demean, malign and demonize hunters (a.k.a. gun owners) for something
they are not even doing."

Using humor to illustrate his message, Gill flew to Colorado late last week to
address the commission while a cohort stood behind him in a rented deer costume
holding a sign reading: "Drone scoping? I'm game!"

"I believe you ought to hunt fairly," said Gill, a nonhunter claiming it would
be just as easy to shoot the deer covering his backyard with a 9mm handgun. "But
we've got enough regulation in business and in life to not spend our time trying
to regulate things people aren't actually doing yet."

With the tongue in cheek slogan, "If you're going to hunt drones, you're going
to need NADS," Gill's organization was created in response to the initiative by
Deer Trail to sell licenses to shoot down drones. While voting on the proposed
Deer Trail ordinance has been delayed, NADS got a second wind from the recent
announcement by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, or PETA, that they
are selling drones known as "Air Angels" to be used to monitor hunter activity
in the field.

Billed by PETA as "the new hobby for animal protectionists," the $325 drones can
send video and photos straight to the user's phone in order to collect footage
of "forbidden hunting tricks."

"PETA's drones will help protect wildlife by letting hunters know that someone
may be watching and recording them, so they should think twice before illegally
killing or maiming any living being," PETA president Ingrid E. Newkirk said in a
news release. "Wildlife watchers outnumber wildlife killers 5 to 1 and if even a
fraction of these kind people use hobby drones, they'll make a huge difference
by exposing hunters' dirty secrets."

As in most states, Colorado law considers such intrusive surveillance illegal
hunter harassment. And contrary to the PETA spin, surveys show that the vast
majority of Americans support hunting as a tool for wildlife management if
animals are not killed solely for trophy status, if the meat is consumed and if
fair chase ethics are applied.

But before hunters start applying those ethics to "Air Angels," they should know
that the Federal Aviation Administration considers shooting them down a crime as
well.

"I have people on my fence lines all the time waving flags and blowing sirens
and everything else," commissioner Robert Bray, owner of Bray Ranches and guided
hunting service in Redvale, said before moving to approve the drone hunting
measure. "I can imagine someone might be playing with an airplane out there too.
I'm just wondering, does this (provision) go deep enough on that side of the
issue?"

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/willoughbydp

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Steve Gill, left, of Nashville, discusses the recently approved
regulations banning the use of drones for scouting and hunting wildlife in
Colorado with Colorado Parks and Wildlife spokesman Randy Hampton. Provided by
Mobile Pro Video
An aircraft climbs toward the sun as local drone enthusiasts gather for the
Maryland Fly In last month in Laytonsville, MD.. Illustrates DRONES-PERSONAL
(category a), by Michael S. Rosenwald (c) 2013, The Washington Post. Moved
Saturday, Aug. 17, 2013. (MUST CREDIT: Washington Post photo by Bill O'Leary)
BILL O'LEARY, The Washington Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


