                             713 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 18, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's On TV Today

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 737 words


4:10 P.M. (Starz Cinema) RUST AND BONE (2012) Ali (Matthias Schoenaerts), a
former prizefighter fleeing with his young son (Armand Verdure) from a bad
situation, arrives in Antibes on the Côte d'Azur and becomes a bouncer at a
nightclub, where he meets Stéphanie (Marion Cotillard, above, with Mr.
Schoenaerts), a trainer for a Sea World-like park. Then she loses her legs in an
accident with a killer whale and calls Ali, thinking he might rouse her from her
despair. ''The removal of Ms. Cotillard's legs -- including in scenes in which
she wears a bathing suit or nothing -- is surely one of the most impressive
special-effects feats of the year, and a reminder that digital cinema is not all
about accessorizing wizards, monsters and superheroes,'' A. O. Scott wrote in
The New York Times. ''But the greater marvel is Ms. Cotillard herself, an
actress of limitless bravery and supernatural poise, who is both beauty and
beast. Mr. Schoenaerts is her perfect foil and complement, as large and coarse
as she is small and delicate, and also as tender as she is tough.''

9:30 A.M. (CUNY) BOB HERBERT'S OP-ED.TV Laird W. Bergad, director of the CUNY
Graduate Center for Latin American, Caribbean and Latino Studies, and Thanu
Yakupitiyage, communications coordinator of the New York Immigration Coalition,
discuss immigration challenges facing the country.

12:10 P.M. (Showtime 2) GOSFORD PARK (2001) In this Robert Altman mystery, a
coterie of aristocrats and their servants gather for a weekend shooting party at
a grand English estate in 1932 during which their host, Sir William McCordle
(Michael Gambon), is murdered. Whodunit? The suspects include Sir William's
chilly wife, Lady Sylvia (Kristin Scott Thomas, above), and her younger sister
(Geraldine Somerville), with whom she cut cards to determine who would snag the
man and his millions; the handsome young valet (Ryan Phillippe) on whom Lady
Sylvia has set her sights; an American movie producer (Bob Balaban) researching
his latest project; the head housemaid (Emily Watson), whose affair with Sir
William is common knowledge; and Lady Sylvia's aunt, the imperious countess of
Trentham (Maggie Smith), whose livelihood is dependent on the allowance that Sir
William has threatened to revoke. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called
the film, for which Julian Fellowes won an Oscar for best screenplay, ''a
melt-in-your- mouth hunk of 12-layer English spice cake.''

3 P.M. (Fox Business) RISE OF THE DRONES This weeklong special report on
''Countdown to the Closing Bell'' explores the ascent of the drone industry
through interviews with Colin Guinn of 3D Robotics, Tim Conver of AeroVironment,
Ernest Earon of PrecisionHawk, Ellen Lord of Textron Systems and Dave Kroetsch
of Aeryon Labs.

9 P.M. (CW) AMERICA'S NEXT TOP MODEL Miss J. Alexander, the Queen of the
Catwalk, rejoins Tyra Banks and Kelly Cutrone at the judges' table in this 21st
cycle, in which seven women and seven men compete for $100,000 from Guess, a
fashion spread in Nylon magazine and a contract with Next Model Management. Yu
Tsai comes on board as the creative consultant for photo shoots.

11 P.M. (Sundance) THE APPROVAL MATRIX The comedians Chris Rock and Kurt
Metzger; the actor Jason Biggs; Dalton Ross, an editor at large for
Entertainment Weekly; and the radio personality Frank DeCaro ponder that beast
called fame.

What's Streaming Now

SOUTHCLIFFE On the first anniversary of a shooting massacre in his English
hometown, the television reporter David Whitehead (Rory Kinnear) receives a
message warning that the killing is about to resume. But Stephen Morton (Sean
Harris), the gunman responsible for the crimes, shot himself at the end of his
rampage, leaving David to wonder if he's being punked -- or if Stephen is still
alive. Tony Grisoni wrote and Sean Durkin directed this four-part mini-series,
shown in Britain last year to mostly warm reviews (though some wondered if the
violence was really necessary). Shirley Henderson, Anatol Yusef and Eddie Marsan
round out the cast. (netflix.com)

AGATHA CHRISTIE'S POIROT: THE LABOURS OF HERCULES Acorn.tv presents the final
three episodes of the series, the first two of which were shown on PBS but are
also available for streaming on this website. In this penultimate installment,
Poirot (David Suchet) travels to the Swiss Alps to lay a trap for a notorious
art thief, and runs into an old familiar face. (acorn.tv) KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/18/arts/television/whats-on-tv-today.html

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEAN-BAPTISTE MODINO/SONY PICTURES)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


