                             718 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 28, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dismal Lessons From Libya and Yemen

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 623 words


As the United States barrels into a new war against Sunni extremists in Iraq and
Syria, it has been easy to overlook the unraveling of Libya and Yemen.

For distinct and complex reasons, both countries appear to be on an irreversible
path toward becoming failed states. While the Obama administration's quest to
destroy the Islamic State terrorist group is more urgent and ambitious in scope
than its military interventions in Yemen and Libya, the dissolution of order in
both nations offers sobering lessons.

American airstrikes can deliver swift and decisive results on the battlefield.
But without a feasible morning-after plan or dependable state institutions to
support, shifting the dynamics on the battlefield often makes things worse.

The military action against the Islamic State has been impressive, with American
and allied Arab fighter pilots leveling logistic hubs and oil refineries used by
the terrorist group, also known as ISIS. But there have been insufficient and
poorly articulated answers to the question that matters the most: What happens
next?

The deadly and chaotic aftermath of America's military intervention in Libya is
rife with cautionary signals. In 2011, as the Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi
was crushing an uprising, President Obama and allied governments hastily put
together a coalition to intervene. Much like the latest campaign in Iraq and
Syria, the mission in Libya was initially billed as an urgent humanitarian
response.

When the United States and allies started bombing Libya, Mr. Obama decided, over
the objection of top legal advisers, that he did not need explicit permission
from Congress.

Some lawmakers protested at the time, but not strenuously enough. That disregard
for Congress's power to declare war partly paved the way for Mr. Obama to launch
the new campaign in Syria without authorization.

Qaddafi's relatively swift ouster initially made the outcome in Libya look like
a foreign policy victory for the Obama administration. But fighting among rival
militias, and a broader conflict between Islamists and their opponents, have
plunged the nation into a new civil war. The United States abandoned its embassy
in Tripoli this summer, a painful retreat almost two years after an American
ambassador and three of his colleagues were slain in an attack in Benghazi.

President Obama recently told Thomas L. Friedman of The Times that failing to
help Libya form a new state after the fall of Qaddafi was his biggest foreign
policy regret. Yet the fate of that country has been largely absent from
discussions about the new war, which is certain to last longer and unleash a
wider array of consequences.

Instead, Mr. Obama, in making the case for carrying out airstrikes against the
Islamic State, drew a dubious parallel to counterterrorism efforts in Yemen,
which he billed as successful.

While dangerous Al Qaeda offshoot organizations in tribal areas of southern
Yemen have been weakened by drone strikes, calling Yemen a success story is
absurd. A band of Shiite rebels has recently taken control over much of Sana,
the capital, showing how hard it is for the United States to shore up a weak
state, particularly given the highly unpopular American drone campaign.

On Thursday, the State Department announced it was pulling out all but essential
government personnel from Yemen and urged American citizens there to leave.

The administration and most lawmakers agree that destroying the Islamic State is
crucial. They would do well to dissect the lessons from other American military
interventions that have fallen short of their goals. The dismal state of Yemen
and Libya are powerful examples. So far, officials seem content to focus instead
on the narrow success of dropping bombs on targets.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/opinion/sunday/dismal-lessons-from-libya-and-y
emen.html

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


