                             712 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 14, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Middle Tier, College Sports Tries to Adjust

BYLINE: By JOHN BRANCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1189 words


FRESNO, Calif. -- As hundreds of universities try to make sense of the seismic
jolts remaking the landscape of college sports, the only certainties appear to
be that the rich are getting richer and that the poor will fall further behind.
Stuck in the middle are universities like Fresno State.

With athletic ambition bigger than its budget, Fresno State represents the vast
middle class in college sports. It is not in the top tier of success and
prestige, but close enough to be tantalized by it. Centered in the heart of
California, surrounded by the likes of U.C.L.A., Stanford and Southern
California, it is perfectly positioned as a bellwether for how next-tier
programs view the changes that seem destined to mostly help the nation's top
programs.

''Clearly we are moving away from parity,'' Thomas Boeh, the Fresno State
athletic director for nine years, said as he watched football practice on Monday
morning. ''We are certainly moving to a Darwinian model.''

As it turned out, Boeh's own role did not survive the rest of the day. It was
announced on Tuesday that Joseph Castro, the president of Fresno State, had
reassigned Boeh from athletic director to special assistant to the president.

''In his new role, Boeh will serve as primary adviser to President Castro on the
unprecedented changes occurring within the N.C.A.A. and Mountain West Conference
due to recent labor actions and legislation,'' the university said in a news
release.

A search is underway for a new athletic director -- one whose mission will be
largely to raise more money to keep up with the changes coming to college
sports.

On Monday, workers at Fresno State installed carpet in the football team's
decade-old locker room, part of a $500,000 remodeling that includes new, wider
lockers for the players, more big-screen televisions and a neon-accented
Bulldogs logo on the ceiling.

Next door, in the airy, $6.7 million Meyers Family Sports Medicine Center, which
opened last fall, athletes from several Fresno State teams received treatment
from an army of trainers. Next door to that, in a vast weight room with half a
million dollars' worth of new equipment, the women's soccer team was led through
workouts below a large Fresno State mural.

''Basically, we're trying to look like a Cadillac on a Chevrolet budget,'' Boeh
said.

The athletics budget is about $30 million, below that of the 65 universities
playing in the five richest conferences, which received preliminary approval
from the N.C.A.A. last week to rewrite rules in their favor to basically allow
their universities to spend more money on the athletes who fuel their programs.
More than a dozen universities have athletic budgets of $100 million or more.

A significant court ruling on Friday, one of many cases that may upend the
tradition of amateurism in college sports, could lead to more compensation for
players -- something that Fresno State, with 225 athletic scholarships, probably
cannot afford to match.

''Does this become business as usual, where you do what you can to keep up?''
Boeh asked. ''Or is there a critical point where some institutions say we don't
want to play in this game anymore? To date, I haven't heard of any institution
say, 'We're not going to do all we can to stay competitive.' ''

Boeh cited 54 construction or renovation projects in his tenure. Outside the
low-slung, concrete-block athletic department offices, backhoes rumbled in a
patch of dirt that will become home to another department building next to an
aquatic center that opened three years ago.

''You have to continue to move forward,'' Boeh said. ''The moment you decide to
stand still, the rest of the industry goes by you very quickly.''

Fresno State has an admirable history of on-field success. It plays in the
Mountain West, against universities like Boise State and San Diego State. Its
football team was 11-2 last season, its men's basketball team is on the rise,
and its baseball and softball teams have won national championships in the
not-so-distant past. Thanks largely to its relative isolation in California's
vast Central Valley, Fresno State has the full attention of a rapturous fan
base.

But what if universities in the Big 5 conferences begin to offer stipends, or
upgrade health insurance or allow greater access to agents? Can universities
like Fresno State, and conferences like the Mountain West, afford to follow? Can
they afford not to?

Tim DeRuyter is in his third season as football coach. Last year, Fresno State
started 10-0 behind quarterback Derek Carr (a second-round draft choice of the
Oakland Raiders in May) and was on the verge of crashing the big-money Bowl
Championship Series when it was upset by San Jose State.

It won the conference championship and lost a bowl game to Southern California.
In the off-season, DeRuyter signed an extension through 2018 that will pay him
$1.4 million this year, with a chance at $750,000 in bonuses. It is big money at
Fresno State, but typical in college football, where Alabama Coach Nick Saban
has a base salary of $6.9 million.

DeRuyter estimated that half of his players were also recruited by programs in
the bigger conferences -- mostly lower-level teams in leagues like the
Pacific-12. And he said about half of his players and their families might be
enticed by the promise of cash stipends and more scholarship money, as the top
conferences appear ready to offer.

''The chips have always been stacked against us,'' DeRuyter said. ''What you
have to do is accentuate what you have to offer. Is getting another $1,000 worth
more to a recruit than more playing time or winning a conference championship?''

DeRuyter is most concerned about two rumored changes. There is talk that the Big
5 conferences may push to expand the number of football scholarships from 85 to
95 per team. That would steer 120 extra players into the Pacific-12 who might
otherwise head to programs like Fresno State's.

Second, some have speculated that the N.C.A.A. might loosen transfer rules,
allowing athletes to move freely from one program to another with no penalty.
(Generally, athletes now sit out of competition for a year when transferring.)
DeRuyter worries that Fresno State and others would lose their best players
after a couple of seasons.

''We'd be a minor league for a lot of those conferences,'' he said.

But until the coming changes crystallize, Fresno State, like other universities,
will plug away, trying to lure recruits, fans, attention and money, same as
ever. It may have been more than a coincidence that Fresno State gave Boeh a new
position on the first business day after last week's news rocked college sports.

As Boeh watched practice Monday, before he knew that he was no longer athletic
director and would instead be steering Fresno State through the altered terrain
developing before it, he took note of a whirring device that was flying about 10
feet above the players during drills.

He was told that it was a remote-controlled drone, giving coaches a different
angle for analysis. He wondered if other college football teams were doing the
same thing.

''We have a drone,'' Boeh said. ''Alabama probably launched a satellite.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/14/sports/ncaafootball/fresno-state-faces-the-tas
k-of-keeping-up-with-the-big-5s.html

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Fresno State football team, at practice above and below, is
not among the nation's most prestigious, but last season the Bulldogs started
10-0 and played Southern California in a bowl game.
 Thomas Boeh, Fresno State's athletic director until this week,  has a new job
and assignment: to help the university and its  president navigate the evolving
collegiate athletics landscape. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAX WHITTAKER FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (B13)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


