                             719 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Where a Mental Illness Can Also Be an Asset

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; THE TV
WATCH; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 790 words


This should come as a relief: ''Homeland'' is safe without Sgt. Nicholas Brody.

Season 4 of ''Homeland'' begins Sunday night on Showtime on a new and better
course, namely back to where it started. This sophisticated espionage thriller
is once again woven around the jagged complexities of its heroine, Carrie
Mathison (Claire Danes), a bipolar C.I.A. officer whose chief asset is that she
is so maladjusted and blindly determined that she detects dangers that nobody
else can see.

There was every reason to fear that a fourth season of ''Homeland'' would be too
much: The third was more baroque and much less compelling than the first two.
But Carrie's lover, Brody, the P.O.W. turned traitor played by Damian Lewis, was
hanged in Tehran at the end of Season 3, killing off a doomed love affair that
lasted too long.

That freed the show's writers to put Carrie back in the field, running
intelligence operations in Kabul and Islamabad, alert and in command, but also
still heeding some offbeat, jangly jazz racing through her head and heart. Her
subordinates call her the Drone Queen.

And while we know Carrie by now -- she's fearless and unbounded at work and
skittish in personal relationships -- her character is so well imagined and so
skillfully performed by Ms. Danes that even after three years, there is still
some ambiguity left.

Her bipolar condition, which she kept secret for most of Season 1, isn't her
real problem, though it explains a lot. Too often, television shows split
personalities along the same lines as their bipolar disorder, painting
characters Manichaean dark when symptomatic, light when even-keeled. But even
when medicated and fully functioning, Carrie is conflicted and uneven,
insightful and compassionate when it suits her, obtuse and unfeeling when that
suits her better.

In Sunday's two-episode premiere, the first hour is truly thrilling: a bomb
attack on a high-value terrorist that inadvertently killed dozens of civilians
could have been based on disinformation.

That episode alone neatly highlights an all-too-real paradox of 21st-century
warfare. The government can put a camera or drone anywhere on the planet, but
any misstep will almost certainly be caught and recorded and splashed across the
Internet. It's the information age version of the Cold War pact of mutually
assured destruction: There is no privacy even for the best-hidden government
secrets.

At its core, the narrative is propelled by the oldest plot in the spy book:
There may be a leak at the heart of the C.I.A.'s counterterrorism operation.

Some of the main characters return, notably Saul Berenson (Mandy Patinkin),
Carrie's mentor and former boss. Saul is no longer at the C.I.A., but he hasn't
gone far, working instead for a private security firm with Defense Department
contracts in Afghanistan and other hot spots.

Peter Quinn (Rupert Friend), the black-ops assassin with a conscience, is still
nursing remorse and an attraction to Carrie, even though she feels little guilt
and has not yet acknowledged their sexual tension. Peter wants out of the
agency, but Carrie wants him working with her in the field, and it's been clear
for a while that her will is stronger than his.

There are some new faces, notably Suraj Sharma as a Pakistani medical student
named Aayan Ibrahim, who survives an attack, and Laila Robins as Martha Boyd,
the United States ambassador to Pakistan, an experienced diplomat who has to
finesse the contradictions between Pakistan's public postures and its private
maneuvers.

Carrie feels that she alone is equipped to lead the investigation into the
security breach, but she also just prefers to be alone. Some of the most
harrowing scenes are not bomb raids or mob killings, but Carrie at home in
America, avoiding contact with the baby she conceived during her romance with
Brody.

At the end of last season, Carrie was so panicked about the responsibility of
motherhood that she had to be dissuaded from giving up the baby for adoption.
Turns out, she more or less did anyway, picking assignments where families are
not allowed and leaving her child in the care of her sister and a nanny.

There is a lot going on this season, but the focus is back on Carrie, from the
opening scene that shows her looking through a car window at the near-empty
streets of Kabul at night to the close of the second episode, when Carrie is
back at a window, this one on an airplane headed for Islamabad, again looking
intently yet sightlessly into darkness.

When a military officer asks her how she can bear the senseless loss of civilian
life that comes with her job, Carrie has an answer: ''I try to see the big
picture.''

Sunday's premiere is an invitation to take another look at all the small pieces
in the puzzle that is Carrie.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/03/arts/television/homeland-begins-its-new-season
-on-sunday.html

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison in the new season of
''Homeland,'' starting Sunday on Showtime. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE ALBLAS/SHOWTIME)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


