                             717 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 8, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fusion Set to Name Innovation Director

BYLINE: By EMILY STEEL

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 458 words


Fusion, the joint online and television venture between Univision and the
Disney-ABC Television Group, is expected to announce on Monday that it has hired
Tim Pool, a digital journalist known for his use of cutting-edge reporting
technologies and his marathon live-stream reporting during the recent
controversy in Ferguson, Mo., and the Occupy Wall Street protests.

Mr. Pool, 28, most recently worked for Vice Media, a rival youth-focused news
and entertainment venture. He is scheduled to start on Monday as Fusion's senior
correspondent and director of media innovation.

The move comes as Fusion continues to build out its next-generation news network
targeted at the diverse and elusive millennial audience. Fusion, which started
last year, recently hired Jane Spencer, formerly of The Daily Beast and The Wall
Street Journal; Felix Salmon, formerly of Reuters; and Anna Holmes, founder of
the website Jezebel.

''We have this blank slate,'' Mr. Pool said, adding that in his new role he
would explore approaches for using mobile, robotic, drone and other technologies
for reporting.

Mr. Pool, a Chicago native, said ''it wasn't really on purpose'' that he became
a journalist. He said he grew up on the Internet and so naturally started
posting updates and photos to Facebook, Twitter and other outlets as those new
technologies emerged. He traveled to New York during the Occupy Wall Street
demonstration in 2011 and quickly gained recognition for his live stream of the
protests -- captured on his mobile phone.

''Unbeknownst to me, I started doing journalism, just because I was bearing
witness,'' he said. ''I started understanding that technology created a real
opportunity to help share information.''

Since then, Mr. Pool has used a similar style of tech-driven eyewitness
reporting for covering protests in Istanbul, Cairo and Brazil. He also has
explored using drones, mobile devices, Google Glass and other technologies for
journalism. This year, he created the Tagg.ly app for reporters to watermark
their photographs and video.

Isaac Lee, Fusion's chief executive, said in a note to staff members, ''As we
continue to find new ways to engage with our audience, Tim will play a crucial
role in helping Fusion break new boundaries, while sharing innovative, authentic
perspectives on the important events impacting the world.''

Separately, Martin Peers is leaving his post as media and marketing bureau chief
at The Wall Street Journal to work as a columnist at The Information, the
subscription tech-news site started last year by Jessica E. Lessin, a former
Wall Street Journal reporter. Mr. Peers, 54, worked at The Wall Street Journal
for 15 years and was part of a team of reporters who won a 2003 Pulitzer Prize
for explanatory reporting.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/08/business/media/fusion-expected-to-name-tim-poo
l-its-director-of-media-innovation.html

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


