                             716 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 7, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is It WWIII or Just Twitter?

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1104 words


WASHINGTON -- SHOCKINGLY, in the end, I didn't miss Brody.

I was perfectly happy with The Drone Queen, as Claire Danes's Carrie Mathison is
christened on her birthday cake in the first episode of Showtime's ''Homeland,''
returning next month.

I gingerly went to a screening in New York, assuming that, without my favorite
ginger, my interest would wane. But the show, set in Kabul and Islamabad, where
Carrie is now working for the C.I.A. directing ''playtime,'' as they call drone
strikes, having dumped her ginger baby with her sister back home, crystallizes
America's Gordian knot in the Middle East. It vividly shows our fungible moral
choices and the disruptive power of social media.

So many gigantic blunders have been made since 9/11, so many historical fault
lines have erupted, that no matter which path the Obama administration takes, it
runs into a ''No Exit'' sign. Any choice seems like a bad choice.

Mandy Patinkin's Saul Berenson, now working for a defense contractor in New
York, warns a group of military officers that America is walking away from
Afghanistan ''with the job half-done.''

He stands up to his boss, who is upset by his impolitic behavior, asking if ''we
really want to risk going back'' to ''girls not allowed in school, roving gangs
of men with whips enforcing Sharia law, a safe haven again for Al Qaeda''?

When Carrie oversees an airstrike in Pakistan to take out the No. 4 terrorist
target on the kill list, the bombs incinerate innocents at a wedding. Afterward,
the Air Force pilot who conducted the strike confronts Carrie in a bar and calls
her a monster. When Rupert Friend's haunted C.I.A. assassin Peter Quinn asks
Carrie if she's ever bothered by dropping fire on a hydra-headed kill list,
sometimes with tragic mistakes, she rolls her eyes and replies, ''It's a job.''

Carrie at first contends that they're ''bulletproof,'' that no one will find out
about what she calls ''collateral damage'' because the strike was in a tribal
region. But then a medical school student, angry that his friend's mother and
sister were killed at the wedding, posts a cellphone video of the gory scene.

The murderous melee that ensues is redolent of President Obama's provocative
remark at a Democratic Party fund-raiser in New York, talking about the alarming
aggressions flaring up around the world and alluding to the sulfurous videos of
the social-media savvy ISIS fiends beheading American journalists.

''If you watch the nightly news,'' the president said, ''it feels like the world
is falling apart.''

Trying to reassure Americans who feel frightened and helpless, he posited that
''the truth of the matter is that the world has always been messy. In part,
we're just noticing now because of social media and our capacity to see in
intimate detail the hardships that people are going through.''

''I think he's trying to blame the messenger,'' said Terry McCarthy, the
president of the Los Angeles World Affairs Council. ''Whether or not James
Foley's brutal beheading was shown on YouTube or disseminated on Twitter doesn't
affect the horror of what was done, and in another era, it would have been just
as shocking, even if reported only on network TV or radio or in a newspaper.

''I think it is also condescending to say we are just noticing now because of
social media. How about the recoil at the news of the My Lai massacre, broken by
Sy Hersh on a newswire? Or the Abu Ghraib pictures run on '60 Minutes II' and in
The New Yorker?

''ISIS beheading American journalists, crucifying people, stoning a man to death
in Mosul, targeting minorities for genocide, is not simply 'messy as always' --
are you kidding me? It is an outright abomination in the face of humanity,
however and through whatever media it is reported and it needs our, and our
allies', most urgent attention.''

Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, noted that the
impact of social media was exaggerated during the Arab Spring, leading to the
mistaken belief that liberal secularists in Tahrir Square and other places posed
a serious alternative to authoritarian regimes or radical Islamists.

The world is more disorderly for all kinds of reasons, he said, including the
loss of confidence in American reliability and the American model, and reactions
to things the United States has done, like the Iraq war, or not done, like
acting on chemical weapons use in Syria.

''But to blame it on social media,'' Haass said, ''is something of a cop-out.''

He contended that while the sky may not be falling, ''it certainly is lower,''
and to deny that ''is to engage in denial. We need to be very careful lest
people begin to conclude that Americans are disinterested in the world. We don't
want that narrative to take hold.''

Margaret MacMillan, an Oxford historian who wrote ''Paris 1919'' and ''The War
That Ended Peace: The Road to 1914,'' says the president is right that we
probably are more aware of what's going on around the world, even with all the
''rubbish'' on the web, but she also believes that, from voracious Putin to
vicious jihadists, ''sometimes we're right to be scared.''

She predicted that instead of World War III, ''The 21st century will be a series
of low grade, very nasty wars that will go on and on without clear outcomes,
doing dreadful things to any civilians in their paths.''

Certainly, Obama never complained about a frenzied social media when it served
his political purposes.

The president's observation unfortunately underscored his role as Barack Seneca
Obama, his air of disconnection, his ''we don't have a strategy'' vagueness on
engagement, his belief that extreme excitement, outrage and sentimentality are
suspect.

His ''bucket list'' visit Friday to the alien-looking Stonehenge was the perfect
backdrop for his strange pattern of detachment, and his adamantine belief that
his Solomonic wisdom and Spocky calm help him resist the siren songs to
disaster.

Joe Biden was the one connecting with Americans, promising to chase the ISIS
savages ''to the gates of hell,'' while Obama's subliminal, or not so
subliminal, message was that before certain atrocities, the heart must muzzle
itself, rejecting flights of anxiety, worry and horror as enemies of lucid
analysis.

In some situations, panic is a sign of clear thinking. Reality is reality,
whether it's tweeted or not. And the truth doesn't always set you free. The mind
and the will don't always act in concert. You can know a lot of things and still
not act. And as we saw with the Iraq invasion, you can not know a lot of things
and still act.

Bill Clinton couldn't stop biting his lip. Now we'd kill to see Obama baring his
teeth.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/07/opinion/sunday/maureen-dowd-is-it-wwiii-or-jus
t-twitter.html

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama says social media makes us more aware that the
world is ''messy.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY
IMAGES) (SR11)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


