                             711 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 9, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Jets and Drones Attack Militants in Iraq

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN, TIM ARANGO and HELENE COOPER; Alissa J. Rubin
reported from Dohuk, Iraq, Tim Arango from Baghdad and Helene Cooper from
Washington. Omar Al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, Somini Sengupta
from the United Nations and Kimiko De Freytas-Tamura from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1325 words


DOHUK, Iraq -- The United States launched a series of airstrikes against Sunni
militants in northern Iraq on Friday, using Predator drones and Navy F-18
fighter jets to destroy rebel positions around the city of Erbil, the American
military said Friday.

The strikes were aimed at halting the advance of militants with the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria toward Erbil, the Kurdish capital, which is home to a
United States Consulate and thousands of Americans.

The action marked the return of the United States to a direct combat role in a
country it left in 2011. Warplanes dropped 500-pound laser-guided bombs on a
number of targets: a mobile artillery piece that was being towed from a truck
and had begun shelling Erbil, a stationary convoy of seven vehicles, and a
mortar position.

The military also used a remotely piloted drone to strike another mortar
position on Friday afternoon. After the first strike, it said in a statement,
ISIS militants ''returned to the site moments later'' and ''were attacked again
and successfully eliminated.''

Defense officials expressed confidence that they could achieve within a few days
one of President Obama's stated goals: stopping the advance of the militants on
Erbil.

Less certain was whether the other objectives Mr. Obama had announced --
breaking the siege on tens of thousands of refugees stranded on Sinjar Mountain
and protecting Americans in Baghdad -- could be achieved as quickly, given the
instability of Iraq's internal politics and the difficulty of protecting and
eventually evacuating the stranded people.

While Mr. Obama said Thursday night that he had authorized military strikes, if
necessary, to help liberate the refugees on Sinjar Mountain, all of the military
attacks on Friday were directed toward stopping the ISIS militants' advance on
Erbil.

The leader of ISIS sent a defiant message to the Americans in an audio statement
posted on YouTube in June and recirculated on Twitter on Friday.

''This is the message of the leader of the faithful,'' the leader, known as Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, wrote in a message addressed to ''America, the defender of the
cross.''

''You should know, you defender of the cross, that getting others to fight on
your behalf will not do for you in Syria as it will not do for you in Iraq,'' he
said. ''And soon enough, you will be in direct confrontation -- forced to do so,
God willing. And the sons of Islam have prepared themselves for this day. So
wait, and we will be waiting, too.''

ISIS fighters had come within 25 miles of Erbil in a rapid advance that took
American military planners by surprise.

Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon spokesman, said in a statement that ISIS
fighters near the mortar positions had been ''successfully eliminated,''
although he did not say exactly how many had been killed. Another Defense
Department official said that the precision of the laser-guided bombs dropped
was such that in the case of the strike on the stationary convoy, ''you know
that vehicle and the people in it don't exist anymore.''

The Navy fighters launched from the aircraft carrier George H. W. Bush, which
has been deployed in the Arabian Sea.

Kurdish officials said the first round of American bombs struck on Friday
afternoon in and around Mahmour, a town near Erbil. They reported an airstrike
in the same location on Thursday, before Mr. Obama's announcement; the Pentagon
denied that American warplanes carried out that earlier attack.

Kurdish fighters, known as pesh merga, have been pressed hard in recent days by
the militants, who have seized several towns near Erbil from the Kurds and taken
the Mosul Dam, one of the most important installations in the country.

''The airstrikes are being led by the U.S.A., and pesh merga are attacking with
Katyusha,'' said Halgurd Hekmat, a spokesman for the Kurdish fighters, referring
to a type of Russian-made tactical rocket.

Many members of religious minorities in northern Iraq, including Christians,
have fled to Kurdish territory to escape the advancing militants, who have
imposed harsh fundamentalist rule in areas they control. Others -- including
tens of thousands of Yazidis, who follow an ancient faith linked to
Zoroastrianism and are stranded in a mountainous area to the west -- have been
trapped and besieged by the militants. Delivering humanitarian aid to that group
is one of the purposes of the American operations in Iraq, Mr. Obama said.

Britain, a close ally and coalition partner of the United States in the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan, said Friday that it would not take part in the current
military action but would provide humanitarian aid and technical help.

''What we have decided today is to assist the United States in the humanitarian
operations that started yesterday,'' the British defense secretary, Michael
Fallon, said in London on Friday.

Turkey, a NATO ally that borders northern Iraq, said on Friday that it, too,
would increase humanitarian aid to the region, news agencies reported.

Nikolay Mladenov, the United Nations' top envoy in Iraq, said airdrops of aid on
Friday had reached a fraction of the 100,000 people trapped on Sinjar Mountain.
Mr. Mladenov has proposed a humanitarian corridor that would allow civilians to
travel from the mountain to a safe zone in a Kurdish-controlled area. Late
Friday, the United States military said it had made a second round of airdrops
of food and water.

But the civilians are currently trapped between front lines. The fighting would
have to stop to open such a corridor, or the warring parties would have to agree
to let people pass into safety. Mr. Mladenov said negotiations were underway.
''It's a matter of days,'' he said. ''It depends on two things. First, how
successful the airdrops can be -- they've been there for a few days; there's no
access to water, food, medicine. Secondly, it depends on the security situation
on the ground.''

While Kurds welcomed Mr. Obama's announcement of American assistance, the
reaction in Baghdad was mixed.

''Obama's speech did not delight Iraqis,'' said Hakim al-Zamili, a leader of a
main Shiite bloc in Parliament, the Sadr faction, who were among the strongest
opponents of American involvement in Iraq. ''They are looking out for their own
interests, not for ours.''

''They should have provided Iraq with weapons,'' Mr. Zamili added, possibly
alluding to the United States' suspension of deliveries of F-16 fighter jets and
combat aircraft to Iraq.

Another Shiite leader, Sami al-Askari, who is close to Prime Minister Nuri Kamal
al-Maliki, said Mr. Obama's call for airstrikes had come ''too late.''

''They should have made this decision when hundreds of Shiites and Sunnis were
being killed every day,'' Mr. Askari said.

Mr. Askari accused the Obama administration of being interested only in
''protecting the Kurdish regional government and Christians, not the rest of
Iraq.''

''Iraqis must rely on themselves and their genuine friends, like Iran and
Russia, who have supported Iraq in its battle against ISIS,'' he said. Russia
has sent Sukhoi aircraft to the Iraqi forces, and Iran has trained and financed
militia forces and sent advisers.

The decision to announce American air operations on Thursday appeared to reflect
a view among American, Kurdish and Iraqi military leaders that a crippling
attack by the militants was more imminent than had been widely recognized. The
militants' seizure of two towns within 20 miles of Erbil stoked panic and the
beginnings of an exodus of residents to Sulaimaniya, the largest city to the
southeast.

Military leaders believed that if the city emptied, it would be more vulnerable
to a militant attack, officials said privately, asking not to be quoted because
they did not want to shake morale.

The airstrikes appeared to improve the mood in Erbil on Friday, at least
temporarily, according to people there. Fewer cars were at the city gates trying
to leave, they said.

''The bombing changed the mood of the people,'' a pesh merga officer said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/world/middleeast/iraq.html

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama called King Abdullah II of Jordan from the Oval
Office on Friday to discuss Iraq, a day after authorizing airstrikes against
militants there. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAPS: U.S.
Strikes Militants Near Erbil: American jets attacked mobile artillery vehicles
that had been shelling Kurdish targets in Erbil, the capital of Iraq's Kurdistan
region. (Sources: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs
U.S. Department of Defense
 American and Kurdish officials) (A7)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


