                             722 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 11, 2014 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Recent White House Memoirs Target Lame Duck Over a Potential Successor

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; LISTENING POST; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1026 words


WASHINGTON -- When Leon E. Panetta was director of the Central Intelligence
Agency, he had a shouting match with Hillary Rodham Clinton about who had
ultimate authority over drone strikes in Pakistan: the C.I.A. or the State
Department's ambassador.

Mrs. Clinton alluded to the contretemps in her memoir ''Hard Choices,'' but it
does not appear in Mr. Panetta's just-published book, even though it seems
tailor-made for a volume called ''Worthy Fights.''

Mr. Panetta's memoir has drawn attention, and raised hackles in the White House,
for its criticism of President Obama, particularly about his handling of Syria
and Iraq. Less noticed is his discreet approach to Mrs. Clinton, with whom Mr.
Panetta has had a long, complicated relationship since he was President Bill
Clinton's budget director and she was first lady.

The kid-glove treatment is not unique to Mr. Panetta. In the growing crop of
tell-all memoirs by former Obama administration officials including Robert M.
Gates and Timothy F. Geithner, Mrs. Clinton has emerged largely unscathed --
proof that in Washington, it is easier to kick a sitting second-term president
than a potential future one.

Mr. Obama, in Mr. Panetta's telling, is a brilliant but vacillating figure with
''the logic of a law professor rather than the passion of a leader.'' Mrs.
Clinton, on the other hand, ''was a luminous representative for the United
States in every foreign capital, as well as a smart, forceful advocate in
meetings of the president's top advisers.''

Mr. Panetta is more gimlet-eyed in discussing his dealings with Mrs. Clinton
during her husband's presidency. They were on opposite sides of a debate over
Mr. Clinton's early budgets, with Mr. Panetta the deficit hawk fending off Mrs.
Clinton the health reformer.

But even then, Mr. Panetta was not spoiling for a fight. ''I don't recall ever
confronting Hillary Clinton directly with my concerns,'' he wrote, noting that
she vented about him to other officials.

Mr. Panetta's gingerly treatment of Mrs. Clinton is partly a tribute to the
alliances she made in the Obama cabinet. She formed a virtual triumvirate with
Mr. Panetta and Mr. Gates, backing the troop surge to Afghanistan, weapons for
Syrian rebels, and leaving a residual force behind in Iraq.

Crucially for Mr. Panetta, Mrs. Clinton spoke up in favor of his recommendation
for the raid that killed Osama bin Laden. She also joined him in opposing a
prisoner swap with the Taliban for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl -- an idea that was
revived after they had both left the cabinet.

Still, there were other places where Mr. Panetta and Mrs. Clinton parted
company, not least in 2011 on the question of whether Cameron Munter, then the
ambassador to Pakistan, should have the right to veto C.I.A. drone strikes if he
believed they would cause serious diplomatic damage.

In a White House meeting, recounted by Mark Mazzetti of The New York Times in
his book, ''The Way of the Knife,'' Mr. Panetta and Mrs. Clinton clashed
bitterly, with her defending Mr. Munter's prerogatives and Mr. Panetta replying,
''No, Hillary, it's you who are flat wrong.''

In an interview in February, Mr. Panetta confirmed that he and Mrs. Clinton
disagreed over who had ultimate authority over counterterrorism operations, the
ambassador or the C.I.A. But he said it was a bureaucratic, not a personal or
policy dispute.

''She was supportive of what we had to do in order to deal with Al Qaeda,'' Mr.
Panetta said. ''Both of us knew very well that the key was to ensure that
Pakistan, regardless of their concerns, would stand back and allow us to
continue those operations.''

More curiously, Mr. Panetta does not mention Mrs. Clinton in his discussion of
the attack on the Benghazi diplomatic outpost that killed Ambassador J.
Christopher Stevens and three other Americans in September 2012. Then the
secretary of defense, he offers a granular account of the Pentagon's response,
saying he wants to dispel suspicions that have come to enshroud this episode.

But Mrs. Clinton plays no part in his telling of the tragedy or its aftermath,
when, he notes, David H. Petraeus, his C.I.A. successor, ordered up the faulty
talking points that described the attack as a protest gone awry, and Susan E.
Rice recited them on the Sunday talk shows.

The Benghazi attack is certain to figure high on the list of Republican attacks
on Mrs. Clinton, but they will not get any ammunition from Mr. Panetta. And
that, say people who know him, is the key to understanding him: At 76, he is not
looking for a job in a Clinton White House. But as a savvy Washington player and
loyal Democrat, he recognizes that the stakes in criticizing someone who may
soon run for president are so much greater than in criticizing a president who
has run his last election.

On the growing bookshelf of Obama-era memoirs, in fact, it took a diplomat to
aim a genuine zinger at Mrs. Clinton. In his new book, ''Outpost: Life on the
Frontlines of American Diplomacy,'' Christopher R. Hill, who served as
ambassador to Iraq until 2010, recalled her first visit to Baghdad as secretary
of state.

As he was bidding farewell to Mrs. Clinton, she encouraged him to reach out to
her whenever he needed help. He waved goodbye, confident that she would be back
soon. ''Three months later,'' he wrote, ''Vice President Joe Biden took the lead
on Iraq and she never returned.''

Mr. Hill said he meant his words not as criticism but as an expression of his
disappointment that ''she went off to do other things.'' And he was nothing but
diplomatic in recounting another episode that Mrs. Clinton's political rivals
have seized on: her 1996 visit as first lady to Bosnia, during which, she
claimed years later, she had come under sniper fire.

Mr. Hill, it turns out, was on Mrs. Clinton's C-17 transport plane that day and
listened in as a security official ominously briefed her about the dangers of
sniper fire after they landed. Instead, Mrs. Clinton was greeted by Bosnian
children, bearing bouquets of spring flowers. The trip went off without a hitch
or a hint of gunfire.

''But the threat of snipers seemed to be all most people could remember,'' Mr.
Hill wrote, without elaborating.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/11/us/politics/recent-white-house-memoirs-target-
lame-duck-over-a-potential-successor.html

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:   Leon E. Panetta with Hillary Rodham Clinton in 2009. The two
have had a long, complicated relationship,  but in his new memoir he deals with
her more gently than with President Obama. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


