                             720 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 9, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Looming Even Larger Off Court

BYLINE: By SCOTT CACCIOLA

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1504 words


ATLANTA -- Shaquille O'Neal arrived at Turner Studios on a recent weekday
morning wearing a tailored suit, size 60XL, and carrying a leather briefcase. He
sat at a table at the front of the room, cracked open his laptop and prepared
for a daylong seminar on a subject that was uniquely familiar to him: Shaquille
O'Neal.

The occasion was the third annual Shaq Summit, a gathering of representatives
from O'Neal's many business ventures -- a group that included the president of
Zales (O'Neal has a men's jewelry line) and executives from Arizona Beverages
(O'Neal has a new fruit punch). One by one, they presented their campaigns and
their products, and they detailed how O'Neal, the former N.B.A. star, figured
into their plans.

''We'd like to see if we can create a little synergy under the Shaq umbrella,''
O'Neal said.

O'Neal is difficult to miss these days. He might be dancing on a television
commercial for Monster speakers. Or extolling the virtues of a medicated powder.
Or selling Shaq-brand suits at Macy's, Shaq-brand jewelry at Zales and
Shaq-brand sneakers at J. C. Penney. All of which O'Neal supplements with his
regular gig as an analyst on TNT's ''Inside the NBA,'' a program that has given
him a valuable platform since he retired from the league in 2011.

From the beginning of his playing career, O'Neal mastered the art of
self-promotion by using his cartoonish size and colorful personality to his
advantage. If the flip side was that he sometimes seemed to lack the edge on the
court that others expected of him, his outside interests still paid off
handsomely. And with more players seeing themselves as individual brands,
perhaps O'Neal's entrepreneurial feats, which have stretched into retirement and
landed him on the cover of Bloomberg Businessweek, offer more of a road map than
ever before.

Consider that O'Neal, 42, earned more than $21 million last year through his
many business partnerships and his TV work, his management team said. And while
several retired athletes make more -- Michael Jordan collected $90 million last
year, according to a recent survey by Forbes -- few can seemingly compete with
the volume and variety of O'Neal products. Representatives from 19 companies
showed up for the Shaq Summit.

Shaq knows that it might seem like a lot of Shaq, except that he says he turns
companies down. His name goes only on things that he likes, he said. Such as his
Dunkman backpacks. And his soon-to-be-released line of Capelli slippers. And all
four flavors of Soda Shaq.

Not everything O'Neal does is an instant triumph. There was his unfortunate
experiment as a rap artist. His 1996 film, ''Kazaam,'' was not considered for an
Academy Award. More recently, sales of Soda Shaq slowed. As Rob Marciano,
Arizona's executive vice president for sales, put it, ''Soda Shaq went pretty
good, but it was not a product that all the consumers gravitated towards.'' That
lesson led to the creation of a new fruit punch, which Marciano hopes is a
winner.

''Shaq wants to be involved,'' said Ian Gomar, who, as president of Shaquille
O'Neal Consumer Properties, handles O'Neal's licensing deals. ''I've worked with
a lot of athletes, and the beauty of him is that if I say, 'Look, I need you at
Walmart on Tuesday at 9 o'clock for a promotion,' he'll show up at 8:30.''

The night before the summit, O'Neal hosted his guests at an Atlanta Braves game.
Out on the concourse, he signed autographs and posed for photos. He wore a
T-shirt that featured the comedian Zach Galifianakis's face.

By the next morning, O'Neal had swapped his T-shirt for a suit. He opened the
summit by giving the assembled executives the wireless code.

The summit was the idea of O'Neal's management team: Perry Rogers, Colin Smeeton
and Mike Parris, who had sought a way to maximize O'Neal's brand. While large
organizations often stage similar events for corporate partners, individuals
typically do not. Then again, O'Neal is a little different.

''I used to have to fly all over the place and meet with everybody,'' O'Neal
said. ''Now, I can have everybody on the same page.''

Over the course of the day, more than a dozen commercials featuring O'Neal were
screened, including one for Drone wristwatches, which were roughly the size of
frying pans. (Subtlety is not a feature of the O'Neal oeuvre.) There were
several spots for Reebok, which will soon add to its line of retro sneakers with
the Shaq Attaq, the Shaq Attacked and the Pump Shaqnosis.

The formula is simple, O'Neal said: Make people laugh, and they will remember
you. Whenever he meets with a new creative team, O'Neal offers input. ''Give me
what you want, and I'll Shaq it up,'' he says. Shaq-ing it up can be as subtle
as a coy smile. Look for it soon on 11 million boxes of Fruity Pebbles.

''Love that smile,'' said Lucas Mininger, a director of marketing at Chattem, a
manufacturer of health care products like Gold Bond and IcyHot -- two other
O'Neal vehicles.

A fearsome 7-foot-1 center and a 15-time All-Star during his playing days,
O'Neal said he first considered the big business of his future profession when
he was a teenager. His father gave him a book that outlined some of the
challenges for athletes in managing their money.

''My parents did a great job of scaring me,'' O'Neal said.

Themes emerged at the summit. Synergy was a popular noun, and activate might
have been the most popular verb -- as in, ''Let's find bigger ways to activate
around Shaq together!'' It was part of a presentation by an executive at Turner
Sports, who pointed out that O'Neal appeared on 212 studio shows during the
2013-14 regular season. That meant lots of exposure for O'Neal and lots of
exposure for his brands.

''We tried to dress him 212 times,'' said Steven Flick, the vice president of
Peerless Clothing, which produces the Shaquille O'Neal Collection of business
attire.

O'Neal's large stature was another point of emphasis. An outlier was Greg
Ferguson, the editorial director at Full Fathom Five, a publishing imprint that
has been at work on a series of children's books about a young boy named Little
Shaq. Ferguson gave a synopsis for the first book, scheduled for publication
next year: Little Shaq and his cousin start a gardening business.

''I think we're the only company here trying to make Shaq smaller,'' Ferguson
said.

Among the half-dozen other animated Shaqs who made cameos was the lead character
in a video game called ''Shaq Fu: The Legend Reborn.'' The original ''Shaq Fu,''
which featured a karate-chopping O'Neal, was made by a different company and was
widely panned by critics when it hit the shelves in 1994. (One website set out
with the mission of getting people to destroy their copies for the sake of
future generations.)

The new ''Shaq Fu'' is still under development. Matthew Karch, the chief
executive at Saber Interactive, said some of the work was being done at the
company's studios in Ukraine. He addressed concerns that the launch of ''Shaq
Fu'' might be undone by the turmoil in the country and insisted everything was
on schedule.

Karch added that he was intrigued by all the talk of synergy at the summit.
Still, the video game itself is something of a hobby for him -- Karch's day job
is working on projects like ''Halo: The Master Chief Collection'' -- so he said
he was not necessarily looking to make a quick buck from product placements. On
the other hand, he observed, ''there's no reason why Shaq couldn't use some
IcyHot after a big battle.''

Or, noted an intrigued Rogers, ''maybe one of the Drone watches could be a
weapon.''

One concern was whether O'Neal could sustain his popularity. It can be difficult
for retired athletes because they tend to fade from public view, said Jim
Andrews, the senior vice president at IEG, a sponsorship and consulting research
firm. And in O'Neal's case, his target audience during his playing days was a
younger crowd. Children now might not be as familiar with his exploits as a
basketball player.

''You can only maintain visibility with young people for so long,'' Andrews said
in a telephone interview. ''But of most retired athletes, he probably has the
best shot of maintaining that sort of relevance because of his personality, and
his willingness and ability to do TV shows.''

O'Neal intends to stay busy. He is gearing up for another season with TNT. He
plans to help promote his jewelry line and his suit collection. He has fruit
punch to pitch, sneakers to sell and video games to plug. There is his
television pilot (Shaq will play himself), his role as commissioner of sport for
the Cartoon Network and his charitable work with Toys for Tots, which has
enlisted him as Shaq-a-Claus.

''I could easily be a professor,'' he said. ''I could easily be a sheriff. I
could easily be a C.E.O. I'm leaning hard towards law school. Not sure yet,
though.''

Asked why he would want to attend law school, O'Neal said: ''It's not that I
really want to be a lawyer. I just want to see my name on the side of a
building.''

When it comes to the business of being Shaq, there is always room for more.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/09/sports/basketball/shaquille-oneal-has-his-hand
s-full-as-a-pitchman.html

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The former N.B.A. star Shaquille O'Neal and his girlfriend,
Nicole Alexander, watching a presentation at the Shaq Summit, a gathering of
executives from businesses tied to O'Neal. Nineteen companies were at the
summit. (B12)
 Shaquille O'Neal earned more than $21 million last year through his  business
and TV work, his management team said. Below, a drink  that bears his name. He
is also associated with jewelry and slippers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KEVIN LILES FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B18)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


