                             721 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 10, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Premier of Pakistan Visits Troops in Tribal Area

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD; Ismail Khan contributed reporting from Peshawar,
Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 727 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan visited a
military camp in the tribal district of North Waziristan on Thursday in what was
seen as a pointed show of support and an attempt to bolster his troubled
relationship with the country's top generals.

The rare visit by Mr. Sharif to the tribal belt came three months after the
military launched a sweeping offensive against the Taliban in North Waziristan,
a hub of Taliban and Qaeda activity.

The trip followed a turbulent period that, at one point, caused Mr. Sharif's
supporters to fear a military takeover. The two sides have fallen out over
several issues, including the government's handling of an opposition political
movement that is challenging Mr. Sharif, and its decision to pursue treason
charges against former President Pervez Musharraf. Mr. Musharraf, a former
general who ousted Mr. Sharif in a bloodless coup in 1999 during his first term
in office, retains many supporters in the military.

Mr. Sharif had also originally been reluctant to pursue an offensive in the
tribal area, preferring peace talks, but the trip Thursday was another
indication that he was increasingly backing the military's push to take the
fight to the militants.

His visit to Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan, on Thursday showed
Mr. Sharif standing staunchly behind the country's generals. ''Our courageous
troops are fighting a difficult war against an invisible enemy,'' he told
soldiers. ''This is a war for the survival of Pakistan.''

Pakistan's military claims that 80 percent of North Waziristan has been wrested
from the militants and that at least 1,000 militants have been killed in the
offensive, known as Zarb-e-Azb, which started on June 15. The figures are
impossible to independently verify because the area is out of bounds for most
reporters.

Mr. Sharif was received by the army chief, Gen. Raheel Sharif, and given a
detailed briefing by military commanders on the region's security situation.

Mr. Sharif's visit coincided with military action on Pakistan's eastern border
with India. Pakistani officials say that at least 13 people have died as a
result of Indian fire and shelling of villages on the Kashmiri frontier. Indian
civilians have also died in the fighting in recent days, and each side blames
the other for violating a cease-fire.

A senior aide to Mr. Sharif said the visit to North Waziristan had been planned
two weeks ago, before the trouble with India erupted. ''The timing is very
opportune, as it dilutes opposition propaganda that the government is not
proactive in showing solidarity with the military,'' the aide said, speaking on
condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak with reporters.

The visit also provided a welcome distraction from Mr. Sharif's political woes.
Since mid-August, protests by the opposition politician Imran Khan and a fiery
cleric, Muhammad Tahir-ul Qadri, have badly hamstrung his government. Thousands
of protesters are camped out in the capital, Islamabad, demanding Mr. Sharif's
resignation.

Although Mr. Khan has failed to topple Mr. Sharif, he has managed to cast a pall
over the credibility of last year's general elections, with his claims of heavy
rigging in favor of Mr. Sharif.

Analysts doubt the protests will immediately upend the government, but they say
the struggle for survival has limited Mr. Sharif's ability to improve
governance.

The military has urged the government to negotiate with the opposition to end
the crisis. The military has also denied that it has surreptitiously backed the
protests, but some government ministers have privately accused the spy agency,
the ISI, of providing support to the protesters.

In an unexpected turn, Mr. Sharif's visit also had an unusual dimension in terms
of his relationship with the United States. Hours before he arrived, an American
drone fired a missile at a vehicle in Datta Khel, 20 miles west of the camp
where Mr. Sharif visited. Four people were killed and two were wounded, a
Pakistani security official said on the condition of anonymity.

The American attack was the closest a Pakistani political leader has come to a
covert campaign that is routinely condemned as a breach of national sovereignty
by military and civilian leaders.

In an apparent signal that drone strikes have effectively become normal, Mr.
Sharif did not comment on the strike.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/10/world/asia/premier-of-pakistan-visits-troops-i
n-tribal-area.html

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


