                              72 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            June 25, 2014 Wednesday

Delivery Drones Grounded by F.A.A.

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 445 words



HIGHLIGHT: Regulators this week reiterated the ban on the use of commercial
drones, stressing that it included drones for delivery.


Delivery drones have barely taken off and they're already being grounded.

In a memo released by the Federal Aviation Administration this week, the agency
said that delivery drones used for business purposes will continue to be banned
until further notice.

Sorry Amazon, that includes you.

Last year on "60 Minutes," Jeff Bezos, the Amazon founder, floated the notion of
using drones to deliver packages. He showed Charlie Rose, the show's host, a
tiny helicopter dropping Amazon packages on people's doorsteps. The company
planned to name its new delivery service "Prime Air."

But the F.A.A. clearly wants people delivering packages the old fashioned way:
by truck.

In the F.A.A. memo, titled "Interpretation of the Special Rule for Model
Aircraft," the agency said that since 2007, the commercial use of drones has
been illegal in the United States and would remain so until further notice.

Until now, flying drones for fun is still considered legal, as long as they are
kept below 400 feet and in no way used for commercial services.

But what about Amazon's "free" delivery. Couldn't the company just say these
drones aren't being used for business? Not so fast, the F.A.A. said.

"Any operation not conducted strictly for hobby or recreation purposes could not
be operated under the special rule for model aircraft. Clearly, commercial
operations would not be hobby or recreation flights," the agency said in the
memo. "Likewise, flights that are in furtherance of a business, or incidental to
a person's business, would not be a hobby or recreation flight."

In my column this week, "Smile! A Drone Is About to Take Your Picture," I noted
that drones are finally starting to enter the real world - and being used for
selfies - but in the process, people are getting hurt by these autonomous flying
vehicles.

Ryan Calo, an assistant professor at the University of Washington School of Law
who specializes in robotics and drones, told me that the worry about drones
colliding in the air, or people being hit by them, will start to ease as drones
become smarter.

"The next generation of drones, which are truly autonomous and can navigate
using sensors and code, rather than people controlling them, will be much safer
than the drones we're seeing today," Mr. Calo said in a phone interview.

As Mr. Calo and others have pointed out, it is unlikely that drones will be
permanently banned for commercial services in the United States. It's only a
matter of time before these vehicles are safe enough and powerful enough to
deliver packages.

The F.A.A. said it plans to revisit commercial use of drones at a later date and
potentially put new rules in place by 2015.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


