                             730 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 11, 2014 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Australian aircraft detects 'possible' new signal in hunt for jet

BYLINE: Chico Harlan

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 792 words


An Australian aircraft on Thursday may have detected the latest in a series of
deep-sea acoustic signals, authorities involved in the hunt for a missing
Malaysian airliner said, raising confidence that search teams are closing in on
wreckage that presumably lies at the bottom of the Indian Ocean.

On Friday, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said searchers are confident
that a series of underwater signals that have been picked up are coming from the
jet's black box, the Associated Press reported. Abbott was speaking while on an
official visit to China.

The first four audio transmissions were picked up by an Australian navy vessel,
the Ocean Shield. But the latest "possible signal" was detected by an Australian
surveillance plane operating in the same area, the Australian agency
coordinating the multinational search said in a statement.

The plane, an Australian air force P-3 Orion, has been dropping sonar buoys -
listening devices - in the vicinity of where the earlier pings were heard.

"The acoustic data will require further analysis overnight but shows potential
of being from a man-made source," retired Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, who
is in charge of the search, said in a statement.

The signals, though not conclusively linked to the plane, have reinvigorated a
search that had languished for weeks amid dead ends and false leads. Houston
said Wednesday that he believed that crews might identify evidence of the
plane's remains within days.

The search is centered on an area about 1,415 miles northwest of Perth, a city
on the western coast of Australia. The planned search area Thursday - about
22,300 square miles - is the smallest since the plane vanished March 8.

The disappearance of Flight 370, which was carrying 227 passengers and 12 crew
members from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to Beijing, has turned into one of the most
confounding aviation mysteries on record. The Boeing 777 is presumed to have
crashed in the southern Indian Ocean, having traveled in its final hours in a
direction opposite to its scheduled flight path. Malaysian officials say the
plane was deliberately steered off course by somebody on board, though they have
not completely discounted the possibility of some kind of mechanical failure.

"At the end of the day, if we do not stray from the course, we will find out"
some answers about what happened to the plane, Malaysian Defense Minister
Hishammuddin Hussein said Thursday in an interview with the BBC. "I know we will
find the plane. It's just a matter of when."

Australian officials had few details about the latest detection and did not
specify the location of the transmission.

The surveillance plane was able to listen for the deep-sea sounds because of a
move Wednesday to drop the sonar buoys. The buoys stay on the surface but deploy
hydrophones to a depth of 1,000 feet. The buoys are equipped with radios that
transmit any data back to the aircraft.

The search for Flight 370's flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder is a
daunting task, and it will ultimately require not just listening devices but
also underwater drones and robotic, clawlike devices that could retrieve debris.
For now, though, search teams are trying only to pick up more transmissions,
which would allow for a better estimate about where to begin the labor-intensive
underwater operation.

The black-box emergency beacons could run out of battery power within hours or
days, Australian officials say. Already, they may be operating beyond their
expected 30-day power supply. Search officials have not concluded that the
signals are coming from a black box, but they say the frequencies are consistent
with what would be expected of tracking pings from a black box.

An underwater drone, known as the Bluefin-21, will begin deep-dive sorties only
after more signals are detected or officials determine that the black-box
batteries have probably died. The Bluefin-21 would be operating in about
three-mile depths, near its technical limit. The detection of additional pings
could help narrow the underwater search area, which is about 500 square miles.
The Bluefin-21, which moves about four mph, would need weeks to cover that zone.
It would first travel to the depths and probably make overlapping,
back-and-forth patterns over the area.

"The system can be programmed to follow a number of possible routes,"
Christopher Johnson, a spokesman for the U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command, said in
an e-mail, "but the most likely would follow a pattern that would resemble how
someone might mow their lawn - back and forth over the area until the entire
programmed sector is covered."

Johnson added, "We believe the equipment will be able to operate at the depths
we would likely encounter."

chico.harlan@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


