                              73 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 26, 2013 Tuesday 8:13 PM EST

Pakistan unveils homegrown drones

BYLINE: Tim Craig;Haq Nawaz Khan

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 786 words


Pakistan unveils its own drones amid anti-U.S. protests

Development of the unarmed drones represents a significant milestone for the
Pakistani military.

KABUL - Pakistan's military unveiled two domestically produced drones Monday,
even as the country is facing growing protests over U.S. drone strikes on
Pakistani soil.

After years of preparation, the Strategically Unmanned Aerial Vehicles were
formally announced by Gen. Ashfaq Kayani, chief of Pakistan's military. The
drones, called Burraq and Shahpar, will not be armed and are to be used only for
surveillance, military officials said.

The development of the drones, thought to have a range of about 75 miles,
represents a milestone for the country's military and scientists, Pakistani and
Western analysts said.

"It is a landmark and a historic event, wherein a very effective force
multiplier has been added to the inventory of the armed forces," the Pakistani
military said in a statement.

For years, Pakistan's military has seen up-close the effectiveness of the U.S.
drone campaign, which has included hundreds of strikes within the country's
borders. When the United States began using armed drones after the Sept. 11,
2001, terrorist attacks, then-Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf asked
President George W. Bush to supply drone technology to his country.

The United States declined, setting in motion Pakistan's homegrown effort to
develop the technology.

Pakistan's military first revealed its drone technology at a trade show last
year, but Monday's formal unveiling coincides with an ongoing farewell tour by
Kayani, who is retiring after two terms as army chief.

Brig. Muhammad Saad, a former senior officer in the Pakistani military familiar
with the subject, said the country already had less-sophisticated drones for
intelligence gathering, with a range of about six miles. The newer models, he
said, will prove useful for the "collecting of more operational intelligence"
that could help guide helicopter gunships and fighter jets to specific targets.

"This is a great achievement, and the drones can be used instead of surveillance
jets and fighter jets that would be costlier" to fly, Saad said.

Saad and other observers said Pakistan is still years away from being able to
develop armed drones. Still, Monday's announcement is likely to unnerve
Pakistan's neighbors, including India and Afghanistan.

Peter W. Singer, a security analyst at the Brookings Institution, said most
surveillance drones can be armed, though they will lack the precision of
U.S.-developed models.

"Almost any unmanned system can be armed in a crude style, such as dropping a
bomb or even turning it into an equivalent of a cruise missile that you fly into
the target," said Singer, adding that the announcement will probably add to
growing fears about proliferation of drone technology.

The Pakistani military's announcement comes as the country is facing growing
discontent in some parts over recent U.S. drone strikes, including an attack
this month that killed the leader of the Pakistani Taliban.

Protests continued Monday in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in the
aftermath of the strike, as well as one last week that killed several commanders
affiliated with the Haqqani militant network.

Since Saturday, supporters of the province's chief political leader, Imran Khan,
have been attempting to disrupt NATO supply convoys traveling to and from
landlocked Afghanistan. The protesters set up checkpoints on at least three
suspected supply routes, requiring truck drivers to verify that they are not
carrying goods for the NATO mission in Afghanistan.

On Sunday, protesters dragged some truck drivers out of their vehicles, but
local police said Monday that they would try to guarantee safe passage of the
cargo.

Spokesmen for the NATO mission in Afghanistan did not respond to requests for
comment.

Ministers in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa provincial government also marched in
protest at the U.S. Consulate in Peshawar on Monday.

"We have told the U.S. that no more drone strikes on our land will be
tolerated," said Sirajul Haq, a senior government minister.

At the federal level, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has repeatedly condemned the
strikes but has vowed that NATO supply routes will remain open.

After last week's strike, Sharif's government issued a statement saying that it
has the capability to shoot down U.S. drones. "However, we are a responsible
state and do not want to take any decisions in haste," said Rana Tanveer
Hussain, the minister of defense production.

tim.craig@washpost.com

Khan reported from Peshawar. Shaiq Hussain in Islamabad, Pakistan, contributed
to this report.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


