                             738 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             June 14, 2014 Saturday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Democrats support Obama's stance

BYLINE: Ed O'Keefe

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 941 words


Democrats stood firm behind President Obama's decision              against
military intervention in Iraq on Friday, asserting that the upheaval taking
place there is not being caused by an absence of U.S. troops.

Some Republican lawmakers have faulted Obama for failing to prevent rebel
fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) from seizing territory
in northern and western Iraq from the government of Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki. The intensified fighting threatens to completely destabilize the
country, with potentially dire political consequences in the region.

But Democrats say the current violence was not a result of Obama's decision to
withdraw U.S. forces in 2011. They instead blame Maliki for refusing an
agreement that would have kept U.S. forces in the country. The outburst of
fighting, they say, is the result of the Iraqi government's failure to quell
sectarian tensions between Maliki's Shiite-dominated government and minority
Sunni and Kurdish populations.

"What's happening in Iraq today is an absolute tragedy, but it is much more a
consequence of our invasion than our withdrawal," Sen. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.)
said in an interview. "The blame for what's happening right now is squarely at
Maliki's feet. This is not a responsibility of the United States."

Murphy arrived in Washington as a House lawmaker in 2007 as Congress prepared to
debate President George W. Bush's proposed troop "surge" to help end the growing
conflict. Murphy said Friday that his vote against the surge contributed in no
way to the fresh trouble there.

Rep. Adam B. Schiff (D-Calif.) was a junior member of the Democratic caucus when
party leaders began calling for a withdrawal from Iraq. Now a senior member of
the House Intelligence Committee, he said Friday that Obama had no choice but to
withdraw after Maliki refused to ensure U.S. troops legal immunity as part of a
"status of forces" agreement.

"Whether we kept a certain number of troops there or pulled out completely, if
we can't get the Maliki government to include a large segment of its population
in its security forces and protection, then the small amount of forces that we
would have left there might have slowed this day, but they wouldn't have
prevented it altogether," Schiff said.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) on Friday applauded Obama's
decision. It was eight years ago this summer that she and Senate Democrats made
the worsening situation in Iraq the centerpiece of their successful campaign to
take control of Congress. Once in control, Democratic leaders sparred with Bush
on Iraq for most of the final two years of his presidency.

Their position was further buoyed when Obama won the 2008 presidential election
in part by highlighting his opposition to the Iraq war. His decision to withdraw
U.S. forces at the end of 2011 was so popular that even a majority of
Republicans backed the move.

The war remains deeply unpopular with Americans. In March 2013, 38 percent said
the costs of the war were worth the effort; 58 percent said they were not.

The war had been especially unpopular among Democrats almost from its beginning,
while Republicans were more supportive at the start. A decision by Obama to use
military force in Iraq is unlikely to suddenly find great favor among either
Democrats or Republicans.

That's why GOP lawmakers have largely avoided talk of redeploying ground troops.
Instead, some are calling for the quick use of other military options.

On Friday, Sens. John McCain (Ariz.) and Lindsey O. Graham (S.C.), Obama's
fiercest GOP critics on issues of foreign policy, called the situation an
"urgent security problem" and said that U.S. airstrikes and other military and
intelligence actions would be the only way to stop ISIS.

Others agreed.

"We shouldn't have boots on the ground, but we need to be hitting these columns
of terrorists marching on Baghdad with drones now," House Foreign Affairs
Committee Chairman Edward R. Royce (R-Calif.) said in a statement Friday. Rep.
Michael McCaul (R-Tex.), who chairs the House Homeland Security Committee, said
Obama's decision to take the next several days to review options means the
administration "is wringing its hands as Baghdad is about to fall. This is not
leadership."

If Obama chooses to take limited military action, he could face opposition from
dozens of Democrats who opposed military action against the government of Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad last summer, a factor that contributed to the
president's decision not to use military force. Nearly a year later, Democrats
said congressional consultation will be needed again.

"The White House has got to come to us very quickly" with options, Sen. Timothy
M. Kaine (D-Va.) said Thursday before Obama spoke on the issue. "They're working
around-the-clock trying to figure that out, but they need to now bring that to
us."

Murphy said he believed that an existing authorization for the use of military
force in Iraq would not apply if Obama seeks to target members of ISIS.

"If he's contemplating any new sustained military action in Iraq, I would argue
that he needs a new authorization," he said.

Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (D-Hawaii), an Army veteran of the war in Iraq, said Friday
that Obama should consult Congress but that she would oppose using force.

"It is not within the best interest of the United States to insert ourselves in
the middle of his religious, sectarian war," she said. "For those who are
calling for airstrikes, for those who are calling for drone strikes, my question
is, what will that actually accomplish? What is the goal?"

ed.okeefe@washpost.com

Aaron Blake and Alice Crites contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


