                             749 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            August 28, 2014 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

Browns wideout Gordon receives season-long ban from NFL

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 619 words


The Cleveland Browns learned Wednesday that wide receiver Josh Gordon's
indefinite suspension by the NFL has been upheld and he will miss at least 16
games for another violation of the league's substance abuse policy. A repeat
drug offender, Gordon had appealed the penalty, hoping it would be reduced so he
could play this season.

The league announced that arbitrator Harold Henderson supported Gordon's
year-long suspension for marijuana use. The Pro Bowler, who was subject to more
frequent testing, will begin serving his suspension immediately and the league
said in its statement that his "eligibility for reinstatement will be determined
following the 2014 season."

In the meantime, Gordon is not allowed to practice with the team, attend
meetings or other club functions.

Browns General Manager Ray Farmer expressed some disappointment at the decision,
but said the team has no choice but to move ahead without Gordon.

"While we may have strong feelings on the timing and the process of this
decision, we have also consistently communicated that we will focus on what we
can control in our day to day approach," Farmer said in a statement. "Right now
that is preparing our team for the 2014 season and at the same time, supporting
Josh however we are able under NFL guidelines during his suspension."

The Browns will have to somehow make up for the league-leading 1,646 yards, 18.9
yards per catch and nine touchdowns Gordon produced last season.

"I'd like to apologize to my teammates, coaches, the Cleveland Browns
organization and our fans," Gordon said in a statement. "I am very disappointed
that the NFL and its hearing office didn't exercise better discretion and
judgment in my case. I would like to sincerely thank the people who have been
incredibly supportive of me during this challenging time, including my family,
my agent, my union, my legal team, and the Cleveland Browns staff."

While he's out, Gordon, who served a two-game suspension for a drug violation
last season, will need to pass drug tests, comply with treatment and apply for
reinstatement with Commissioner Roger Goodell before he plays again. Gordon
could possibly return inside a year if he stays clean.

l CARDINALS:  Arizona signed Tommy Kelly, two days after he was cut by New
England.

The 33-year-old Kelly is coming off surgery to repair a torn anterior cruciate
ligament but was playing with the Patriots' first-team defense before he was
cut.

The Cardinals were in the market for a tackle after Darnell Dockett went down
with a season-ending knee injury.

l BENGALS:  Pro Bowl linebacker Vontaze Burfict signed a three-year extension
that runs through the 2017 season and will pay him a maximum of $20.05 million.

l TITANS:  Defensive lineman Jurrell Casey reached a deal on a contract
extension multiple media outlets say is for $36 million over four years, with
$20.5 million guaranteed.

l CHIEFS:  Authorities say a bus taking the team to its Wisconsin hotel was
involved in an accident.

The Outagamie County sheriff's office says it was escorting the Chiefs' five
buses from the airport to the hotel when a vehicle entered the intersection and
collided with one of the buses.

Two adults and three children were in the vehicle that struck the bus. One of
the children had a minor cut to the head and was taken by ambulance to a
hospital.

No one on the Chiefs' bus was hurt.

Kansas City faces Green Bay on Thursday night.

MISC.:  Police in North Carolina briefly detained and questioned a man who flew
a drone with a camera mounted on it over a stadium during a preseason game.

Area news media outlets report that the drone was spotted during the Aug. 17
game between the Panthers and Chiefs at Bank of America Stadium in Charlotte.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


