                             743 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              July 20, 2014 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

Why Obama should send several thousand more troops to Iraq

BYLINE: Michael O'Hanlon

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 1106 words


The solution to the violence in Iraq is political, not military. But if a
suitable government can be formed in Baghdad, the United States has to consider
a wide range of military options. And to be effective, America's troop presence
in Iraq should exceed the hundreds of Special Operations advisers that President
Obama has announced thus far.

Certainly, no one should expect the United States, after the huge military
effort of the past dozen years, to redeploy main combat units to Iraq to try to
counter the territorial advances of the extremist organization known as the
Islamic State. Lesser but still significant American military assistance doesn't
make sense, either, absent a new government that incorporates Sunni and Kurdish
politicians in meaningful power-sharing. Many Iraqi Sunnis now consider Prime
Minister Nouri al-Maliki  the "Shiite Saddam" and despise him even more than the
Islamic State. They will not cooperate with Baghdad or with us - and the Obama
administration is therefore right to focus first and foremost on Iraqi politics
at present.

But what would be the right American contribution to an Iraqi-led military
campaign against the Islamic State? Both drones and manned aircraft would
probably be useful tools, but they might not be enough. Indeed, the history of
trying to make a difference on the ground through pinpricks from the sky in wars
such as this one is hardly encouraging. We tried that in Kosovo with several
hundred aircraft in 1999, and achieved success only after increasing our air
power threefold and hinting at a ground invasion two months later. Air power
helped a great deal in Afghanistan in 2001, but only because we had an effective
military ally in the Northern Alliance, which made it possible to isolate and
then target the enemy from the air, as George Washington University political
scientist Stephen Biddle has shown. We had manned and unmanned aircraft in Iraq
from 2003 through 2006, yet we were losing the war there until the combination
of the Sunni Awakening and the troop surge turned things around.

None of the breakthroughs in drone technology in the years since change the
basic facts: It remains very hard to find and destroy an enemy of any
significant size from the air absent good intelligence gained largely on the
ground, and absent an ability to protect one's allies on the ground from
retribution by the enemy. U.S. troops do not need to attempt these functions
again. But our military options need to help restore the Iraqi army's ability to
do so.

Fortunately, there are many options between limited airstrikes and all-out
invasion. Even the total of all the options I consider plausible would not
require more than 10,000 U.S. troops in Iraq at most - roughly the number that
the United States originally planned to keep in Iraq after 2011 and roughly the
number that the Obama administration intends to have in Afghanistan next year.
That would involve real costs and risks to American troops, but the numbers
would not be enormous.

One option is to deploy a significant number of Special Operations teams, well
above and beyond the several hundred American advisers sent to Iraq over the
past month. If the Islamic State has 10,000 dedicated fighters whom U.S. and
Iraqi units must ultimately take off the battlefield, the experiences of Iraq
and Afghanistan during the past decade suggest that we would need to conduct
perhaps several thousand raids informed by good intelligence to counter the
threat. Ideally, combined U.S. and Iraqi forces would strike hard early in any
operation so that the enemy would not have time to adjust, carrying out many of
these raids in the first couple of months. This would require having up to
several dozen U.S. commando teams in Iraq or based in neighboring countries,
totaling 1,000 to 5,000 troops, for a mission lasting perhaps several months at
peak intensity.

A second option involves a type of military unit developed in recent years in
Afghanistan called a Security Force Assistance Team. This is a group of 10 to 20
U.S. soldiers who embed with local forces at the small-unit level. Since the
Iraqi army has in some cases dissolved, such advisory teams - which live with
and deploy into the field alongside local troops - could be crucial to restoring
the good tactics, unit cohesion, leadership confidence and tenacity that Iraqi
units will require. Assuming that they might be deployed with most of Iraq's
army battalions, there could be a need for up to 100 such teams deploying for
several months, and up to one or two years at most. Add logistical and
intelligence support for these teams, as well as quick-response units that could
help them if they got in trouble, and the numbers would again reach into the low
thousands.

None of this would appeal to Americans weary of overseas engagement in general,
the war on terror in particular and Iraq most of all. And a recent classified
military assessment  reported by the New York Times found that some Iraqi units
are infiltrated by Sunni extremists or Iranian-backed Shiite personnel, making
it difficult for U.S. forces to work with some of them, at least in the early
going. But accepting some risk is necessary. The alternative may be to see a
brutal group that seeks a caliphate over much of the Middle East - and that
continues to recruit and warp the minds of thousands of fighters holding Western
passports - entrenched in much of Iraq and Syria. That prospect is incompatible
with U.S. national security interests.

Indeed, by indicating a willingness to do more now, as Iraqis consider
alternative ruling coalitions, Washington may also help prod the Iraqis to
choose a more unifying leader than Maliki. Substantial forms of military
assistance may prove a significant inducement to pick a better leader.

Of course, for an American president who has been intent on ending two wars and
getting U.S. troops home from Iraq and Afghanistan on his watch, returning to
Iraq in the manner I sketch out here would be a bitter pill. But it would not be
incompatible with Obama's assertion that he has ended the main U.S. combat roles
in both countries, since even if several thousand troops were to remain after
Obama leaves the White House, those residual forces would be much less than a
tenth of their peak sizes in either place.

Most of all, it is what may be needed to keep America safe. And that, of course,
is the president's main responsibility to the nation.

Twitter: @MichaelEOHanlon

Read more from Outlook:

Why we stuck with Maliki - and lost Iraq

It's not Washington's job to tell Iraq who its leaders should be

Follow our updates on Facebook and Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


