                              74 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putting Drones to the Test

BYLINE: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 527 words


Drones will soon take to the skies across the United States in federally
approved tests that are meant to clear the way for the commercial use of
unmanned aircraft. But before that happens, lawmakers and regulators need to
deal with a host of unresolved privacy and safety concerns.

The Federal Aviation Administration last week selected six universities and
government agencies to test civilian versions of drone aircraft, which are best
known for their use by the military and the Central Intelligence Agency to kill
suspected terrorists in places like Pakistan and Yemen.

The tests are meant to help the F.A.A. integrate unmanned aerial vehicles, as
drones are formally known, into the national airspace by 2015 under a law passed
by Congress in 2012.

Like many new technologies, drones pose both opportunities and challenges. The
aircraft, which can range widely in size from less than a pound to more than
30,000 pounds, can be incredibly useful but also very dangerous.

For example, when outfitted with high-resolution cameras they can help
businesses monitor remote infrastructure like pipelines and power lines more
cheaply and easily than when conventional means like helicopters are used. But
drones can just as easily be used by law-enforcement agencies and big
corporations to conduct unconstitutional monitoring of individuals or groups of
people.

Given the National Security Agency's widespread spying and efforts by
advertisers and Internet companies to track consumers online, another technology
capable of conducting mass surveillance could become a serious threat to
privacy. There are also safety issues. Drones operated by inexperienced or
unlicensed pilots pose a hazard to people and property in populated areas.

While the F.A.A. has wisely added privacy requirements to its test program, the
agency is primarily a safety regulator. It is best suited for developing the
kinds of regulations that require the makers of drones to endow their machines
with the ability to sense potential collisions and to avoid them.

The F.A.A. is also well placed to determine which kinds of drones are best for
specific locations. For example, the agency should make clear that most drones
will not be allowed to fly at low altitudes through residential neighborhoods,
where they would pose a much greater danger than they would in rural areas.
(Current F.A.A. regulations require police departments and other domestic
agencies to fly drones at altitudes below 400 feet to keep them away from
commercial planes, and only during daylight hours.)

As drone technology improves and becomes more affordable -- some drones
outfitted with cameras for shooting high-definition video and still photographs
are already selling for as little as $300 -- unmanned aircraft will undoubtedly
become more common.

Some state legislatures have passed laws restricting drone surveillance,
including requiring a probable cause warrant for law enforcement to use drones
to gather evidence. Congress should enact similar safeguards. Lawmakers should
also outline how long data collected by drones operated by law enforcement and
private businesses can be stored and what it can be used for.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/opinion/sunday/putting-drones
-to-the-test.html

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


