                              75 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Rise of the Drone Master: Pop Culture Recasts Obama

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1205 words


WASHINGTON -- In Marvel's latest popcorn thriller, Captain America battles
Hydra, a malevolent organization that has infiltrated the highest levels of the
United States government. There are missile attacks, screeching car chases,
enormous explosions, evil assassins, data-mining supercomputers and giant killer
drones ready to obliterate millions of people.

Its inspiration?

President Obama, the optimistic candidate of hope and change.

Five and a half years into his presidency, Mr. Obama has had a powerful impact
on the nation's popular culture. But what many screenwriters, novelists and
visual artists have seized on is not an inspirational story of the first black
president. Instead they have found more compelling story lines in the bleaker,
morally fraught parts of Mr. Obama's legacy.

''We were trying to find a bridge to the same sort of questions that Barack
Obama has to address,'' said Joe Russo, who with his brother, Anthony, directed
''Captain America: The Winter Soldier.'' ''If you're saying with a drone strike,
we can eradicate an enemy of the state, what if you say with 100 drone strikes,
we can eradicate 100? With 1,000, we can eradicate 1,000? At what point do you
stop?''

Beyond ''Captain America,'' a virtual arts festival of films, books, plays,
comics, television shows and paintings have been using as their underlying
narratives the sometimes grim reality of Mr. Obama's presidency.

The commando raid that Mr. Obama ordered to kill Osama bin Laden is the basis
for the actions of the fictional President Ogden in the Godzilla comic books.
Several episodes of CBS's ''The Good Wife'' feature mysterious wiretaps of the
main characters by the National Security Agency. Artists in California are
protesting drones by sculpturing a Predator out of mud. In New York, playwrights
are exploring disappointment in the pace of societal change in Mr. Obama's
America.

The public relations machinery of the White House assiduously tries to control
Mr. Obama's image and legacy, but there is nothing it can do to stop artistic
interpretation of his policies. After inheriting a post-Sept. 11 surveillance
state and security apparatus from President George W. Bush, Mr. Obama pulled
back in some areas and expanded others. Artists have focused particularly on the
N.S.A. spying revelations disclosed by Edward J. Snowden and the president's
''kill list'' of terrorists targeted by drones.

''The drone wars are really one of Obama's signature foreign policies,'' said
Trevor Paglen, a photographer whose fuzzy images of flying drones are exhibited
in galleries around the world. ''We are living in a moment that's characterized
by this mass surveillance. I think art can help us call attention to certain
things. It can help contribute to the cultural vocabulary that we use.''

Past presidents have also seen their actions reflected in the culture of the
day. Ronald Reagan's crusade against Communism in Central America became fodder
for 1980s movies such as ''Red Dawn,'' and Reaganomics inspired Alex P. Keaton,
the conservative teenager played by Michael J. Fox on NBC's popular sitcom
''Family Ties.'' Artists in the 1980s also used their canvases to protest the
conservative cultural movement that Reagan embraced and nurtured.

Bill Clinton's White House inspired the NBC series ''West Wing,'' and the
president's affair with Monica Lewinsky was an irresistible story line for
everything from cartoon strips to novels. When Mr. Clinton's effort to capture a
Somali warlord in Mogadishu went bad, the disaster became the book and movie
''Black Hawk Down.''

The difference for Mr. Obama may be the gap between what his supporters expected
and what they now see.

The artist Kara Walker set off a minor controversy in 2012 with a
black-and-white drawing displayed at the Newark Public Library in New Jersey.
The drawing included an image of Mr. Obama standing at a lectern beneath a
burning cross. It is titled ''The moral arc of history ideally bends towards
justice but just as soon as not curves back around toward barbarism, sadism, and
unrestrained chaos.''

In New York City, the playwright Richard Nelson's series at the Public Theater
explored the lives of family members who, among other things, become
disillusioned with Mr. Obama and his promises of change.

''The arts are often a left or progressive community,'' said Nato Thompson, the
chief curator at Creative Time, a public arts group in New York City that
sponsors and promotes art exhibitions around the country. ''There are a lot of
people being let down by a president they were very enthusiastic about. There's
a big sense of betrayal.''

''It's affected the tone'' of the art being produced, he added.

He continued, ''It's getting more cynical and desperate.''

Issues like the racial disparities in the nation's prisons often become the raw
material for paintings, poems, drawings and plays, Mr. Thompson said. ''Where
you have a black president but deeply racist policies are continuing like in the
prison population, you have a lot of artists who are deeply interested in these
contradictions,'' he said.

But the most common artistic themes revolve around the surveillance and privacy
issues.

On the campus of Occidental College in Los Angeles, the artists Nadia Afghani
and Matt Fisher sculptured a full-size, 55-foot-wide MQ-1B Predator drone out of
mud. In an accompanying manifesto titled ''We Will Show You Fear in a Handful of
Dust,'' the artists say they are ''proposing and modeling a possible act of
resistance to the authoritarian machinery'' of the drones.

In the Captain America movie, a politician played by Robert Redford argues that
using super-drones to pre-emptively kill 20 million people to save the planet's
other seven billion is an acceptable trade-off.

Anthony Russo, one of the directors, said the plot served dual purposes:
creating an exciting narrative for a Hollywood action film while also giving
people something deeper and more personally relevant to think about.

''That was very much our thinking in terms of trying to turn these helicarriers
and Project Insight into the ultimate drone technology gone bad,'' Mr. Russo
said, referring to the movie's aircraft carrier-size drones and a diabolical
project to link the drones to a vast surveillance network. ''We tried to come up
with a fantasy expression or an allegorical expression of where those anxieties
and problems can lead.''

Joe Russo said moviemakers and other artists had seized on the shadowy themes of
Mr. Obama's presidency because more was known about what the government was
doing.

But Mr. Russo said that, in his view, Mr. Obama had been more transparent about
some parts of his national security agenda, including drone strikes. In a speech
last May, the president offered more detail than he had previously about the
drone program and pledged to curtail it, with mixed results so far.

''Governments for thousands of years have enacted things that may not
necessarily be in the best interests of the general populace or is offensive to
the morality of the general populace,'' Mr. Russo said. ''Those things are
typically hidden. In his administration, they have not been hidden.''

Which, he said, is good for creative tension. ''That's created a debate,'' he
said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/us/politics/pop-culture-puts-spin-on-grim-real
ities-of-obama-presidency.html

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A scene from ''Captain America: The Winter Soldier,'' top, a
new movie with topics like missile attacks, data-mining supercomputers and
killer drones. In ''Sorry,'' above left, a play in a series by Richard Nelson, a
family is disillusioned with President Obama and his promises of change. An art
installation, above right, ''We Will Show You Fear in a Handful of Dust,'' takes
on drones. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARVEL STUDIOS AND WALT DISNEY PICTURES
SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES
J. EMILIO FLORES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 An image of an N.S.A. listening station by Trevor Paglen, who focuses on issues
of surveillance. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TREVOR PAGLEN/COURTESY OF METRO PICTURES) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


