                             751 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                          September 24, 2014 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

Syrian plane shot down over the Golan Heights

BYLINE: Ruth Eglash;William Booth

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 467 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


JERUSALEM - Israel's military said it shot down a Syrian fighter jet Tuesday
after the aircraft strayed less than a mile into airspace that Israel controls
over the Golan Heights.

The Syrian government made no official condemnation. The Syrian crew safely
ejected. Israeli officials said they assumed that the warplane had made a
mistake, albeit one they would not allow to go unpunished.

Military experts in Israel said it was the first time in nearly 30 years that
Israel downed a Syrian attack aircraft, although a Syrian drone that entered
Israeli-occupied territory last month was shot down.

The incident reflects how the Golan - captured by Israel in the 1967
Arab-Israeli war - is increasingly being drawn into the tensions in war-torn
Syria amid the growing reach of Islamist militants who now control more than 90
percent of the Syria-Israel frontier.

The Israeli army fired a U.S.-made Patriot surface-to-air missile at the Syrian
jet, a Soviet-made Sukhoi-24. According to the Israeli military, the two Syrian
crew members ejected and came down safely inside Syria. Local media reported
that the aircraft crashed near the Syrian town of Quneitra, which is controlled
by rebels linked to al-Qaeda.

The official Syrian Arab News Agency (SANA) quoted an anonymous Syrian military
official as saying that by shooting down a Syrian jet, Israel was showing
support for terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State and Jabhat
al-Nusra.

Moshe Maoz, a Syria expert at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, said the Syrian
government has its hands full and will likely not respond in any meaningful way
to the downing of its warplane - in part out of fear of what a tough Israeli
response could do to Syrian air bases.

Since the civil war started in Syria more than three years ago, fighting on the
Syrian side of the Golan Heights has regularly spilled over onto the Israeli
side. The United Nations has monitored a demilitarized buffer zone in the area
for 40 years.

The Israeli military said it appeared that the Syrian warplane was targeting not
Israel, but rebel forces that last month captured strategic points along the
frontier between Israel and Syria.

Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon warned: "We won't allow anybody, whether
it's a state or a terrorist organization, to threaten our security and violate
our sovereignty."

Ram Shmueli, a brigadier general in the Israeli reserves and a former head of
Israel's air force intelligence, said Israel is facing threats all along its
northern borders. "We are very much on alert to all types of drones, jets and
airplanes, even civilian airliners like those used during 9/11," saidShmueli, a
fighter pilot for more than 35 years. "Although we are not part of this war, we
have to keep the borders safe."

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


