                             758 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 13, 2014 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Briefs

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 542 words


U.S. DRONES KILL 13 IN PAKISTAN

ISLAMABAD Missiles from U.S. drones slammed into militant hideouts overnight in
northwestern Pakistan, killing 13 suspected insurgents and marking the
resumption of the CIA led program after a nearly six month break, officials said
Thursday.

The strikes were swiftly condemned by the Pakistani government, with the Foreign
Ministry saying that they were a violation of Pakistan's sovereignty and its
territorial integrity.

The strikes came just days after a five hour siege of Pakistan's busiest airport
ended with 36 people, including 10 militants, killed.

Priest killed in rectory attack phoenix A badly injured priest managed to
administer last rites to a fellow clergyman who was fatally shot at their Roman
Catholic church, setting off a search for suspects and clues.

Police say the Rev. Kenneth Walker was fatally shot and the Rev. Joseph Terra
physically assaulted. Police say they aren't certain of a motive.

Woman throws two kids from window, jumps las vegas Police say a woman apparently
threw a baby and a toddler out of a second story window of a Las Vegas home
before jumping from the window herself.

The two children suffered apparent head injuries. No information on the woman's
condition was released.

Substance counselor gets prison in DUI death los angeles A substance abuse
counselor who struck a pedestrian with her car and drove through a suburb with
the dying man on her windshield was sentenced to 55 years to life in prison.
Sherri Lynn Wilkins, 53, had a blood alcohol level twice the legal limit.

Former N.Y. Times editor to teach at Harvard boston Former New York Times
executive editor Jill Abramson is joining Harvard University as a visiting
lecturer this coming school year, the university announced.

Abramson was the first woman to hold the top post at the Times before her
dismissal in May.

White House tells cops to stay quiet on surveillancewash ington The Obama
administration has been quietly advising local police not to disclose details
about surveillance technology they are using to sweep up basic cellphone data
from entire neighborhoods, The Associated Press has learned.

Citing security reasons, the U.S. has intervened in routine public records cases
and criminal trials regarding use of the technology.

Restaurant at addicts' apartments may get booze permit los angeles A city
planning commission has approved a beer and wine permit for a restaurant at an
apartment complex that houses recovering alcoholics and drug addicts. The Skid
Row Housing Trust argued the permit was crucial to the financial health of the
complex in the gentrifying area. Opponents will take their challenge to the
Alcoholic Beverage Control board.

Musharraf travel appeal granted karachi, pakistan A Pakistani court lifted a ban
against former military ruler Pervez Musharraf traveling abroad. The government
has 15 days to appeal the decision in the country's Supreme Court, said
Musharraf's lawyer, Farogh Naseem. Musharraf has said he wants to visit his
ailing mother, who is hospitalized in Dubai.

Car bomb kills seven in Syria beirut A car bomb exploded in a pro government
neighborhood in the central Syrian city of Homs, killing at least seven people,
state media and activists said. Denver Post news services

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


