                             754 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            November 15, 2013 Friday
                              FRI REGIONAL Edition

Horns of dilemma

BYLINE: Bruce Finley

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 721 words


COMMERCE CITY

American military force may be brought to the growing fight to save elephants
and kill a $10 billion illicit trade tied to crime and ter rorism, U.S.
officials said Thurs day before crushing 6 tons of seized ivory.

But deploying drones, choppers and troops to bolster park ranger forces would
have to be done delicately to protect human rights and avoid destabilizing
Africa, according to wildlife and diplomatic officials.

African representatives observing the ivory crush at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal
National Wildlife Refuge pointed to poverty as a weakness traffickers exploit.

"The wildlife traffickers have stepped up their game. We must step up our game.
Clearly, the Defense Department has a role to play," U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service director Dan Ashe said in an interview.

African governments "have requested drone technology and intelligence that the
Defense Department will have at its disposal," Ashe said. U.S. defense
officials, he noted, are part of President Barack Obama's task force on this
issue.

The contemplation of military force reflects a toughening U.S. approach to
wildlife trafficking. Once treated primarily as a conservation issue,
trafficking is increasingly viewed by federal authorities and allies abroad as a
threat to security beyond safari parks.

A surge in slaughtering African elephants 30,000 killed this year, driven by
demand for ivory by Asia's expanding wealthy groups will, if unchecked, cause
extinction of elephants in a decade, conservation groups contend. And evidence
is emerging that the illicit wildlife trade is funding criminal networks and
terrorists, including the Somali group that assaulted the Westgate mall in Kenya
in September.

U.S. diplomats are talking with their Asian counterparts proposing teamwork. And
embassy officials this week helped highlight Thursday's destruction of ivory
tusks and carvings seized over two decades. Chinese TV crews were among those
covering the event.

While the focus is on law enforcement, "discussions with Africom" the U.S.
military's Africa branch have looked at the potential to help rangers patrolling
wildlife parks, said Judy Garber, deputy assistant secretary of state. "We've
been in discussions with them about what training might be possible."

Secretary of State John Kerry is offering $1 million for tips that help stop the
Xaysavang Network, a Laos based trafficking operation linked to killing
endangered elephants, rhinos and other species for products such as ivory.

Park rangers in African countries home to elephants "are just out gunned," said
David Hayes, a former deputy secretary of interior appointed in September to
Obama's task force. "What is clear is that military style capabilities need to
be introduced."

However, task force members and wildlife authorities say tactics will vary
widely, depending on conditions in different countries.

Creating "mixed teams" that incorporate three or four U.S. special forces
soldiers and military assets, guided by African park rangers who know local
conditions, appears most promising, said Richard Ruggiero, chief of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service's activities in Africa, Near East and South Asia.

The widening illegal wildlife trade threatens stability in Africa, Ruggiero
said.

"When you are seeing the Lord's Resistance Army running ivory, what does that do
in an area? The destabilization of governments is a bad thing for the world," he
said. "We need to work against it collectively."

World Bank funding has helped Sam Wasser, a University of Washington biology
professor, develop a system that uses DNA evidence to determine where seized
ivory originated in Africa. Wasser said he recently analyzed samples from the 17
tons of ivory confiscated this year at the Kenyan port at Mombasa.

"This will allow us to more efficiently direct law enforcement to the key
areas," Wasser said.

Yet poverty looms. Former Kenyan Wildlife Service employee Jim Nyamu,
campaigning now for U.S. help to save elephants, said he met recently with
poachers in Kenya.

"They kill elephants for $20 or $30, because people come to them and say if you
kill elephants, I will buy the ivory from you," Nyamu said. "I asked them what
it would take to get them to stop killing elephants. They said: Give us jobs."

Bruce Finley: 303 954 1700, twitter.com/finleybruce or bfinley@denverpost.com

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tracy Ellis loads tusks to be crushed at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal
National Wildlife Refuge on Thursday. Joe Amon, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


