                             759 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            August 19, 2014 Tuesday
                               TUE FINAL Edition

Iraqi forces retake dam, Obama says

BYLINE: Vivian Salama and Diaa Hadid

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 900 words


BAGHDAD

Iraqi and Kurdish forces recaptured Iraq's largest dam from Islamic militants
Monday following dozens of U.S. airstrikes, President Barack Obama said, in the
first major defeat for the extremists since they swept across the country this
summer.

Militants from the Islamic State group had seized the Mosul Dam on Aug. 7,
giving them access and control of enormous power and water reserves and
threatening to deny those resources to much of Iraq.

Iraqi forces suffered a string of humiliating defeats at the hands of the
Islamic State as the extremists took over large parts of northern and western
Iraq and sent religious minorities fleeing.

The militants' battlefield victories brought U.S. forces back into the conflict
for the first time since it withdrew its troops in 2011 and reflected the
growing international concern about the Sunni extremist group. Washington
launched attacks from its warplanes and drones Aug. 8.

Obama called recapturing the dam by Iraqi and Kurdish forces a "major step
forward" in the battle against Islamic State militants.

Had the dam been breached, it could have had catastrophic consequences and
endangered U.S. Embassy personnel in Baghdad, Obama said at the White House.

He said the U.S. is providing arms and assistance to Iraqi security forces as
well as Kurdish fighters.

"We've got a national security interest in making sure our people are protected
and in making sure that a savage group that seems willing to slaughter people
for no rhyme or reason other than they have not kowtowed that a group like that
is contained, because ultimately it can pose a threat to us," Obama told
reporters.

Obama also had signaled in a statement last week that protecting "critical
infrastructure" would be part of what officials have described as a limited
military intervention. This was, however, the first time Iraqi, Kurdish and U.S.
forces had come together to launch a major ground assault.

He also urged the badly fractured and largely dysfunctional Iraqi government to
move quickly to forge a united front. He noted last week's decision by Nouri al
Maliki to step down as Iraq's prime minister, a move that raised hopes a new
government could roll back Iraq's powerful Sunni insurgency and prevent the
country from splitting apart.

"They've got to get this done because the wolf's at the door," Obama said.

There were conflicting statements throughout the day from the Kurdish
commanders, the Iraqi military in Baghdad, the Pentagon and the militants of the
Islamic State group over who was in control of the strategic 2.1 mile dam that
spans the Tigris River. Completed in 1986 under Saddam Hussein, it includes a
sprawling complex with power generators, offices and employee housing. The
southern end is mostly reserved for housing and offices.

Before Obama spoke, Kurdish forces spokesman Halgurd Hekmat said the peshmerga
regained full control of the dam and its surrounding facilities following two
days of fierce clashes. But Iraq's Defense Ministry said security forces
"liberated a large part of the Mosul Dam" with the help of U.S. airstrikes,
adding that forces had not freed the entire complex.

Iraqi army spokesman Lt. Gen. Qassim al Moussawi said at least 170 bombs have
been dismantled around the dam but many more remain. He added that militants
fled to areas near the south of the complex, hiding in homes and offices on the
premises.

The Islamic State group denied it had lost control of the facility, saying on a
website frequently used by the militants that the Iraqi government claim was a
"mere propaganda war."

The U.S. Central Command said it carried out 15 airstrikes near the dam Monday
with fighter jets, bombers and drones. There were 25 U.S. airstrikes on Saturday
and Sunday, it said.

The Obama administration also has agreed to supply peshmerga forces with light
weapons and ammunition, as have the French.

The moves may provide Iraqi forces with a significant morale boost as they try
to retake territory overrun by the Islamic State this summer.

Some 1.5 million people have been displaced by fighting in Iraq since the
Islamic State's rapid advance began in June. The scale of the humanitarian
crisis prompted the U.N. to declare its highest level of emergency last week.

Obama said other U.S. goals also had been met in Iraq, including stopping a
militant surge toward the Kurdish capital of Irbil, but he declined to set a
time frame to limit U.S. military action in the country.

The president said his primary goal in Iraq is to "make sure we have a viable
partner" and a "government formation process that is credible, legitimate and
can appeal to Sunnis" and other Iraqi minorities. "We've made significant
progress on that front, but we're not there yet," Obama said.

Iraq's new prime minister designate, Haider al Abadi, has said he will form a
new government within the next two weeks. "When we see a credible Iraqi
government," Obama said in remarks in the White House press briefing room, "we
are then in a position to engage in planning" for the future.

Asked about U.S. "mission creep," Obama said "if we have effective partners on
the ground, mission creep is much less likely." When U.S. officials "start
deciding that we're the ones that have to do it all ourselves, because of the
excellence of our military, that can work for a time, we learned that in Iraq.
But it's not sustainable."

The Washington Post contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


