                             757 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                             May 7, 2014 Wednesday
                               WED FINAL Edition

Briefs

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 18A

LENGTH: 590 words


CLINTON: GUN RESTRICTIONS CONSISTENT WITH RIGHTS

OXEN HILL, MD. Hillary Rodham Clinton said Tuesday the nation's gun culture has
gotten "way out of balance" and the U.S. needs to rein in the notion that
"anybody can have a gun, anywhere, any time."

The former secretary of state and potential 2016 Democratic presidential
candidate said the idea that anyone can have a gun is not in the "best interest
of the vast majority of people." But she said that approach does not conflict
with the rights of people to own firearms.

Clinton waded into the polarizing issue of gun politics during an appearance at
the National Council for Behavioral Health conference. The Democratic controlled
Senate voted against legislation last year that would have expanded background
checks.

California explores plan to run water uphill * SAN FRANCISCO State officials are
considering an audacious plan to use pumps to reverse the flow of California
Aqueduct water back uphill to parched Northern California cities by this summer.

State water engineers say it will be a complex challenge, requiring millions of
dollars to defy gravity.

Farmers would bear costs estimated at $1.5 million to $9.5 million.

Russian punkers tell Congress of rights abuses washington Two members of the
Russian dissident punk group Pussy Riot went to the Capitol and asked members of
Congress to add 16 officials to the list of Russian human rights violators who
face U.S. sanctions.

Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alekhina said Russia has resumed abusing
prisoners, using mandatory psychiatric treatment for some.

U.S. sanctions both sides in South Sudan conflict washington The Treasury
Department issued sanctions against two individuals on either side of the deadly
conflict in South Sudan, which has killed thousands of people.

Peter Gadet, who defected from the South Sudan's military, and Marial Chanuong,
commander of the government's presidential guard force, are accused of leading
attacks.

GOP establishment gets leg up on tea party washington North Carolina House
Speaker Thom Tillis captured the Republican nomination to oppose imperiled
Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, overcoming anti establishment rivals by a comfortable
margin in a test of the tea party movement.

In Ohio, U.S. House Speaker John Boehner easily won renomination in a bid for
his 13th term, while Democrats picked county executive Ed Fitzgerald to
challenge Republican Gov. John Kasich.

In Indiana, Republican Rep. Susan Brooks took 75 percent of the vote in a three
way race.

News media challenge ban on droneswash ington Sixteen media organizations are
challenging the Federal Aviation Administration's ban on journalists' use of
drones, saying it violates First Amendment protection.

The organizations filed a brief with the National Transportation Safety Board in
support of aerial photographer Raphael Pirker, who was fined by the FAA for
flying a small drone near the University of Virginia to make a commercial video
in October 2011.

Local al Qaeda leader killed in Syria beirut A roadside bomb in Syria killed
local al Qaeda leader Ali al Nuaimi of the Nusra Front and his wife, activists
said.

The commander was killed near the town of Busra al Sham, said Omar al Hariri of
the pro rebel Sham News Network. The Britain based Syrian Observatory for Human
Rights called it an "assassination."

Meanwhile, President Barack Obama is expected to meet with the head of Syria's
opposition council in the coming days, as the U.S. weighs more economic
sanctions against Syrian President Bashar Assad. Denver Post news services

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


