                              76 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            December 22, 2013 Sunday
                              SUN PERSPECT Edition

Drones fly in the face of hunting traditions

BYLINE: Eric Sandstrom

SECTION: PERSPECT; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 1033 words


As we prepare to celebrate America's traditional values of family togetherness,
spiritual renewal and maxing out credit cards, Colorado's Parks and Wildlife
Commission finds itself questioning the potential use of unmanned, radio
controlled, camera toting aircraft for the purpose of hunting big game.

Drones.

Commissioners expect to squash this cockamamie idea next month before it has a
chance to get off the ground. That this issue using drones to hunt even reached
their agenda disturbs me.

But it's no surprise, either. Assuming drones get banned from Colorado's hunting
community, any lazy hunter who launches one of these multirotor quadricopters
(with high definition streaming for under $300 on Amazon) to locate wildlife
will violate state regulations and get a healthy fine or worse.

Nobody I spoke to (including a spokesman for Colorado Parks and Wildlife) said
drones were a problem in Colorado. So if it ain't broke?

"There are people out there who would use" drones, big game guide Richard
Samuelson told me. "You just haven't asked the right person yet. Or if you have,
they wouldn't admit it."

His message was clear. Just as there are a few unethical golfers and unethical
journalists who will do whatever it takes to win a prize, so we have a few
people who, calling themselves hunters, break the rules whenever it suits them.
They're poachers, among other things.

The day we met at his house on the outskirts of Fraser in Grand County,
Samuelson was busy cleaning up after what he called a successful hunting season.
A big camp tent was ready to be stored away until next year. A newly harvested
bull elk skull soaked in a barrel of bleach.

Samuelson, 62, is strictly old school. A second generation outfitter (his father
started the business in 1967), Samuelson shoes his own horses, favors a muzzle
loader and takes his clients into public lands where all terrain vehicles are
prohibited.

On the topic of drones, he cited the fair chase ethic, the hunter's concept of
integrity for an endeavor he fell in love with as a young boy and later as a
husband and father learned to support his family with.

Samuelson could be a poster child for the American hunter of the 21st century,
albeit a child with a balding scalp, drooping white mustache and half a century
of hunting under his belt.

Despite his aversion to the use of noisy, exhaust spewing ATVs for hunting, he
admits that certain technologies such as trail cameras are helpful (and legal)
tools for digitally capturing deer or elk in Troublesome Basin, a roadless
section of the Medicine Bow Routt National Forest, where he leads his clients.

Timing seems the critical factor separating one form of technology like trail
cams from another like drones. It may take hours or days for a hunter to
retrieve a trail camera in the woods. By the time he has checked images and has
evidence of wildlife in the vicinity, the entire herd may be long gone.

In our modern world of immediate gratification, no wonder drones sell well. They
not only aid the military fight against terrorism in foreign countries, they can
give the lazy hunter "live" coverage from the air. The drone cam shows him where
an animal is browsing. Why bother to traipse all over creation, searching for
tracks in the mud, or waiting silently on a log for game to pass by?

Since Colorado prohibits hunters from using airplanes to scout wildlife, it
seems logical to impose the same restrictions on drones. I remained skeptical
that drones loomed on the horizon like a dark cloud. Then I saw a video on
YouTube in which a drone pilot drives two moose through rugged terrain
(supposedly in Norway, but who knows) by frightening them from above. After he
watched it, Tim Snowden, a big game hunter from Loveland, urged Colorado Parks
and Wildlife commissioners to outlaw drones.

Snowden hasn't witnessed this egregious activity in Colorado. But, he noted, "I
could see the handwriting on the wall. I didn't think trail cams or ATVs would
catch, on either."

An avid bow hunter, Denny C. Behrens weighed in on drones without much
prompting, too. The 65 year old Grand Junction resident extolls the virtue of
"fair chase," the ethical and sportsmanlike pursuit of any big game animal in
such a way that doesn't give the hunter unfair advantage. To Behrens, no
question drones offer an unfair advantage.

"Technology is getting (popularized) to the point where it is not hunting
anymore; it's become a shoot," he said. "There are those people out there who
will do anything to make the kill. They aren't hunters. They are killers doing
it for their egos."

Behrens strikes me as old school, too. He scouts the landscape on foot from a
base camp at 11,500 feet. He speaks eloquently of the "romance of the hunt." In
his view, this pastime has no room for drones.

"I don't think you need all the technology out there. Good grief," said Behrens,
a field rep for the Colorado Mule Deer Association.

Consider the "fair chase" concept for a moment. A two legged predator with poor
eyesight and a nose that's only good for sneezing (that would be me) pursues a
graceful creature who smells me a mile away, then it disappears faster than you
can say "quadricopter."

Of course, the hunter carries a firearm. But that doesn't preclude a fair chase.
Even with a scope mounted rifle, I never once considered aiming at a pair of cow
elk because of 800 yards of aspen trees between us. That's four times farther
than my demonstrated ability at the rifle range. Mine would have been a foolish
shot in the bright afternoon of a glorious late fall day.

As for technology, all I had was an organic computer, aka, my old brain. It
works pretty well, though it's been known to crash occasionally.

Your hard core hunters will track game for miles without getting an opportunity
to squeeze the trigger or release the arrow. As dusk approaches, they retrace
their own steps, hump it back to camp, then rise long before dawn so they can do
it all over again. If the season ends without luck, as mine did this fall,
there's always next year.

That's what traditions are made of.

Eric Sandstrom is an assistant professor in the mass communication program at
Colorado Mesa University. He was a Colorado Voices writer in 2008.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: This is from opening day 2012 of the dove hunting season. Two dove
hunters and their dog watch the sunrise and skies for birds in Southeast
COolorado. Photo by Emily Gleason
Two dove hunters watch the skies for birds in southeast Colorado. Big-game guide
Richard Samuelson says "there are people out there who would use drones" to
hunt. Emily Gleason, Special to The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2013 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


