                             769 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday

Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 561 words



HIGHLIGHT: Small-business employment declines. Do business owners have a false
sense of security about their data?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    America's deficit fell 37 percent in 2013.
     ·    General Motors' earnings are down because of overseas sales.
     ·    For the fourth consecutive month, small-business employment declined
          in October, as did compensation and hours worked for their hourly
          employees.
     ·    Private-sector employers hired the fewest workers in six months in
          October while tepid domestic demand kept inflation benign.


Management


     ·    Small businesses are becoming hot commodities as companies get
          healthier and Baby Boomer owners retire.
     ·    David Hassell explains how to ask questions that uncover your
          company's values.
     ·    David Luvisa reminds owners to think of their businesses as an asset,
          not as a job: "Assets can be bought and sold while jobs cannot (unless
          you are an elected official in Chicago)."


Employees


     ·    Yahoo says that eliminating working from home has improved engagement
          and productivity.
     ·    Americans missed 230 million work days and lost $8.5 billion in wages
          in 2012 and 2013, according to a report from Walgreens.
     ·    This guy not only sell cars but he can dance, too!


Social Media


     ·    Virgin America's airline safety video goes viral.
     ·    Verizon is offering a free $50 American Express Gift Card to small
          businesses that let them list their business on their Facebook page
          for the upcoming Small Business Saturday.
     ·    LinkedIn tops 250 million members.


Start-Ups


     ·    PayPal is now waiving $50,000 of payment fees for start-ups.
     ·    A company raises money to help people talk to lawyers instantly.
     ·    Venture capitalists invest in a start-up that's developing drones that
          deliver pizza.


Around the Country


     ·    Nebraska manufacturers want more young people to consider jobs on the
          factory floor.
     ·    Business owners in Juneau, Alaska, report better summer numbers
          because of an increase in tourism.
     ·    These photos show how Staten Island businesses are celebrating their
          resiliency one year after Hurricane Sandy.


Around the World


     ·    Japan's manufacturing industry is growing at the fastest pace in more
          than three years.
     ·    After years of upheaval Egypt is experiencing a proliferation of
          enterprises that reflect a nation looking for new ways to overcome its
          worst economic slump in two decades.
     ·    Glasgow and Edinburgh are named Britain's spookiest cities.


Health Care


     ·    If you want to purchase health insurance for your small business on
          one of the SHOP exchanges, you will have to wait at least a few more
          weeks.


Technology


     ·    Lenovo names Ashton Kutcher its newest product engineer.
     ·    Brain implants will connect people to the Internet by 2020.
     ·    These six start-ups want to disrupt the data world.
     ·    ASUS and Samsung gained tablet market share in the third quarter.
     ·    In this video, a father shows how he saved $19,995 by making his son a
          prosthetic hand with a 3-D printer.
     ·    When it comes to broadband Internet connections, the United States
          falls behind other developed nations in both speed and affordability.
     ·    A new report says small-business owners have a false sense of security
          about their data.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: The Business Lessons of Walter White
     ·    Today in Small Business: The 'Crabfries' Lawsuit
     ·    Today in Small Business: Employee Monitoring
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Salad Dressing Barometer
     ·    Today in Small Business: Walmart Vs. Amazon


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


