                             766 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           November 26, 2013 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 344 words


Newtown still a mystery A report shed no light on gunman Adam Lanza's motive
behind last year's school massacre in Connecticut. A3

'Tough talk and bluster' President Obama pushed back on criticism over the
interim nuclear deal with Iran. A8

the nation

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange probably won't be indicted for publishing
classified records because government lawyers could not do so without
prosecuting U.S. news organizations and journalists, officials say. A2

The launch of a SpaceX commercial satellite was scrubbed after a technical
problem halted the countdown less than four minutes before ignition. A2

Consumersand health insurers give a mixed progress report on the new health-care
law. A4

Obama's visit to DreamWorks Animation underscores how well his top campaign
donors have fared in his administration. A4

the economy

Wal-Mart named Doug McMillon chief executive, changing leadership as it faces
scrutiny for its treatment of workers and rising pressure to boost sales. A10

College students have launched a divestment movement against energy companies to
fight climate change. A10

A breakup of Time Warner Cable may help the industry  sidestep regulatory
scrutiny. A11

the world

Pakistan's militaryunveiled two unarmed drones even as the country is facing
growing protests over U.S. drone strikes. A6

Thailand's prime minister invoked an emergency law after protesters occupied two
ministries. A7

the region

Fairfax County's school chief has warned that a budget shortfall might lead to
layoffs, but several veteran officials say it's a familiar story: "The Boy Who
Cried Wolf." B1

A Maryland woman pleaded guilty to stealing more than $5 million from the
nonprofit group for which she worked. B1

Two former workersat a Woodbridge day-care center were charged with abusing at
least three children. B5

Virginia state Sen. R. Creigh Deeds said that a mental-health agency was
"responsible" for the death of his son, who stabbed Deeds and then killed
himself. B8

style

Katie Couric and Yahoo formalized their courtship, but how do they benefit from
the partnership? C1

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


