                             760 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           August 27, 2014 Wednesday
                               WED FINAL Edition

Related

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 344 words


Freed U.S. journalist back home BOSTON American journalist Peter Theo Curtis has
returned home to the United States, two days after being freed by a Syrian
extremist group.

A statement released by a family member late Tuesday says 45 year old Curtis
arrived at Newark Liberty International Airport Tuesday afternoon after leaving
Tel Aviv. He was later reunited with his mother, Nancy Curtis, at Boston Logan
International Airport.

Curtis says he was "touched and moved" by airline passengers and flight
attendants who welcomed him home. He says he's "deeply indebted" to U.S.
officials who worked to get him released.

Possible strikes in Syria raise questions * WASHINGTON The intelligence gathered
by U.S. military surveillance flights over Syria could support a broad bombing
campaign against the Islamic State militant group, but current and former U.S.
officials differ on whether air power would significantly degrade what some have
called a "terrorist army."

U.S. officials say that surveillance drones and spy planes had begun flying over
Syria on the orders of President Barack Obama.

Targeted drone missile strikes against al Qaeda groups in Yemen and Pakistan had
significant impact, American officials say, but only after many months of on the
ground intelligence gathering that would be difficult, if not impossible, to
replicate in Iraq and Syria.

Yet some air war planners argue that because Islamic State acts more like an
army massing in large formations of vehicles and moving over open terrain a
sustained air campaign could smash it.

American man killed may have been militant * WASHINGTON A U.S. official said
Douglas McArthur McCain, an American reported to have been killed in Syria, was
there to fight alongside a terrorist group, most likely Islamic State.

Meanwhile, Islamic State is holding hostage a 26 year old American woman who was
doing humanitarian aid work in Syria, a family representative said. The 26 year
old woman is the third American known to have been kidnapped by the group. The
woman was captured last year.

Denver Post news services

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


