                             777 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                 (Taking Note)

                              May 1, 2014 Thursday

A New Way to Stir Up Benghazi Anger

BYLINE: ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 446 words



HIGHLIGHT: An influential member of Congress wants to amend the AUMF to give
President Obama authority to send troops into Libya.


An influential member of Congress plans to introduce a measure that would at
long last amend the Authorization for the Use of Military Force, passed after
the 9/11 attacks and warped over time to excuse all manner of executive
overreach, including electronic surveillance without a warrant .

The Congressman is Representative Duncan Hunter-the California Republican who
once mounted a presidential campaign that barely cracked single digits in any
poll or primary contest-and the proposal is terrible. Some Democratic lawmakers
and even President Obama think we need to replace the AUMF with something more
narrow, but Mr. Hunter wants to do the opposite. He wants to amend the AUMF to
give President Obama the "authority" to send drones or ground troops into Libya
to target those who carried out the lethal attack on the Benghazi diplomatic
compound on Sept. 11, 2012.

The proposal is baldly political (it seems intended to stir the Republican soup
of conspiracy theories about the attack). It is bad policy (the last thing the
United States needs now is another military commitment in the Middle East) and
tactically bizarre (the likelihood of success, assuming the United States can
identify and find those guilty, seems minute).

And it is, charitably speaking, of dubious legality. It's hard to see how Mr.
Obama could justify under international law a military incursion into a
sovereign state where there is no actual war going on, to go after people who do
not seem to be actively plotting any attack on the United States.

I wonder if Mr. Hunter cares. It may be just as valuable from his perspective,
and that of other right-wingers in Congress, to create another situation in
which Mr. Obama looks like he is hesitating to use force against the bad guys.

The president has given the Republicans plenty of room to question his
leadership in many areas of foreign and military policy. But he's been anything
but "soft" in attacking terrorist targets abroad. The Republicans seem to
conveniently forget about the assassination of Osama bin Laden, which was widely
celebrated, and his far less celebrated policy of using drones to kill
foreigners and even American citizens in other countries who are suspected of
plotting attacks on the United States.

If Mr. Hunter gets his bill onto the House floor and through that right-wing
dominated chamber, it will probably die in the Senate. But in the meantime it
will further distract attention from the need to modify the force resolution in
an intelligent way.


     ·    Benghazi: 'The Administration Has Won'
     ·    Republicans React to Benghazi News
     ·    There Just Has to Be a Scandal - Somewhere
     ·    Nope, Still No Cover-Up
     ·    Rand Paul at the Benghazi Hearing


LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


