                             773 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            January 13, 2014 Monday

Today in Small Business: Learning From the Big Sites

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 444 words



HIGHLIGHT: How to tell your start-up story. How a bowling alley in New Jersey
dealt with a competitor. And what you can learn from the big e-commerce sites.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    Here is every job in America in one infographic.
     ·    Jared Bernstein wants to know what the real unemployment rate is.
     ·    Bill McBride predicts that payroll levels will exceed their
          pre-recession peak by the middle of the year.
     ·    The forecast for global auto sales is rosy (with reservations), and
          technology profits are expected to surge.


Start-Up


     ·    How one entrepreneur figured out what blind watch-buyers really
          wanted.
     ·    The Story Exchange is looking for women business owners from around
          the world who want to tell their start-up stories.
     ·    And here are some pointers on how to tell that story.


Online


     ·    Here are three things you can learn from the big e-commerce sites.


Management


     ·    Ken Keller explains why it's important to get rid of toxic employees:
          "These employees are expensive; they not only receive a paycheck, but
          they are typically disengaged, under-performing, high-maintenance, and
          require additional supervisory time to keep them on track."
     ·    How a New Jersey bowling alley dealt with a competitor.


Finance


     ·    Here's why banks aren't accepting legal marijuana money.
     ·    Bank of America says it will improve working conditions for junior
          bankers after the death of a summer intern.
     ·    Bitcoin ATMs are coming to New York City.


Sales and Marketing


     ·    Matt Hodkinson offers advice for getting leads.


Around the Country


     ·    Here are the 10 most-hated companies in America.
     ·    A Northern California woman becomes the first resident entrepreneur of
          the United Nations Foundation, a Washington-based nonprofit that Ted
          Turner started.
     ·    A Montana entrepreneur creates one-of-a-kind tools for NASA.
     ·    A panel says New Hampshire needs more women-owned businesses.
     ·    A utility service in Mississippi says it has helped more than 1,100
          small businesses save more than $400,000 in start-up costs.


Around the World


     ·    Sunday was the 13th annual worldwide no-pants subway ride day.


Health Care


     ·    In October, millions of people who receive insurance through small
          employers may be disrupted by cancellations.


Technology


     ·    Target reports more customer data breaches, and Neiman Marcus gets
          hacked, too.
     ·    A Portland, Ore. company's drone technology could transform
          agriculture, and a United Kingdom school invests in drone technology
          to patrol exam halls and stop cheats.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Celebrity Business Failures
     ·    The Best Small-Business Posts of 2013
     ·    This Year in Small Business: Highlights From 2013
     ·    Recalling a Christmas Spent With a Start-Up
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Hottest Start-Ups of 2013


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


