                             778 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                              May 6, 2014 Tuesday

VSCO, a Digital Photography Company, Raises $40 Million From Accel Partners

BYLINE: JENNA WORTHAM

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 308 words



HIGHLIGHT: The company has created an app that has a large following among
professional photographers.


Chances are, if you have used Instagram, you have come across the hashtag #VSCO
or #VSCOCam.

Both refer to a feature-rich camera application developed by a Bay Area
start-up, Visual Supply Company, or VSCO for short, that has gained a large
following among professional photographers and photo enthusiasts for its suite
of digital tools.

It has also attracted the eye of investors.

On Tuesday, the company is announcing a $40 million investment from Accel
Partners, a venture firm noted for its early investment in Facebook.

VSCO; which says that it has a community "tens of millions of people" large - is
more than just another app maker. VSCO also sells editing software that emulates
the effects of classic analog film photography, which the company says has
allowed it to be "cash-flow positive since Day 1," when the company was founded
in 2011.

Joel Flory, the chief executive and a founder of VSCO, said in a recent
interview that although the company had been operating profitably, the team
decided it wanted to expand and add to product offerings in international
markets, as well as work on other creative ventures, like awarding grants to
artists.

The company employs 43 people in Oakland, Calif., who help run the other
elements of Vsco (whose name rhymes with "disco"), including a community
platform where photographers can share their work with one another, and a
digital journal that features the artists using VSCO software and tools, among
other things.

"We are working to create a new digital age of creativity," said Greg Lutze, who
founded VSCO along with Mr. Flory. "We built something we wanted to use
ourselves."


     ·    Lytro Goes After Prosumer Photographers With New Camera
     ·    Google Uses Algorithms to Create SLR-Like Photos
     ·    How to Take the Ultimate Drone Selfie
     ·    Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land
     ·    Picking a Bag for a Camera


LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


