                              77 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

How to Take the Ultimate Drone Selfie

BYLINE: NICK BILTON

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 538 words



HIGHLIGHT: Learning how to fly a drone requires you to be patient and put in a
lot of practice. Once you get the hang of the controls, you can take amazing
photos, and even elaborate video selfies.


Smile! You're on a drone camera!

Last week I wrote about using drones to capture photos. Actually, let me
rephrase that. Last week I wrote about attempting to use drones to capture
photos.

Instead, I spent most of my time crashing the drones.

Determined to master the art of flight with a camera - this is the future, after
all - I asked Amit Gupta, the founder of the online photography store Photojojo,

 to give me a few lessons.

Mr. Gupta and I set out to Bernal Heights Hill in San Francisco for my flight
training. The setting, an open, rolling hill that is more than 400 feet high,
was perfect for an inept pilot, ensuring that I didn't have much to fly into.

The first thing I learned during my flight lesson is that Mr. Gupta has a lot
more patience than I do. Instead of starting the drone and just taking off
immediately, we started it, set it on the ground, and waited.

The trick with the drones that have GPS built-in is to ensure that it has
activated before flying - in the case of the DJI Phantom drones, a series of
lights under the propellers flash green when it is ready to go. Once this is
done, the drone knows where you are, where it is, and if it's windy, it will
stay in place rather than float away. If it gets lost, it will now know where it
started its trip and return.

When it was finally time to take off I had to tell my inner 12-year-old to slow
down and not attempt to go as far away as I possibly could.

Just like learning to ride a bike, one of the tricks Mr. Gupta suggested is
practicing figure-eights with your drone, sweeping in and out through the air in
a stable and smooth motion. This way you know how to control it, which is
especially important when things go awry.

Another good practice lesson is to have the drone curve around you in a circle
while the camera stays focused on you - almost like a horse running around a
pole. And trust me on this one, it is much more difficult than it sounds.

When it comes to snapping photos, be prepared for a lot of effort and a little
bit of luck. I took about 50 photos with my drone and only two were worth
sharing. If you really want a perfect shot, take it 100 times. Chances are, one
will be close to perfect, the other 99 can be deleted.

My day wasn't without a few technical errors. One of the propellers on my drone
flew off before I could take off as it wasn't properly secured. (Again, my
fault.) Another incident involved me landing on an angle in a gust of wind,
which broke a propeller.

Toward the end of the flying lesson, Mr. Gupta showed me and Zach Klein, the
co-founder of DIY who was also in attendance, how to take an unbelievable video
selfie using a drone.

We stood at the edge of Bernal Heights Hill and the drone hovered in front of us
for about 10 seconds. Then Mr. Gupta told us all to "smile" as he shot the
controls forward and up and zoomed the drone backwards into the sky, shooting it
about 800 feet away from us. While this took a few takes to get right, the
result, as you can see in the video above, is breathtaking.


     ·    Crashing DJI's New Drone Into Water and Land
     ·    A Tax Break to Anchor Tech Growth in San Francisco
     ·    The Tech Bubble's Silver Lining: Cheap Services for Everyone
     ·    Picking a Bag for a Camera
     ·    Google's Bigger, Cheaper Cloud


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


