                             771 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (The Caucus)

                            December 16, 2013 Monday

Senate Confirms New Homeland Security Chief

BYLINE: STEVE KENNY

SECTION: US; politics

LENGTH: 456 words



HIGHLIGHT: Jeh Johnson has already had a significant influence on the Obama
administration&#8217;s national security policies, serving as the Defense
Department&#8217;s general counsel during the president&#8217;s first term.


The Senate on Monday evening confirmed Jeh C. Johnson as President Obama's
secretary of homeland security.

Mr. Johnson's nomination was held up in the Senate fight over filibusters. In
the end, however, his appointment was approved, 78 to 16, after the relaxed
filibuster rules forced by the Democrats allowed a final vote.

It will not be the first time that Mr. Johnson has a significant influence on
the Obama administration's national security policies. He framed many of them as
the Defense Department's general counsel during Mr. Obama's first term.

"Jeh has been a critical member of my national security team," Mr. Obama said in
a statement on Monday night. "As secretary of homeland security, Jeh will play a
leading role in our efforts to protect the homeland against terrorist attacks,
adapt to changing threats, stay prepared for natural disasters, strengthen our
border security, and make our immigration system fairer."

Mr. Johnson, 56, will fill the vacancy left by Janet Napolitano, a former
governor of Arizona. She resigned in July to lead the University of California
system.

He does not come to the job with Ms. Napolitano's credentials on border security
and immigration. But Mr. Johnson - whose first name is pronounced Jay - was a
legal adviser to Mr. Obama during his first presidential campaign and shares
many of the president's ideas about counterterrorism operations.

In the first term, Mr. Johnson helped Mr. Obama reshape President George W.
Bush's counterterrorism policies. Mr. Johnson influenced the administration's
approach to the detention of terrorism suspects and drone strikes in Yemen and
Somalia. And he was a leading force in the drive to end the "don't ask, don't
tell" law and to allow gay men and lesbians to serve openly in the military.

He has also said that the United States must not be too quick to declare that
the fight with Al Qaeda is over. In speeches over the last several years, he has
stressed that Qaeda affiliates in Yemen and in North and West Africa continue to
pose threats to the United States' security.

Yet, he has criticized the Obama administration for being too secretive,
especially when it comes to drone strikes. "The problem is that the American
public is suspicious of executive power shrouded in secrecy," Mr. Johnson said
in a speech at Fordham University this year. "In the absence of an official
picture of what our government is doing, and by what authority, many in the
public fill the void by imagining the worst."


     ·    President Obama Cancels Congressional Picnic
     ·    In Nunn and Warner, a Reminder of the Tower Hearings
     ·    On Anniversary of '63 March, Congress Finds Notes of Present Struggles
     ·    New Polls Are Bad News for Obama, and Worse for Congress
     ·    The Early Word: Reinforcements


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


