                             776 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                             March 30, 2014 Sunday

Is Facebook Too Big to Care?

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 716 words



HIGHLIGHT: The social network has made some recent moves that suggest it is
determined to follow its own path, regardless of what outsiders think.


Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has always followed his own
instincts when making decisions about the company he founded 10 years ago. But
several events over the last week make you wonder: Has the company gotten so
successful that it doesn't care what other people think about it?

On Tuesday, Mr. Zuckerberg announced that Facebook would pay more than $2
billion in cash and stock to buy Oculus VR, a start-up that has spent years
developing a virtual reality headset that is still far from ready for public
release.

According to various published accounts, including one in the Wall Street
Journal, the deal came together quickly. Mr. Zuckerberg decided he wanted to buy
the company, and a couple of weeks later, the purchase was announced.

Facebook's stock fell more than 7 percent as investors and analysts questioned
the wisdom of Facebook spending $2 billion in real money to buy a product that
will be virtual for another year or more. But Mr. Zuckerberg has voting control
over the company, so he can simply ignore Wall Street as he pursues his vision
of the company's future.

Then there was the company's unsympathetic reaction to Thursday's announcement
by Eat24, an online food ordering service, that it would shut down its Facebook
page on Monday.

In a long, funny "breakup letter to Facebook," Eat24 recounted all the reasons
that brands are unhappy with Facebook. The biggest complaint: Facebook has
changed its algorithms over the last couple of years to highlight more posts by
individuals and bury posts from brands - unless, of course, a brand wants to pay
for ads to promote its posts.

"Truth be told, your actions make us feel like you don't respect us. Maybe you
think our food-related pick-up lines and sexy tater tots memes come out of
nowhere, but we spend a lot of time trying to make people happy," Eat24 wrote.
"What do you do in return? You take them and you hide them from all our
friends."

A Facebook spokesman, Brandon McCormick, posted a response on Eat24's Facebook
page essentially telling the delivery company not to slam the door too hard on
the way out.

"We used to love your jokes about tacquitos and 420 but now they don't seem so
funny," he wrote. "There is some serious stuff happening in the world and one of
my best friends just had a baby and another one just took the best photo of his
homemade cupcakes and what we have come to realize is people care about those
things more than sushi porn."

In the long run, the departure of one brand from Facebook is a blip in the feed.
Advertisers continue to flock to the service. The research firm eMarketer
projects that Facebook will bring in $10.75 billion in digital ad revenue this
year, accounting for 7.82 percent of the global market, up from 5.83 percent
last year. In the fast-growing mobile arena, Facebook is expected to get 21.7
percent of ad revenue worldwide in 2014, up from 17.5 percent last year,
according to eMarketer.

But Eat24's concerns echo those from other companies, which complain that
Facebook keeps changing the rules on how brands can use the service to get their
message out. Nate Elliott, a Forrester analyst, wrote this month, "Every day I
talk to brands that are disillusioned with Facebook and are now placing their
bets on other social sites."

Facebook says that the changes are meant to give more relevant content to its
1.2 billion users and get them to spend more time on the service.

Maybe Eat24 is trying to hit the top of the news feed the wrong way.

In the spirit of its rant about Facebook's problems, I have a suggestion:
Instead of posting jokes about bear anatomy and dietary preferences to sell
pizzas and burritos, Eat24 could lay out a futuristic strategy to deliver
customer orders via unmanned aerial delivery vehicles. (Drones, like cute cats,
seem to be one of those topics that are inherently viral.)

Even Mr. Zuckerberg - who just laid out his own vision for a fleet of
laser-wielding, Internet access drones - might hit the like button on that.


     ·    Daily Report: Facebook to Buy Oculus VR, Maker of Virtual Reality
          Hardware
     ·    Minecraft Maker Won't Work With a Facebook-Owned Oculus VR
     ·    Zuckerberg Says WhatsApp Deal Was a Bargain
     ·    Facebook Buys Israeli Maker of Data Compression Software for Mobile
          Web Effort
     ·    Twitter Buys a Referee in the Fight Over Online TV Chatter


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


