                             789 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                              May 19, 2014 Monday
                                 Every Edition

Boston bombing response was the talk of IT and tech conference in D.C.

BYLINE: Mohana Ravindranath

SECTION: Pg. A09

LENGTH: 399 words


Washington's biggest technology and security expo this year focused on Boston.

The keynote at the  FOSE  and  GovSec   confab at the Walter E. Washington
Convention Center featured Massachusetts State Police Superintendent Col.
Timothy Alben , former Boston police commissioner  Ed Davis  and former special
agent at the FBI's Boston division  Richard DeLauriers , who walked the audience
through the capture of Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tzarnaev last
April.

During the manhunt, perhaps more important than weapons or technology, was the
cooperation between various law enforcement groups, Davis said - such as the
Watertown and Boston police departments.

"You cannot make a relationship in a crisis -  you have to strategically think
about who you'll be working with if the balloon goes up ... and make a concerted
effort to meet them and continually work with them because so much is on the
line when the crisis hits," he said.

During a question-and-answer session, the three agreed that drone surveillance
could be useful in future security crises.

"I think the idea of string cameras up throughout the city is old fashioned,"
Davis said.

But the technology must be better regulated before it can be widely used,
DeLauriers said.

"I believe the [Federal Aviation Administration] has to come up with some
regulations as to how private or public use of drones will not interfere with
the safety of commercial aviation."

Agile adds cloud division

Fairfax-based IT contractor  Agile Defense  has created a new cloud services
division to design software solutions that comply with the federal government's
security standards.

Cloud services currently implemented, or those that began the federal
acquisition process before June 5, 2012, have until June 5, 2014, to meet new
security requirements, according to the General Services Administration. Agile's
division was introduced in part to help agencies meet this deadline,  Brian
Burns , head of the division, said.

No reconsideration for SAIC

The  Government Accountability Office  has denied a request from  NASA  to
revisit a decision blocking  Science Applications International Corp.  from
receiving a contract to provide services for NASA's human spaceflight programs.
The GAO sided with  Wye Laboratories  in a protest claiming the agency should
have considered SAIC's pending split from Leidos.

mohana.ravindranath@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


