                              78 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 2, 2014 Tuesday 1:38 AM EST

Pentagon set to open second drone base in Niger as it expands operations in
Africa;
The expansion highlights the growing U.S. counterterrorism cooperation in the
region with France.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 1181 words


The Pentagon is preparing to open a drone base in one of the remotest places on
Earth: an ancient caravan crossroads in the middle of the Sahara.

After months of negotiations, the government of Niger, a landlocked West African
nation, has authorized the U.S. military to fly unarmed drones from the
mud-walled desert city of Agadez, according to Nigerien and U.S. officials.

The previously undisclosed decision gives the Pentagon another surveillance hub
- its second in Niger and third in the region - to track Islamist fighters who
have destabilized parts of North and West Africa. It also advances a
little-publicized U.S. strategy to tackle counterterrorism threats alongside
France, the former colonial power in that part of the continent.

Although the two allies have a sporadic history of quarreling when it comes to
military action, U.S. and French troops have been working hand in glove as they
steadily expand their presence in impoverished West Africa. Both countries are
alarmed by the presence of jihadist groups, some affiliated with al-Qaeda, that
have taken root in states whose governments are unable to exert control over
their own territory.

In Niamey, Niger's capital, U.S. and French forces set up neighboring drone
hangars last year to conduct reconnaissance flights over Mali, where about 1,200
French soldiers are trying to suppress a revolt that erupted in 2012.

In Chad, the U.S. Air Force has been flying drones and other aircraft from a
French military base to search for hundreds of schoolgirls abducted by Islamic
militants in northern Nigeria.

The White House approved $10 million in emergency aid on Aug. 11 to help airlift
French troops and provide midair refueling for French aircraft deployed to West
Africa. Analysts said the monetary sum was less important than what it
symbolized: U.S. endorsement of a new French plan to deploy 3,000 troops across
the region.

"We have this confluence of interests where both countries are working much more
closely than would have been thought possible just a couple of years ago," said
J. Peter Pham, an expert on African security at the Atlantic Council, a
Washington think tank.

The cooperation is a turnabout from early 2013, when France deployed troops to
northern Mali to try to prevent the country from breaking apart. The Obama
administration was slow to respond to requests to provide crucial logistical
support to French troops, a reflection of how the two countries have sometimes
worked at cross-purposes on security policy.

France is protective of its economic and political interests in West Africa. Yet
in 2008 it shrank its military presence on the continent and instead opened a
base in the Persian Gulf, an area that the U.S. military sees as its sphere of
influence. Around the same time, the Pentagon created an Africa Command and
expanded its training partnerships with French-speaking countries on the
continent, to the annoyance of some officials in Paris.

In July, however, French President François Hollande announced that his country
would again bulk up its forces in West Africa. Under Operation Barkhane (a term
for a crescent-shaped sand dune), France will permanently deploy 3,000 troops at
bases in Mali, Chad, Niger and Burkina Faso.

French leaders consulted closely with U.S. officials before the operation.
Pentagon officials said they were happy to let France take the lead on the
ground, enabling the U.S. Air Force to focus on drone flights and other airborne
missions that it is better equipped to handle.

"They have a similar strategy and aim about what they are doing," said Sarah
Covington, a sub-Saharan Africa analyst at IHS Country Risk, based in London.
"The French have been in that region for decades now and have an extremely
strong presence."

The new base in Agadez will put U.S. drones closer to a desert corridor
connecting northern Mali and southern Libya that is a key route for arms
traffickers, drug smugglers and Islamist fighters migrating across the Sahara.

The city was once a magnet for ad­ven­ture tourists from Europe seeking a taste
of nomad culture. But rebellions by Tuareg tribesmen in recent years and an
influx of Islamists have made it a more dangerous place.

In a written response to questions, Benjamin A. Benson, a spokesman for Africa
Command, called Agadez "an attractive option" for a base, "given its proximity
to the threats in the region."

In February, records show, the Pentagon's Defense Logistics Agency solicited
bids for the delivery of more than 7 million gallons of jet and diesel fuel to
Agadez later this year. In July, the Air Force posted a separate solicitation to
upgrade the Agadez airport runway, a project estimated to cost between $5
million and $10 million. Documents cautioned that the project was still awaiting
authorization from the government of Niger.

The next month, Mahamadou Issoufou, the president of Niger, traveled to
Washington to attend the Obama administration's U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit. On
Aug. 7, the day after the summit, Issoufou gave final approval to the Agadez
drone base during a meeting with Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work; Army Gen.
David Rodriguez, the leader of Africa Command; and several other participants,
according to Nigerien and U.S. officials.

Benson, the Africa Command spokesman, declined to say how many drones or U.S.
military personnel will be deployed to Agadez, saying the operation is still in
the planning stages.

The Pentagon continues to broaden its drone operations in Africa, despite
growing demand for the aircraft in other conflict zones.

Since June, surveillance drones have been redeployed from bases in the Middle
East to fly dozens of sorties a day over Iraq. The aircraft are also sorely
needed in Afghanistan as the U.S. military draws down its forces there, as well
as for counterterrorism missions in Yemen and Somalia.

The Pentagon also keeps watch over northern Libya with Predator drones that
cross the Mediterranean from a U.S. base in Sicily, Italy.

The U.S. military would like to increase its reconnaissance flights over Libya,
where Islamist factions and tribal militias have shattered the country. Having a
drone base in Agadez will make it easier to reach the vast desert terrain in
southern Libya, where many itinerant Islamist fighters have regrouped after
being expelled from Mali, according to security analysts.

It is unclear whether the Pentagon will continue to operate drones from Niamey,
the capital, about 500 miles southwest of Agadez, though some officials said it
was unlikely. About 120 U.S. troops are deployed there at a Nigerien military
base adjacent to the international airport.

French forces keep their own, small drone fleet in nearby hangars. It consists
of two U.S.-built Reaper aircraft, purchased last year, and an older-model
Harfang drone.

In contrast to the U.S. military, which is secretive about its drone operations,
the French have been eager to show off their spy aircraft. When Hollande visited
Niamey in July to tout Operation Barkhane, news photographers were permitted
inside the French drone hangar.

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


