                             781 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                             June 19, 2014 Thursday

Our Robot Nightmares

BYLINE: ANNA NORTH

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 610 words



HIGHLIGHT: The more sophisticated robots become, the more, ANNA NORTH writes, we
are freaked out by them.


As robotics technology grows ever more surprising, its developers and users face
a difficult problem: Robots are kind of scary.

Vaughan Bell, a clinical psychologist and writer, noted rising "killer robot
anxiety" yesterday on Twitter. He pointed to a story at The Upshot, in which
John Markoff and Claire Cain Miller report that coming robotic technology could
pose new safety problems. They write:

"Unlike today's robots, which generally work in cages, the next generation will
have much more autonomy and freedom to move on their own. 'In order for robots
to work more productively, they must escape from their cages and be able to work
alongside people,' said Kent Massey, the director of advanced programs at HDT
Robotics."

If you have seen any movies, you know that releasing robots from their cages
rarely ends well.

Mr. Markoff and Ms. Miller write that the new robots will be equipped with
safeguards to keep them from harming people. Mr. Massey tells them that in order
to work with humans, "robots must become more like people. They must have eyes
and a sense of touch, as well as the intelligence to use those senses."

This almost sounds more scary.

Others have registered their concern as well. On a recent segment of his show
"Last Week Tonight," John Oliver asked Stephen Hawking if robots would "destroy
humanity." Mr. Hawking's answer: "Artificial intelligence could be a real danger
in the not-too-distant future. It could design improvements to itself and
outsmart us all." Mr. Hawking also opined that in a fight with a robot, Mr.
Oliver would lose.

Meanwhile, at Fox News, John Stossel writes that the rise of artificial
intelligence "is scary because scientists say that soon machines will be too
smart and self-motivated for us to predict." His prescription for the safety of
our species is to make robots libertarians: "That way, they'll be forbidden to
commit assault, theft or fraud - the three legal restrictions in which
libertarians believe."

Whatever their political persuasion, automatons might simply be more unsettling
than humans, even if they do essentially the same thing. Bryant Walker Smith, a
fellow at the Center for Internet and Society at Stanford Law School, told Mr.
Markoff and Ms. Miller that "there's something scarier about a machine
malfunctioning and taking away control from somebody."

Vaughan Bell, meanwhile, told Op-Talk the rise of robot-fear might be rooted in
some recent innovations. He noted that Google's announcement that it would build
driverless cars prompted some to ask whether those cars would (or should) be
able to choose to kill their drivers. And, he said, the development of drone
technology for both military and commercial uses "has raised lots of interesting
privacy issues, but more recently security and control concerns." A riot-control
drone that fires pepper-spray bullets, for instance, has sparked some outrage -
a spokesperson for the International Trade Union Confederation told the B.B.C.
it was "a deeply disturbing and repugnant development."

Mr. Bell also chalked up some of our rising robot anxiety to "the fact that
robots are becoming more equivalent to certain aspects of humanoid and animal
behavior." So the eyes and sense of touch Mr. Massey recommends may not be too
comforting.

But humans' worries don't seem to be holding robot development back. Mr. Bell
pointed out that in addition to working on driverless cars, Google recently
acquired Boston Dynamics, a company that has designed animal-like robots called
BigDog and Cheetah for the U.S. military. "As far as the big tech companies are
concerned," he said, "life with robots is going to be the future."

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


