                             782 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                            September 5, 2014 Friday

What We're Reading

BYLINE: Insider Staff

LENGTH: 478 words



HIGHLIGHT: Recommended reads from New York Times reporters and editors,
highlighting great stories from around the web.


 Recommended reads from New York Times reporters and editors, highlighting great
stories from around the web. What We're Reading is an exclusive benefit for home
delivery and digital subscribers that is sent twice a week as an email. Sign up
»

Buzzfeed

A Baby Boomer Heaven of Free Love and Happy Hours

I first came across The Villages - one of America's largest retirement
communities and a political and social force of its own - in election filings,
when I saw contributions from its founder in Republican "super PACs." This
excellent narrative takes you into the unique and fascinating culture of a kind
of baby boomer Valhalla. - Nicholas Confessore

The Cut

My $4,000 Coat and Me

Why do we covet certain items of clothing? And what power do they hold over us,
and why? As New York Fashion Week revs up, the writer and editor Mary
H.[#x200a]K. Choi takes readers into the rationale behind her most indulgent
purchase, in a telling that glides from light to heavy to intimate and aloof,
all in the same, effortless breath. - Jenna Wortham

Vimeo

Cinematic Silence Is Golden

One of the more powerful and least talked about traits of a Martin Scorsese film
is the deliberate use of silence. As the film critic and cinephile Tony Zhou
points out in this compelling video, Scorsese uses silence to heighten the
subjectivity of a moment, make a creepy scene even creepier or show us love at
first sight. This isn't just good sound mixing, it's good film design. - Jeremy
Zilar

Buzzfeed

Aftermath of a Drone Strike: It's Complicated. And Expensive.

After American drones launched an attack against Al Qaeda in Yemen in 2013,
locals said the missiles hit the wrong target - a wedding party. But American
politicians said it was a good, clean strike. So who mysteriously paid $800,000
to make the controversy go away? In this stunningly detailed account, the
brilliant Gregory D. Johnsen explains how we keep killing the wrong people, how
that has fueled Al Qaeda's growth and how it takes hard cash to make amends. -
Matt Apuzzo

The Atlantic

Do It Yourself. But Beware.

This is the story of what happened after a microbiology graduate student watched
a friend infected with a notorious "superbug" receive a D.I.Y. fecal transplant
- in his apartment, using an over-the-counter enema kit. It helped. But the
student later said, "The whole thing was absurd, not at all how it should be
done." So he decided to start a not-for-profit feces bank. And then the real
drama began. - Charles Duhigg

New York Magazine

Celebrity Women as Targets

After hackers leaked nude photos of a number of celebrities, Jessica Roy looked
at the pattern of vicious online attacks on women. She developed a really
interesting argument that the hacking is the "logical extension of the type of
abuse" that famous women "face on platforms like Twitter and Facebook every
day." - Andrea Kannapell

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


