                              79 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 2, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civilian Photography, Now Rising To New Level

BYLINE: By KIT EATON.

Kit Eaton, a regular contributor to The Times, is a guest columnist for State of
the Art.

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; STATE OF THE ART; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1169 words


Five years ago, the DJI Phantom 2 Vision would have seemed like a science
fiction film prop or a piece of surveillance hardware flown only by the sexiest
of superspies. But it is the first camera-carrying drone you may want to own --
and you could do that without spending thousands of dollars.

This drone is an intelligent, remote-controlled air vehicle that can fly far out
of direct line of sight of its operator. It can record great video and photo
stills from a thousand feet in the air over whatever ''target'' you can imagine.
If it loses the connection to its remote control, it can even use GPS to fly
automatically back to its launching point and land by itself. It is just like
what you see on the news, only smaller, with about 20 to 25 minutes of flying
time and less aggressive missions.

I'm not exaggerating here: From the moment I opened the (huge) box containing
this four-bladed flying machine and its remote control, I felt a degree of
wariness that I imagine you'd feel if a bit of a stealth bomber fell off and
landed in your backyard.

But once that wariness wore off, and I'd gotten over the complexity of the
hardware, the one word to sum up the Phantom 2 Vision is fun. Oh, my goodness,
this thing is fun.

The Vision is the latest quadrocopter from DJI, which has been in the business
for a relatively short while. It's not a toy by any means -- and at $1,200, it
is certainly not cheap. But it's a world away from those tiny $20 remote-control
helicopters that probably filled many a stocking this Christmas. The Vision is
serious hardware.

DJI has learned from the experience of its earlier Phantom drone, which is
similar in appearance and still on sale at a reduced price of around $500. The
older machine could carry a camera, like a GoPro, but you had to supply your own
and mating it to the drone was expensive and tricky, often resulting in wobbly
video.

The Vision has better systems, including an improved battery unit that can be
extracted from the drone to be charged, plus better flight software. Its best
feature, though, is the dedicated high-res camera slung under its belly, mounted
on a special vibration-reducing platform.

Live video from the camera is streamed over a Wi-Fi link to your iOS or Android
smartphone running DJI's app. The app has controls for tilting the camera,
activating a video capture or snapping a still photo. By tilting the camera, you
can aim it more easily in flight to capture images at different angles. And
while flying the drone using the traditional remote controller, you can watch
the video feed on the app to take the drone beyond where you can see it.

Testing the Vision in a forest clearing, I could fly it up through the opening
in the trees, then when it was high above the leaves I could fly it farther just
by looking at the display on the phone. It's incredible.

With the Vision, you can accurately film things that you would otherwise find
hard to see properly with your own eyes -- like a historic building from the
right angle, or surfers from a vantage point close to the waves. It is easy to
imagine how the Vision could be useful for sports photographers, architectural
photographers and even event photographers -- because you know drone videos are
going to be the next wedding special effect.

But is the built-in camera up to the job? Absolutely. Like the GoPro units it's
meant to replace, the unit has a wide-angle view and can record video onto an
onboard micro-SD card in full HD at up to 1080i resolution and 60 frames a
second. The vibration-reducing mount really does seem to do the job, too,
resulting in smooth images.

This is particularly true if the drone isn't maneuvering when you hit Record.
The camera doesn't record audio, but most external sounds would be drowned out
by the loud whizzing of the nearby props and their electric motors.

Still images are captured at 14-megapixel resolution, which matches some
high-end D.S.L.R. cameras, and the unit seems to do a good job of coping with a
variety of lighting conditions. If the lighting is difficult, perhaps from
bright sunlight, you can control some features, like white balance or shutter
speed, from the app.

The imaging unit is not without flaws, and it's not as powerful as a
professional hand-held S.L.R. camera. For example, there's a noticeable fish-eye
distortion in the image that comes from the unit's really wide vision angle, and
you can't zoom the field of view.

Even though the Vision is a large, complicated device, flying it is far easier
than flying a traditional remote control helicopter or a large R.C. aircraft,
thanks in part to its intelligence. If you let go of the controls, for instance,
the Vision will use its GPS system to stop where it is in midair, keeping itself
more or less stationary both horizontally and vertically, even in blustery wind
conditions.

Still, all is not smooth sailing. First, it comes with a 50-plus page manual,
which you must read, because what you're flying is in effect a very light
aircraft. The last thing you want to do is to crash it, damaging your machine or
potentially even hurting someone with its 14-inch-wide, three-pound mass and
whirling blades.

And despite its automatic systems, you are going to have quite a learning curve
to safely and confidently fly the Vision -- particularly if you're going to take
it beyond where you can see it directly.

Another thing to consider is that regulations governing drones -- whether for
commercial use or by hobbyists -- differ among countries and localities and are
changing quickly. So it is best to check the local rules before you fly.

As with real aircraft, dangerous moments happen near the ground. Manually
landing the drone is hard, and takes practice. You're going to bump it into the
ground a few times. Luckily the body is sturdy, and it probably won't get
damaged. The one time I did this, all that happened was that it got muddy as the
blades dug into the soft forest floor.

Using the remote control's traditional twin joysticks while tapping on the
dedicated smartphone app to control the camera is tricky. You almost have to
have three hands. You can, however, rely on the Vision's autopilot to handle the
flying for a moment or two so you can set up a photograph properly.

It's also tough to keep on top of charging all the batteries needed. The remote
takes standard AAs, but the drone has a huge lithium battery that charges with a
special wall unit. There's also a ''Wi-Fi range extender'' bolted to the top of
the remote control to connect your smartphone to the Vision's camera; this is
charged over a micro-USB cable and another wall charger.

And you have to remember to keep your smartphone charged to actually fly the
drone.

Once you've gotten past all this, you are in for pure excitement, plus great
video and stills.

For professional photographers or videographers looking for an unusual shot in
decent digital resolution, it may well be worth the price tag. For the rest of
us, it's a way to have a bit of tomorrow's tech in your hands today.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/02/technology/personaltech/review-the-phantom-2-v
ision-photo-drone-from-dji.html

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: What you need to take photos aloft: the Phantom 2 Vision drone,
its remote controller and your iOS or Android device. With its underslung
camera, the drone takes video and stills from places a photographer can't reach.

 The Phantom 2 Vision drone in action. If it loses connection with its
controller,  it will use GPS to find its way back to its launching site and land
itself. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KIT EATON) (B7)  DRAWING (DRAWING BY STUART GOLDENBERG)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


