                             791 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                The Federal Eye

                       March 7, 2014 Friday 11:03 AM EST

Senate confirms Kerlikowske to head Customs and Border Protection

BYLINE: Josh Hicks

LENGTH: 426 words


The Senate on Thursday voted by unanimous consent to confirm U.S. drug czar Gil
Kerlikowske as the next head of Customs and Border Protection.

Kerlikowske has an extensive background in law enforcement. Besides serving as
director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy since 2009, he was
Seattle's police chief for more than eight years. He also led police departments
in Buffalo, Fort Pierce, Fla. and Port St. Lucie, Fla., in addition to working
for two years as deputy director of the Justice Department's community-oriented
policing division during the Clinton administration.

With the Senate action on Thursday, Kerlikowske is set to become the first
permanent CBP chief since 2011, when former commissioner Alan Bersin, a recess
appointee, stepped down. He is also the first Senate-confirmed commissioner
since 2009, the last year of W. Ralph Basham's tenure in the position.

President Obama nominated Kerlikowske in August. Thomas S. Winkowski has served
as CBP's acting director since roughly the same time.

Kerlikowske's challenges will include reigning in overtime abuses by
headquarters employees and managing CBP's relatively new drone fleet, which has
raised concerns because of the agency lending the aircraft to other federal,
state and local law-enforcement agencies.

MORE: Border-patrol drones being borrowed by other agencies more often than
previously known

The new commissioner will also help the Department of Homeland Security review
his agency's use-of-force guidelines. Civil rights groups have criticized CBP
for allowing border agents to shoot at undocumented immigrants accused of
throwing rocks at them.

In Seattle, Kerlikowske was credited with helping to reduce the city's crime
rate and stabilizing its police department after the 1999 World Trade
Organization riots. But he was accused by some critics of being soft on officer
misconduct, according to a Seattle Times article.

Kerlikowske earned a B.A. and a M.A. in criminal justicea from the University of
South Florida.

Follow Josh Hicks on Twitter, Facebook or Google+. Connect by e-mail at
josh.hicks@washpost.com Visit The Federal Eye,                             The
Fed Page and                                Post Politics for more federal news.
E-mail federalworker@washpost.com                    with news tips and other
suggestions.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


