                             792 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                        June 20, 2014 Friday 5:46 PM EST

300 advisers is still a military intervention

BYLINE: Laura Durkay

LENGTH: 633 words


President Obama promises that there will be no re-invasion of Iraq, no boots on
the ground. For now he is even holding back airstrikes. But he is still
deploying up to 300 U.S. "military advisers" to Iraq. Whatever he wants to call
it, this is still a military intervention. And it will leave the Iraqi people no
better off than any of previous American adventures in that country.

The president promises a small detachment. This shouldn't be any comfort. His
presidency has been defined by the use of small teams of elite soldiers, backed
up by heavy surveillance and drone strikes; this has become the signature U.S.
foreign-intervention strategy. Under Obama, the use of covert Special Operations
teams has skyrocketed, with forces now deployed in as many as 75 countries. The
Joint Special Operations Command is now the favored way to prosecute the war on
terror. Its work in dozens of countries (without formal declarations) adds up to
an assertion that the U.S. may deploy troops, capture, detain, interrogate and
kill those it deems terrorists anywhere in the world. Obama's "advisers" will be
collecting intelligence that they might use in exactly those types of
operations.

From a purely American point of view, this strategy may seem preferable to long
deployments of hundreds of thousands of soldiers. But whether a missile is
launched from a Blackhawk over Fallujah or a drone base in Las Vegas matters
little if you're the person on the receiving end.

In his news conference, Obama criticized Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki
for stoking sectarian tensions between Sunni and Shia Iraqis, and claimed that
the U.S. was entering Iraq to help prevent civil war. This is amazingly
hypocritical. The U.S. has been quite content to let ISIS fight both Bashar
al-Assad's forces and other revolutionary groups in Syria, so its sudden concern
about the Islamist group's role in civil war, now that it threatens the
government of a nominal U.S. ally, seems disingenuous.

Furthermore, the U.S. itself did everything in its power to push Iraq into a
sectarian civil war starting in 2005, including setting up the government
structure Maliki now controls. Faced with the prospect of a united Sunni-Shia
guerilla resistance to its occupation, the U.S. enlisted a veteran of Latin
America's dirty wars, Col. James Steele, who filled the ranks of Iraq's police
force with fighters from various Shia militias and deliberately deployed them
against the Sunni sections of the resistance in what turned into a wave of
detentions, torture and murder. The divide-and-conquer strategy was eventually
successful, transforming a country with little history of communal violence into
the site of a bloody three-year sectarian conflict that at its height claimed
3,000 civilian lives a month. Is it any wonder that the Sunnis revile the
Shia-led government?

So violent has the Maliki government been in its repression of the Sunni areas
that some residents of Mosul welcomed ISIS's takeover of the city. "[W]e are so
happy to have them rather than having Maliki's bloody, brutal forces," Ali Aziz,
a resident of Mosul, told The Guardian. "I feel we have been liberated from an
awful nightmare that was suffocating us for 11 years. The army and the police
never stopped arresting, detaining and killing people."

Ordinary Americans following the news from Iraq may understandably feel a desire
for the U.S. to "do something." But other than paying reparations for two
devastating wars and 13 years of sanctions, there is nothing positive the U.S.
government can do in Iraq. The tools for healing sectarian rifts and rebuilding
a shattered country do not exist within the toolbox of the U.S. military. Any
number of U.S. troops or advisers will merely add fuel to the flame. The best
thing the U.S. can do now is stay out.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


