                             794 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       June 24, 2014 Tuesday 2:01 PM EST

Losing the Middle East: Time for Congress to act

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 967 words


The newest Washington Post-ABC poll shows that support for President Obama on
Iraq has collapsed:

For the first time in Post-ABC polls disapproval of Obama for handling Iraq
outpaces approval, 52 to 42 percent. His ratings tilted positive the last time
Iraq approval was asked in September 2010 - 49 percent approving and 45 percent
disapproving, with nearly one-third of Republicans giving him positive marks (31
percent). But Republican support has plummeted to 13 percent in the new poll
while independents have also shifted negatively, with the share approving of his
Iraq efforts dipping from 49 to 40 percent. Democrats have been more consistent
in approval of Obama, though their level of support fails to match Republicans'
opposition.

The latest New York Times/CBS poll has more bad news for the president:

The poll found that 58 percent of Americans disapprove of the way Mr. Obama is
handling foreign policy, a jump of 10 points in the last month to the highest
level since Mr. Obama took office in 2009. The spike in disapproval is
especially striking among Democrats, nearly a third of whom said they did not
approve of his handling of foreign policy. Fifty-two percent of Americans say
they disapprove of how the president is dealing with the current violence in
Iraq (including about a third of Democrats); 37 percent approve.

Overall the numbers are not much better. ("The president's approval rating is
now at 40 percent, while 54 percent say they disapprove of the job he is doing
in office, a six-point jump since May.") Unsurprising to many conservatives, the
only popular moves seem to be those that reflect hints of a more robust foreign
policy: "51 percent of those surveyed, including Republicans, Democrats and
independents, said they supported his recent decision to send 300 military
advisers to Iraq. Fifty-six percent said they supported the use of drones in
Iraq, a military option that Mr. Obama's advisers have said is still on the
table as the militants, known as the Islamic State [of] Iraq and Syria, have
extended gains across the northern parts of the country." Unlike the far right
and left, including figures such as Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), the public does see
an interest for the United States in the fate of Iraq: "A large majority thinks
that the United States has important interests in Iraq's future. Two-thirds said
Mr. Obama had not done enough to explain American goals in the country."

There could be no better example of the yearning for presidential leadership
than this. Voters in the United States, as in most democracies, are generally
opposed to war, but they also understand the risks of a dangerous world and the
essential role of the United States. The idea that we should revert to a 9/11
mentality, dismantle our anti-terror apparatus, give up drones 0r be bystanders
in the Middle East does not sit well with the public. It really doesn't sit well
with allies, who now openly express disdain for the administration and seek out
their own solutions (e.g. the Saudis back Egypt's military government, Egypt
looks to Russia for assistance, Israel develops its relationship with China).

Isolationism, whether from the right or left, works best in theory and in
campaigns, but rarely in practice. We now have the worst of all worlds - an
aggressive Iran pushing its way to a nuclear arms capability, the Sunni states
prepared to get their own nukes, a potential jihadist state in the midst of the
Middle East, a Syrian civil war that has taken 160,000 lives while weakening and
overwhelming our allies such as Jordan and jihadist safe harbors in several
failed or failing states. This did not come about because of too much U.S.
involvement but because of the absence, belatedness or insufficiency of U.S.
action. Like U.S. voters, allies and friends around the globe have a hard time
understanding what U.S. policy is and what our objectives are.

There is bipartisan worry that the administration is heading for even greater
trouble, perhaps about to make a rotten deal with Iran or to preside over Iraq's
dissolution. So let me suggest to House Republicans that they take the Benghazi
select committee, which has yet to get off the ground, and fold it into a much
more important and truly bipartisan select committee on the formation of a new
al-Qaeda state in the Middle East and the threats from Iran. How did we get
here? What are the dangers to Americans? The select committee on the Middle East
collapse is of much greater importance than affirming that the president didn't
want to let on that al-Qaeda was far from dead and had organized an attack on
the United States. As we have said many times, the reason Benghazi is important
is not the misleading narrative from the White House but the completely
wrongheaded policy that failed to appreciate the rise in jihadism in the Middle
East. The extent of that failure is only now becoming clear.

An inquiry such as the one I describe would have a number of benefits. It would
help educate the public. It would force the administration to get serious about
a coherent policy. It would reveal who in Congress is serious about national
security and who is not. It would put discrete mistakes into a larger context
(e.g. Do we really want to dismantle or hinder the National Security Agency when
ISIS is about to create its own terrorist state capable of hitting the United
States?) It would, I believe, reveal that there is a more agreement from the
center-left through the mainstream right on foreign policy than one might
imagine. And for whoever will become president in 2017, it may serve as a useful
analysis of what has gone wrong and what threats we face. House Speaker John
Boehner (R-Ohio) should give this strong consideration. It would be an act of
statesmanship at a time we badly need some.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


