                             808 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      September 1, 2014 Monday 8:26 AM EST

Israel proposes taking more West Bank land for Jewish settlers;
The appropriation of almost 1,000 acres would be the largest in years in the
occupied territory

BYLINE: William Booth;Ruth Eglash

LENGTH: 566 words


JERUSALEM - The Israeli government announced Sunday that it would appropriate
almost 1,000 acres of land in the West Bank that could be used to build homes
for Jewish settlers.

The Israeli group Peace Now, which opposes expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied West Bank, called it the largest land appropriation in 30 years.

The Civil Administration, the Israeli military authority responsible for
implementing government policy in the West Bank, said the decision was based on
the "instructions of the political leadership" after Operation Brother's Keeper,
the security sweep in June that followed the killing of three Israeli teens
abducted in the area.

In recent weeks, leaders of the Islamist militant movement Hamas, which controls
the Gaza Strip and is branded a terrorist organization by Israel and the United
States, have indicated that their operatives were behind the kidnapping.

On Sunday, Israel formally began the process of converting the 1,000 acres into
"state land." The area lies west of Bethlehem in a section of the West Bank that
Israelis call Gush Etzion, a cluster of nine Israeli settlements.

According to Peace Now, 10 Jewish families live at the site and operate a
religious school.

A leader of the council that administers the Gush Etzion settlement bloc told
the Israeli newspaper Haaretz that the appropriation paves the way for the
establishment of a city to be called Gvaot.

Those who oppose the appropriation plan have 45 days to express their
objections. According to the news agency Reuters, the mayor of a nearby town
said Palestinians owned the tracts and harvested olives there.

Palestinians want to create a sovereign state in the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank, and they say Israel's settlement construction makes their dream of a
contiguous, viable state less achievable.

Hanan Ashrawi, a leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said the move
"clearly represents Israel's deliberate intent to wipe out any Palestinian
presence on the land and to willfully impose a de facto one-state solution."

Hagit Ofran, director of Peace Now's Settlement Watch project, speculated that
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu likely had approved such a large land
appropriation.

"Netanyahu is weakening the moderate voices of the Palestinians and
strengthening Hamas and those who say they don't talk to the Israelis because
they do not want peace," Ofran said.

At his weekly cabinet meeting, Netanyahu did not specifically address the
appropriation, but he did say, "Our hand has been extended in peace to those of
our neighbors who want peace, and we have always fought vigorously, and with
strength, against those who wish to destroy us, while building up our state, our
cities and our communities."

In other developments Sunday, Israel's military said it fired a Patriot missile
to bring down a drone that flew from Syria into Israeli-controlled airspace over
the Golan Heights.

Israeli military officials suggested that the drone had entered the area by
mistake and that the unmanned aircraft probably belonged to the Syrian military,
not to a rebel group.

Rebels with Jabhat al-Nusra, an Islamist group affiliated with al-Qaeda, have
taken control of the U.N.-manned border crossing on the Syrian side of the Golan
Heights. Forty-four U.N. peacekeepers from Fiji were taken captive by Islamist
militants there Thursday.

william.booth@washpost.com

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


