                             803 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                       August 15, 2014 Friday 2:45 PM EST

What politicians should be saying about Ferguson (Hint: It's what Rand Paul is
saying);
As a political issue, the de-militarization of police has legs.

BYLINE: Aaron Blake

LENGTH: 396 words


So far, politicians have struggled with what to say about what occurred this
week in Ferguson, Mo. Most urged peace and patience, but the political debate in
this racially charged situation hasn't gotten much beyond that.

That was until Thursday, when Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and some other politicians
seized on an issue: The over-militarization of the police.

"Washington has incentivized the militarization of local police precincts by
using federal dollars to help municipal governments build what are essentially
small armies - where police departments compete to acquire military gear that
goes far beyond what most of Americans think of as law enforcement," Paul wrote.

As it turns out, that issue is a political winner.

A December poll for the libertarian magazine Reason showed there is bipartisan
agreement that the police are going too far by using things like drones,
military weapons and armored vehicles. Strong majorities of Democrats and
independents (60 percent of both) say that, according to the Rupe poll, as do 53
percent of Republicans and 60 percent of tea partiers.

Overall, Americans say these tactics go too far by a 21-point margin, 58-37.

(The Reason-Rupe poll was conducted Dec. 4-8, 2013, among a random sample of
1,011 adults on landlines and cellphones. The results among the full sample have
an error margin of 3.7 percentage points.)

The poll question isn't a perfect approximation of what we saw in Ferguson (to
our knowledge, no drones were used), but it shows the potential for a message
like Paul's to resonate. The scenes in Ferguson were at first all about the
unrest; then they became about heavy-handed policing. Law enforcement backed off
its show of force Thursday night, and the scene was marked by peace.

Talking about police equipment and tactics is also less likely to inflame racial
tensions - while at the same time addressing a concern that is real in the
African American community. The poll shows 67-31 that African Americans think
police equipment goes too far.

This isn't a totally easy political issue, however. As our own Philip Bump noted
this week, the police are a powerful political force, and it's unlikely they
want to see these kinds of tools taken off the table.

But as a starting point, what Paul is talking about is pretty fertile and safe
territory.

Peyton M. Craighill contributed to this post.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


