                             801 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 12, 2014 Tuesday 11:49 AM EST

Sadly the golf world isn't quite ready to embrace robotic caddies;
Courses are closing around the country, making it obvious the sport needs some
new ideas.

BYLINE: Matt McFarland

LENGTH: 463 words


Golf is a game that desperately needs a boost. For the eighth straight year more
golf courses closed than opened. For whatever reason - be it the time
commitment, expense or intricate rules of playing golf, the game's popularity is
at risk. Some have suggested playing with a massive, 15-inch hole, which would
make the gamer quicker and easier to play.

The game's leaders might want to think how to harness the latest technologies to
encourage participation. Instead of being a victim of our shortened attention
spans and attraction to flashy, high-energy activities, why not leverage
technology?

For three years FTR Systems Inc., a small company based in Las Vegas, has
attempted to sell the CaddyTrek, which is essentially a motorized stand that can
hold a bag of clubs and will automatically follow its owner around the course.
If a player stops on the fairway to hit a shot, the bag will stop behind him.
Once the player hits his shot and walks toward the green, the bag will resume
following.

The bag uses a radio frequency and ultrasound to remain six paces behind its
owner, who needs to wear a handset that clips onto a belt. The handset can also
be removed from one's belt and used as a remote control to manually guide the
CaddyTrek. It is battery powered and should last for 27 holes of golf.

CaddyTrek looks cool, perhaps something that could threaten the role of golf
carts, but sales have been far from brisk. At $1,795, it's cheaper than a new
golf cart, but still incredibly expensive compared to a push cart. In a rare
feat for technologies - where prices generally drop over time - CaddyTrek
actually became $200 more expensive in 2013 to cover the costs of making it more
reliable. It's far from a perfected product, owners have complained that it
beeps loudly and struggles on certain terrain.

"There can be that issue with the signal getting bumped. But really it's a
finesse product and we've found that users who use it really love it and they
also learn how to use it. If they're playing a course and know their are trouble
areas there's simple ways to get around those," FTR Systems director of
operations Charlie Palmer explained to me.

While CaddyTrek in its current form probably will never become as common at
courses as golf carts and push carts, something like the CaddyTrek might help
win golf the attention of younger generations. What Millennial wouldn't mind
having a robot for a caddy?

The game's leaders should also consider tapping into the coming drone economy.
What if a drone tracked your shots, reducing the likelihood of lost balls, or
videotaped tee shots and offered instant feedback via a related smartphone app.

The game of golf is far from dead, but finding ways to harness the digital
revolution could go a long way toward invigorating it.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


