                             809 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 16, 2014 Tuesday 11:46 AM EST

The quixotic pursuit of the technology-first city

BYLINE: Dominic Basulto

LENGTH: 808 words


The Chinese city of Chongqing is experimenting with the world's first-ever
pedestrian lane for mobile phone users. Think of it as a specially demarcated
slow lane in a busy city designed for people who walk around with their heads
down all day and are therefore always at risk of bumping into stuff. The idea
may seem whimsical - and perhaps just plain silly - but it points at the
interesting ways that every new consumer technology changes the way we think
about urban environments and contributes to the debate on how we design the
cities of the future.

China's mobile phone pedestrian lanes were launched specifically to address the
annoying - and probably incurable - habits of people who spend too much time
staring at their phones, slowing down others, and causing accidents. These
pedestrian lanes look just like a bike lane or a bus lane in any major city, but
are really more of a tongue-in-cheek suggestion rather than something
specifically enforced (unlike an HOV lane on a highway, for example). In fact,
based on previous iterations to create pedestrian lanes for mobile phone users,
the Chongqing pedestrian lanes seem to have the potential to evolve into more of
a photo-worthy tourist destination as much as a serious statement on urban
planning.

Yet, it's easy to see how the experiment in Chongqing could spread elsewhere,
maybe even stateside. Perhaps innovations in haptics - an emerging field
referenced in the Apple Watch launch - could be used to keep people in lanes: A
gentle nudge would push people with mobile phones into the appropriate lane and
perhaps keep them from straying off-course and bumping into objects. In short,
more innovation might be needed to catch up with the changing behaviors (and
traffic patterns) caused by wide-scale use of mobile technology.

The way you feel about these Chinese mobile phone-only lanes is probably the
same way you feel about innovations like "quiet cars" on commuter trains - they
are either meant to stigmatize and marginalize a certain group of people, or
they are meant to update a specific urban environment in a creative and fun way
for the way people use technology. This Chinese experiment with technology can
be viewed in two different ways. Interestingly, half of the stories about the
new lanes focused on "mobile lanes," the other half focused on the "no cellphone
pedestrian lanes."

The way you see these Chinese pedestrian lanes for mobile phone users is the way
you see mobile technology.

And mobile phone pedestrian lanes are just the latest iteration when it comes to
rethinking cities of the future for new technology. Remember when WiFi was a
novelty? Now there are entire cities blanketed with WiFi. Everywhere we go, we
expect to take our Internet with us. In some cases, existing urban
infrastructure can be retrofitted for modern technological needs, making things
easier for urban planners. In New York City, for example, classic telephone
booths are now being rethought as smartphone booths and Wi-Fi hubs. In the
future, we may need to rethink our cities for everything from aerial delivery
drones to driverless cars to people-moving tubes. Each new consumer-facing
technology brings new issues to consider.

Consider, for example, the amount of planning that went into South Korea's
Songdo, a futuristic concept city that is being built around changing notions of
what it means to be an urban city in the modern era. Songdo has been touted as a
smart, wired, sustainable city and can be considered an important experiment in
building a true technology-first city. There's WiFi everywhere, telepresence
screens are installed in all buildings for making video calls, and everything -
streets, buildings, lights - will be hooked up to the Internet via sensors.
Think of it as a smart city on steroids.

Of course, all of this begs the obvious question: Will redesigning our cities
with technology users in mind really make these cities more livable? If you live
in a place like Silicon Valley, the chances are that you believe that technology
will cure all modern ills, creating a techno oasis of drones, driverless cars
and the Internet of Things. Yet, if you think about the plot lines of many
dystopian science fiction fantasies, the real risk is that we wind up with
something along the lines of a "Blade Runner" society rather than some kind of
techno-utopia.

What's needed is some broader agreement about what it means to make our cities
more "livable." What's clear is that, the more that technology becomes
ubiquitous, the more that cities will have to be designed with these
technologies in mind. Maybe pedestrian mobile-only lanes are just an idea ahead
of their time, and that's why we find the idea of them so confusing. Decades
from now, though, we may wonder at how people ever made it cross-town or uptown
or downtown without the aid of mobile lanes.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


