                             806 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 21, 2014 Thursday 1:05 AM EST

Why conservatives love 'The Giver';
Right-wing commentators have endorsed Walden Media's adaptation of Lois Lowry's
classic novel, but that says more about the culture than "The Giver" itself.

BYLINE: Alyssa Rosenberg

LENGTH: 830 words


When the trailers for the film adaptation of Lois Lowry's classic dystopian
young adult novel "The Giver" hit theaters and the Internet earlier this year, I
made up my mind to stay away. There are only so many parts of my childhood that
I can stand to see treated as simply another opportunity to capitalize on the
craze for "The Hunger Games."

But over the past couple of weeks, "The Giver," which was produced by family
(and sometimes faith-tinged) filmmaker Walden Media, has become a minor cause
for conservatives who want to prove that they can make a movie a hit. So I
capitulated. Had director Phillip Noyce actually made a conservative film? Or
are conservative champions of the movie behaving as liberals sometimes do,
trying to yank a movie with a wide range of political ideas firmly into one
partisan camp or another?

"The Giver" is a spectacularly indifferent movie, both in matters artistic and
in the expression of its ideas.

Noyce sketches in the details of Lowry's story with efficiency but without wit.
The main character, Jonas (Brenton Thwaites), lives in a place called the
Community with his parents (Alexander Skarsgård and Katie Holmes) and sister
(Emma Tremblay). The family is a creation of the Community: In this society,
children are born to Birth Mothers and raised by Nurturers (two of many jobs to
which Community residents are assigned on their graduation from school), then
given to families.

Upon Jonas's graduation, he is assigned to an unusual job. He is to become the
Receiver of Memory, studying with his predecessor in that role (Jeff Bridges)
and becoming the receptacle for everything the Community has banished:
recollections of climactic variation, racial and religious difference,
biodiversity, sexuality and human conflict. Jonas also is given permission to
learn what actually lies behind the Community's rituals, including Releases,
which turn out to be euthanizations of the elderly or children who fail to meet
growth benchmarks.

Or, as former Alaska governor Sarah Palin put it in an endorsement of "The
Giver" on her Web television channel, "Gradually, Jonas learns what Reagan knew,
and what some of us still know today: that freedom is worth it."

Over at National Review, Kathryn Jean Lopez singles out the family politics of
the film in a larger discussion of the value of self-sacrifice and generosity.
"In the first part of 'The Giver,' we see the wretched souls in a society where
the relationship between a mother and child is severed, where women are no
longer free to nurture the innocent into their best selves," Lopez writes.
"There is a deadening that sets in and spreads like a cancer when the strong no
longer protect the weak and the gifts of the essential freedom and dignity and
responsibilities of stewardship give way to idols of faux security."

Insomuch as "The Giver" is capable of communicating emotion, the movie makes
absolutely clear that it is grotesque to kill a baby who cries when he is not
soothed and that something is missing in families designed by the state. Though
it may be in Palin's and Lopez's interests to suggest otherwise, these ideas are
hardly the sole provenance of conservatives. Suggesting that people who advocate
for continued access to abortion do not care about the welfare of young children
is an unpleasant rhetorical gamut, but often an effective one.

While it might be strategic to try to claim "The Giver" for the anti-abortion
movement, conservatives who are championing the movie as pro-life seem to be
making the same sort of aesthetic error as liberals who think that every movie
even marginally about economic inequality is necessarily progressive. Fictional
dictatorships can be animated by corruptions of conservative ideals as well as
by ostensibly progressive ones. And stories about inequality can argue for
benevolent stewardship of the lower classes just as they can make the case for
radical actions to eliminate the wealth gap.

In the case of "The Giver," progressives could easily claim that part of the
nightmare of "The Giver" is the way it turns some women into professional baby
vessels, stripping away their reproductive choices. They might also point to the
movie's addition of drones and dead-eyed drone pilots to Lowry's story (a move
in keeping with Hollywood's recent obsessions) as a jab at the Obama
administration's tactics in the war on terror. The Community's elimination of
racial difference and religious faith could be interpreted in any number of
directions. "The Giver" is ultimately a political grab bag, rather than a
particularly clear statement of any political worldview.

I suspect the reason that liberals have not rushed to contest the politics of
"The Giver" is that the movie is not particularly worth claiming. I am
sympathetic to conservatives who feel as though it is a rare opportunity to
claim a big-budget Hollywood production as their own. But they - and anyone who
goes to the movies purely for entertainment - deserve better than this.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


