                             807 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                       August 25, 2014 Monday 5:19 PM EST

Besieged Iraqi town of Amerli desperately needs U.S. help;
U.S. should help facilitate the opening of a relief corridor for the besieged
people in Amerli.

BYLINE: Michael Knights

LENGTH: 621 words


This weekend, the international community appeared to finally wake to the
looming humanitarian crisis in Amerli, a town of 12,000 Shiite Turkmen in
northern Iraq that has been under attack by the Islamic State for more than 60
days. On Saturday, Nickolay Mladenov, head of the U.N. Assistance Mission in
Iraq, urged the international community in a tweet "to relieve the #Amerli siege
and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance."

Amerli is the only major Shiite community still behind the Islamic State's front
lines. In nearby towns, Shiite Turkmen families captured by the Islamic State
have been split up, men and boys taken to be killed and women and girls bused
away to be used as human shields, sold as chattel and sometimes raped and
murdered.

Now, the Islamic State seems to be redoubling its efforts to overrun the town.
Its outposts are less than a mile away from the makeshift perimeter set up by
poorly armed residents, and its rockets make it impossible for Iraqi helicopters
to bring supplies and take out the most vulnerable. If the fragile defense
fails, we face the risk of another Srebrenica, the July 1995 massacre of more
than 8,000 Bosnian civilians under the noses of the U.N.

With a safe haven only four miles away in the Kurdish-controlled area to the
north, the international community, particularly the United States, needs to
intervene immediately to facilitate the opening of a relief corridor to Amerli.
The presence of thousands of Shiite civilians in territory controlled by the
Islamic State presents the terrorist movement with the opportunity to undertake
a sectarian provocation that would eclipse its previous crimes and plunge Iraq
irretrievably into full-scale disintegration. If Iranian-supported Shiite
militias liberate Amerli on their own, any relief operation might turn into a
sectarian rampage as these forces take revenge on local Sunnis. But if the
United States facilitates a joint effort to relieve Amerli, similar to the
recent recapture of the Mosul dam, the fight against the Islamic State and
efforts to stabilize Iraq could be greatly strengthened by another example of
cooperation between the federal government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
(KRG). Relief of the town offers the possibility of an unparalleled win-win-win:
Baghdad and Iran would protect an important Shiite community; Kurdistan would
show its non-Kurdish minorities that it will protect them; and Turkey, the
Turkmen's historic protector, can live up to its responsibilities, most likely
by arranging aerial medical evacuation, as it did when the town was hit by a
truck bomb in 2007.

Iraqis have tried repeatedly to relieve Amerli by themselves but failed. On Aug.
8, a column of Iranian-backed Shiite militiamen sought to punch through from the
north, but their column was shot to pieces by an Islamic State tank. A single
U.S. drone could have dispatched the tank at almost no risk to friendly forces
or civilians.

Having worked in Iraq for more than a decade, I would not lightly advocate any
use of force by the U.S. military. But Amerli represents an unusually clear-cut
opportunity to reduce human suffering, weaken the Islamic State and neutralize a
key risk to Iraq's fundamental stability. It is not the top of a slippery slope
to unintended escalation: In fact, Amerli is a uniquely dreadful situation with
a simple, achievable solution - coordinated U.S. airstrikes with a joint
Baghdad-KRG offensive to open a humanitarian corridor. Flying over Iraq right
now is a Predator drone carrying a Hellfire missile, and that missile will
probably one day be shot into a tank hulk on a training range when it reaches
its expiration date.

Or it could save 12,000 people if it is used today.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


