                             802 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Style Blog

                      August 14, 2014 Thursday 2:18 PM EST

Dan Fesperman, One Night Only, Politics and Prose

BYLINE: Neely Tucker

LENGTH: 504 words


Sometimes your life changes in funny ways.

For Dan Fesperman, it changed in Sarajevo, during the Bosnian War. The North
Carolina native arrived as a correspondent for the Baltimore Sun in 1994. By the
time he left, he knew he'd write a novel about it. Twenty years and nine
international thrillers later, he has left the Sun and now writes fiction full
time.

"Lie in the Dark," that first novel, was about a Bosnian policeman investigating
homicides during the war. It won the U.K.'s John Creasey Dagger for best first
novel. In 2006, "The Prisoner of Guantanamo"  was picked by USA  Today as the
best mystery/thriller of the year, while also winning the Hammett Award from the

 North American branch of the International Association of Crime Writers.

He'll be at Politics and Prose at 7 tonight to talk about "Unmanned," his
latest. It follows Darwin Cole, a former F-16 fighter pilot who later flew
drones,  haunted by a mission gone wrong for reasons that aren't clear. Cole,
like his real-life counterparts, served at Creech Air Force Base in the desert
about 40 miles outside Las Vegas. The pilots work in trailers, look at computer
screens and fly Predator drones in Afghanistan, 7,000 miles and nine time zones
away.

"It's a weird, weird job," he says. "They have a lots of burnout, depression.
The stress to risk is the highest in the military - the stress is enormous, but
the only real risk they face is driving home in traffic in Las Vegas."

Like all of his books, Fesperman builds the narrative by on-the-ground research.
He got clearance to the base in 2011, saw the inside of the trailers, watching
training missions and interviewed pilots.

"They were completely candid about the eeriness of the job. These guys had two
keyboards, three or four video screens, headsets on, there are four or five
people looking (virtually) over their shoulder. You've got these really tense
messages going back and forth, and then somebody gives a command like 'Take a
look at this spot over here'....You wind up, even at that distance, with this
weird intimacy with the people and villages you're surveilling. Then they go
back to completely alien lives where they can't really talk about what they've
been doing all day."

The Afghan research he already had down from reporting in the country after
9/11. And while his books are most often set abroad - Germany, Dubai,
Afghanistan - he's starting to explore native ground. "The Double Game," his
previous book, was largely set in Washington. His next - as yet un untitled but
the working name is "The Letter Writer" - is set in New York in 1942, with the
city aflame with fears of German spies and infiltrators.

"You had German subs sinking ships off the coast, a huge number of New Yorkers
were foreign-born, a lot of them immigrants from Germany and Italy. Before the
war, you had 22,000 people turn out for a rally by the Bund, who were Nazi
sympathizers and supporters, at Madison Square Garden...it was a very paranoid
time, and it makes for a lot of good material to write about."

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


