                             812 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 23, 2014 Tuesday 11:28 AM EST

Tomahawk missiles the latest U.S. weapon used against Islamic State

BYLINE: Dan Lamothe

LENGTH: 592 words


The new round of U.S. military strikes in Syria announced late Monday by the
Pentagon against the Islamic State militant group included many of the same
weapons and aircraft the Pentagon has used in recent weeks in Iraq. But it
included a new wrinkle, too: the use of Tomahawk cruise missiles launched by the
U.S. Navy from the Arabian Gulf and the Red Sea.

Navy Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, confirmed the strikes
in a statement late Monday. The decision to conduct them was made earlier in the
day by Army Gen. Lloyd Austin, the head of U.S. Central Command, Kirby said. The
strikes were still ongoing, meaning defense officials were "not in a position to
provide additional details at this time," Kirby said.

U.S. military officials with CENTCOM said early Tuesday that it had launched a
combined 47 missiles from two destroyers, the USS Philippine Sea, a guided
missile cruiser, and the USS Arleigh Burke, a destroyer. The first ship was in
the Arabian Gulf; the second in the Red Sea. The Philippine Sea is part of the
USS George H.W. Bush Carrier Strike Group, which includes an aircraft carrier by
the same that the U.S. military has been using for weeks to launch airstrikes in
Iraq.

The Navy released videos of missiles getting launched from both ships early
Tuesday:

The missiles were launched as part of 14 military strikes on Islamic State
targets in Syria overnight, defense officials said. They were used as U.S.
fighter jets, bombers and drones also dropped ordnance in Syria on militants,
their training compounds, headquarters, storage facilities, supply trucks, armed
vehicles and a finance center, CENTCOM said.

The U.S. also launched four more airstrikes in Iraq on Monday, bringing the
total number since they were authorized there by the White House on Aug. 7 to
194. They've been carried out by a mix of fighter jets, bombers and drone
aircraft, but the U.S. military had not previously disclosed using Tomahawks
against the militants.

The cruise missiles have been used by the U.S. military for decades, most
extensively in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq and around the 2003 U.S. invasion
of the same country. But they also have been fired more recently at targets in
Libya in 2011, and were put in position in the eastern Mediterranean to launch
strikes in Syria in August 2013, as the Obama administration accused Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad's regime of using chemical weapons against its own
people.

The Tomahawk strikes in Syria last year were eventually called off, as Obama
sought congressional approval. On Sept. 14, 2013, Russia and the United States
reached an agreement in which Syria's declared chemical weapons would instead be
destroyed at sea by a U.S. crew on the MV Cape Ray, a cargo ship specifically
equipped for the mission.

Two weeks ago, a Navy official said the USS Cole, a Navy destroyer carrying the
missiles, was in the eastern Mediterranean, but it does not appear it was used
late Monday in the strikes. The missiles also can be launched from U.S.
submarines, but defense officials do not commonly disclose where underwater
ships in the so-called "Silent Service" are.

The Tomahawk, made by Raytheon, is about 18 feet long and typically carries a
1,000-pound warhead on it. Some versions of it have a range of more than 1,000
miles, Navy officials say. It is typically considered ill-suited to hit moving
targets, but can hit stationary targets with precision.

UPDATE, Sept. 23, 7:25 a.m.: This post was updated with new information provided
by the U.S. military.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


