                             813 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 25, 2014 Thursday 5:19 PM EST

U.S.-led airstrikes could open new fronts for Syrian battles against Islamic
State;
The United States denies any coordination with Syria but the airstrikes could
open new fronts.

BYLINE: Rebecca Collard;Brian Murphy

LENGTH: 881 words


BEIRUT - Syrian government forces clashed with Islamic State fighters near
Damascus, a report said Thursday, in a possible sign that President Bashar
al-Assad's military may step up offensives amid the wider fallout from U.S.-led
airstrikes against the militants.

On other fronts, Syrian Kurdish fighters appealed for warplanes to hit Islamic
State units gathering for another bid to seize a strategic town near the Turkish
border. In Iraq, French and U.S. airstrikes targeted Islamic State networks.

The air attacks by the U.S. and Arab partners launched this week in Syria have
sought to deny the Islamic State its key bases and funding sources. On
Wednesday, the Pentagon said warplanes and drones attacked at least a dozen
small-scale refineries in eastern Syria used in oil smuggling that can bring in
as much as $1 million a day.

American officials said Assad's envoys were notified in advance that the
airstrikes would expand from northern Iraq to Syria. But the State Department
insists there is no strategic coordination with Assad's government, which has
been fighting a more than three-year civil war against rebel factions that
include groups backed by the West.

Assad's government also views the Islamic State as the rising threat and could
use the    blows inflicted by the airstrikes as indirect help to open new ground
battles against the militants.

At the same time, President Barack Obama has urged for sharply increased
military aid and training to "moderate" Syrian rebels as a potential proxy force
against the Islamic State. The greater rebel firepower also could be turned
against the Syrian government.

But in a possible gain for Assad, government forces took control of an Islamic
State foothold in an area about 19 miles northeast of Damascus. The report by
Hezbollah's Al-Manar TV could not be independently verified, but Lebanon-based
Hezbollah have helped support Assad by sending fighters to Syria.

The area of the reported fighting, Adra al-Omalia, has not been part of the
U.S.-directed air campaign against the Islamic State and other groups such as an
al-Qaeda-inspired splinter cell believed plotting to hit Western targets.

In northern Syria, Kurdish fighters said Islamic State forces, backed by heavy
weapons and vehicles, were opening another assault on the border town of Kobane,
or Ayn al-Arab  in Arabic. Kobane's fall would give the militants control over
an important stretch of the Syrian-Turkish frontier, one of the supply routes
for the group. More than 130,000 people have fled the clashes.

"[The] bases of ISIL and all their heavy weapons, vehicles and equipment are in
the open air, visible to everyone, but yet they haven't been targeted by the
airstrikes," said a statement from Redur Xelil, spokesperson of the People's
Protection Units, one of the Kurdish groups.

Across the border in Iraq, U.S. airstrikes ranged from near the northern city of
Irbil to areas west of Baghdad, targeting fighters and vehicles including a
tank, according to a Central Command statement.

The full extent of the air attacks remains unclear as they moved into a fourth
day. But that overall contours of the strategy point to efforts to degrade the
Islamic State's arsenal, supply lines and main funding sources.

On Wednesday, the U.S. fighter jets and drones, alongside warplanes from Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, struck refineries in eastern Syria. The
sites are among oil facilities seized by the militants during their rapid
advance in the past months.

The Islamic State is estimated to produce between 25,000 and 40,000 barrels of
oil a day, earning as much as $1 million a day, according to industry experts.

The United States has so far relied on Arab backing for the expanding air
attacks.

But France last week launched its first airstrikes in northern Iraq, and
followed up Thursday with more attacks in Iraq, French media reported. The
airstrikes came a day after a French citizen, Herve Gourdel, was beheaded by an
Algerian Islamist group claiming revenge for French military action against the
Islamic State.

French officials called an emergency meeting Thursday. The discussions could
include whether to expand its airstrikes to Syria, Defense Minister Jean-Yves Le
Drian told RTL radio.

Other European nations, meanwhile, have taken steps to aid the international
coalition.

Germany's defense minister, Ursula von der Leyen, visited Iraq's semi-autonomous
Kurdish region, whose fighters have been on the front lines against the Islamic
State. Germany also began the delivery of military aid to the Iraqi Kurds,
including 50 hand-held anti-tank weapons.

In the Netherlands - which is sending six F-16 fighter jets to join the air
campaign - the defense minister advised military personnel not to wear their
uniforms on public transportation because of fears of backlash from Islamist
militants.

British Prime Minister David Cameron plans to ask parliament on Friday for
approval to join the airstrikes.

"We must not allow past mistakes to become an excuse for indifference or
inaction," Cameron said at the United Nations. "We are facing an evil against
which the whole of the world should unite and as ever, in the cause of freedom,
democracy and justice, Britain will play its part."

Murphy reported from Washington.

brian.murphy@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


