                             817 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     October 1, 2014 Wednesday 1:02 PM EST

White House 'appalled' no more by civilian casualties;
The administration's high-handedness comes back to haunt it.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 505 words


I trust the Israelis will not lecture the administration that "there is always
more to do" to avoid civilian casualties, nor will the Israeli government
proclaim itself  "appalled" and civilian deaths "totally unacceptable and
totally indefensible" when it comes to fighting the Islamic State. The United
States spoke in such terms to Israel during the Gaza War, but now has
encountered the realities of war. And it turns out there is not always more to
do.

Yahoo News reports:

The White House has acknowledged for the first time that strict standards
President Obama imposed last year to prevent civilian deaths from U.S. drone
strikes will not apply to U.S. military operations in Syria and Iraq. A White
House statement to Yahoo News confirming the looser policy came in response to
questions about reports that as many as a dozen civilians, including women and
young children, were killed when a Tomahawk missile struck the village of Kafr
Daryan in Syria's Idlib province on the morning of Sept. 23.

The rules previously announced that handcuffed the administration are declared
inapplicable here. ("[A] much-publicized White House policy that President Obama
announced last year barring U.S. drone strikes unless there is a 'near
certainty' there will be no civilian casualties - 'the highest standard we can
meet,' he said at the time - does not cover the current U.S. airstrikes in Syria
and Iraq. The 'near certainty' standard was intended to apply 'only when we take
direct action 'outside areas of active hostilities,' as we noted at the time,'
[the NSC spokeswoman] said in an email. 'That description - outside areas of
active hostilities - simply does not fit what we are seeing on the ground in
Iraq and Syria right now.'")

Don't get me wrong. The current U.S. practice is entirely legitimate. It is hard
to argue with the assertion that "like all U.S. military operations, [airstrikes
on the Islamic State] are being conducted consistently with the laws of armed
conflict, proportionality and distinction." However, this does underscore how
misguided and unfair U.S. condemnation of Israel was. Perhaps Ben Rhodes, the
politically minded national security official who took it upon himself to
lecture Israel, should finally apologize.

There is something else to be said here about the choice of airstrikes as the
main U.S. tactic. The Obama administration has been roundly criticized for
pursuing an air campaign that cannot possibly destroy the Islamic State. If that
is a strategy with limited efficacy, what is the moral argument for continuing
to employ it when civilian casualties result? It is one thing when a strategy is
well-designed to achieve a specific military objective (e.g. destroying Gaza
terrorists' tunnels and rockets), but quite another when it is not. Imagine if
Israel had conducted bombing raid after bombing raid resulting in civilian
casualties rather than send in ground troops at great risk to them in order to
strike with precision. I'm sure the Obama administration would have been
appalled.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


