                             816 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     September 30, 2014 Tuesday 4:16 PM EST

The undoing of the Iraq and Syria revisionists

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 1105 words


If President Obama and his spinners won't accept conservatives' take on the
failures and missteps leading up to the Islamic State and the region-wide chaos
in the Middle East, maybe they will believe the New York Times. Strangely
enough, it confirms the facts and arguments conservative critics have been
making for years now. What is also evident is that President Obama picked on the
wrong people; the intelligence community is striking back by going to the media
with chapter and verse of the president's dereliction. The report substantiates
eight key points:

1. Leaving Iraq with no troops was a disaster.  "The Islamic State was born out
of the ashes of Al Qaeda in Iraq, which was crippled by the time Mr. Obama
withdrew American forces from Iraq at the end of 2011. The civil war that
erupted in neighboring Syria pitting President Bashar al-Assad against a variety
of rebel organizations provided a haven for the Qaeda affiliate to reconstitute
itself with an influx of foreign fighters."

2. It was foreseeable that sectarian violence would return. "'To anyone watching
developments in Iraq from mid-2010 and Syria from early 2011, the recovery and
rise of ISIS should have been starkly clear,' said Charles Lister, a visiting
fellow at the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar. 'The organization itself was also
carrying out an explicitly clear step-by-step strategy aimed at engendering the
conditions that would feed its accelerated rise.'"

3. Intelligence agencies long ago spotted the danger that jihadists were
spreading and threatening Iraq and Syria. "By late last year, classified
American intelligence reports painted an increasingly ominous picture of a
growing threat from Sunni extremists in Syria, according to senior intelligence
and military officials. Just as worrisome, they said, were reports of
deteriorating readiness and morale among troops next door in Iraq. . . . By late
December, alarm over deteriorating security in Iraq was growing and the United
States quietly rushed dozens of Hellfire missiles and low-tech surveillance
drones to help Baghdad combat an explosion of violence. Intelligence officials
were warning in classified reports at the time that the Islamic State had become
a potent force in northern and western Iraq, with armed convoys intimidating
towns, assassinating local officials and using explosives to kill Iraqi
soldiers."

4. The president ignored warnings. "[T]he reports, they said, generated little
attention in a White House consumed with multiple brush fires and reluctant to
be drawn back into Iraq. 'Some of us were pushing the reporting, but the White
House just didn't pay attention to it,' said a senior American intelligence
official. 'They were preoccupied with other crises,' the official added. 'This
just wasn't a big priority.'"

5. The president was driven by ideology. "Mr. Obama was determined not to let
the United States be dragged back into a war that he had opposed from the start
and that he had promised during his first campaign for the White House to end.
After five years in office, aides said, Mr. Obama was convinced that the United
States was too quick to pull the military lever whenever it confronted a foreign
crisis. He would not repeat what he considered the mistake of his predecessor
President George W. Bush."

6.  The situation became more dire as time went on. "Mr. Maliki asked that Iraq
be provided the ability to operate drones; if the United States was unwilling to
do that, then he indicated he was prepared for the United States to carry out
strikes itself. He later made the same point to Vice President Joseph R. Biden
Jr. and sent a written request. At the time, Mr. Obama was not open to such a
move. He gave a speech at West Point eschewing what he deemed the overuse of
American force to solve world problems. But he promised more aid to moderate
Syrian rebels. The White House sent a proposal for a $500 million program to
train and equip the rebels back to the Pentagon several times, but the president
eventually announced it. By then, though, it was too late. On June 10, thousands
of Sunni militants poured over the border from Syria and seized control of
Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city. Armed gunmen then headed south toward Baghdad
and east toward the autonomous region of Kurdistan. The Iraqi Army crumbled in
the face of the assault, as soldiers dropped their weapons, shed their uniforms
and fled."

7. The president is not telling the truth when he puts blame on the intelligence
community. "In interviews in recent weeks, administration officials privately
agreed that they had not focused enough on the Islamic State's territorial
ambitions but said they were hamstrung in responding by an Iraqi government that
was fanning the sectarian divide that helped give rise to the Sunni extremists
in the first place."

The Times focuses on what was going on inside the administration. When you
include the pervasive criticisms and warnings in the media, from former
officials and respected outside experts it becomes evident that the president
was either isolated from reality or now is pretending that he was. In either
case, it is no excuse to pretend he did not have ample time and warnings to
reverse a failed policy.

This should also put to rest the blatant untruth (promulgated by the right-wing
isolationists led by Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.)) that the Islamic State flourished
because of U.S. involvement. The facts say otherwise. The problem was lack of
action or a go-slow philosophy. ("While [Obama] would help Iraq's government, he
would not use American military force nor would he escalate involvement in
Syria's brutal civil war after having decided the previous fall to call off a
plan to launch a missile strike against Mr. Assad's government in retaliation
for using chemical weapons on civilians. Government officials referred to that
as the 'nonstrike incident' and told foreign policy experts last spring that the
president would take a 'minimalist approach' to Syria." That help did not come
until this spring in the form of $500 million to train and equip the rebels.)
And for those on the right that cheered the total withdrawal of forces from Iraq
or who decried the United States as an "occupying" power in Iraq, the facts
again say otherwise. When the administration finally realized the gross error
"they tried to 'get our foot back in the door'" in Iraq. Again, it was too late.

Those who got it wrong - on the far right and inside the administration - should
acknowledge it and stop compounding their error by fabricating history. All that
does is compound a failure of judgment with a failure of character.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


