                             814 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 26, 2014 Friday 8:15 AM EST

Washington's not-so-small contracting problem

BYLINE: J.D. Harrison

LENGTH: 428 words


Welcome to CapBiz A.M., your morning primer on business news with a focus on
Washington.

Contracting claims: Last year was the first year that the Obama administration
claimed to have met the federal government's small-business contracting goals. A
new federal report casts doubt on that accomplishment, providing yet more
evidence that the numbers may be inflated. (WP)

Blackboard's buy: District-based Blackboard has acquired a small British firm
whose technology allows students to communicate in real time via video
conferencing and instant messaging. (CAPBIZ)

Start-up spaces: American University's business school will today unveil its new
on-campus start-up incubator, the latest in a string of co-working spaces to pop
up in and around the nation's capital. (CAPBIZ)

Coming soon: Here's a master list of what's being built in the newly
Metro-accessible Tysons Corner, when it will all be complete and what you'll
find inside, courtesy of the Tysons Partnership. (WBJ)

Drone drama: The government has granted six movie and television production
firms permission to use drones for filming, an important step toward greater use
of the technology by commercial operators. (WP)

Marketing shift: In the race to attract consumers, some of the largest American
food companies are tweaking their marketing playbooks to go after a once-ignored
group - men. (WP)

Macy's move: Macy's is adding iBeacon technology to all of its stores, an
innovation that has been much buzzed-about but hasn't been widely used in
stores. Is this our first glimpse at the future of retail? (WP)

Good signs: New orders for capital goods by American businesses rebounded in
August, as well as only a marginal uptick in unemployment claims, point to
underlying strength in the economy. (REUT)

On Wall Street

Stocks suffered their worst day in nearly two months on Thursday, sent tumbling
by concerns over the global economy as well as steep declines for several major
stocks, including Apple. (Get the latest updates here)

What's on tap today

GDP report (8:30 a.m.)

Corporate profits report (8:30 a.m.)

Consumer sentiment report (9:55 a.m.)

Help: How to stay organized and on task every day (ENT)

Follow:  Blackboard

Extra: The rich aren't just nabbing more of the wealth. They're taking all of
it. (WP)

Thoughts? Have feedback, tips or events we should know about? E-mail us here.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


