                             811 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 23, 2014 Tuesday 11:24 AM EST

BYLINE: Ruth Eglash;William Booth

LENGTH: 433 words


JERUSALEM - Israel's military said that it shot down a Syrian warplane Tuesday
after the aircraft strayed more than half-mile into airspace Israel controls
over the Golan Heights.

Military experts in Israel said that this was the first time in nearly 40 years
that Israel downed a Syrian jet, although a Syrian drone that entered
Israeli-occupied territory last month was also shot down.

It also reflects how the Golan - captured by Israel in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war
- is increasingly drawn into the tensions in Syria, including the more than
three-year-old civil war and the growing reach of  Islamist militants.

The Israeli army fired a U.S.-made Patriot surface-to-air missile at the Syrian
jet, a Soviet-made Sukhoi-24. According to the Israeli military, the two Syrian
pilots ejected and safely landed inside Syrian territory. Local media reported
that the aircraft crashed near the Syrian town of Quenitra, which is now
controlled by al-Qaeda-linked rebels.

Since the civil war started in Syria more than three years ago, fighting on the
Syrian side of the Golan Heights has regularly spilled over into Israeli side.
The United Nations has monitored a demilitarized buffer zone in the area for 40
years.

Mortar, tank and artillery fire has reached Israel several times, injuring
Israeli soldiers who patrol the border road and killing an Israeli teenager who
was traveling there with his father this summer.

The Israeli military said that it was investigating the circumstances of
Tuesday's incident. But it did not appear that the Syrian aircraft's mission was
aimed at Israel, but instead at anti-regime rebel forces that last month
captured strategic points along the frontier between Israel and Syria.

In a statement, Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Ya'alon said that the Syrian
aircraft had crossed into Israeli airspace and reiterated that Israel would not
tolerate any threats to its security.

"We've clarified this in the past and we're emphasizing it again: We won't allow
anybody, whether it's a state or a terrorist organization, to threaten our
security and violate our sovereignty," he said.

Ram Shmueli, a brigadier general in the Israeli reserves and former head of
Israel's air force intelligence, said that Israel is currently facing a major
threat on all of its northern borders.

"We are very much on alert to all types of drones, jets and airplanes, even
civilian airlines like those used during 9/11," said Shmueli, a fighter pilot
for more than 35 years. "Although we are not part of this war, we have to keep
the borders safe."

ruth.eglash@washpost.com

william.booth@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


