                             818 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 10, 2014 Friday 3:40 PM EST

What was fake on the Internet this week: Ebola zombies, child brides and a
seeing Stevie Wonder

BYLINE: Caitlin Dewey

LENGTH: 957 words


There is so much fake stuff on the Internet in any given week that we've grown
tired of debunking it all. Fake Twitter fights. Fake pumpkin-spice products.
Amazing viral video? Nope - a Jimmy Kimmel stunt!

So, rather than take down each and every undeservedly viral story that crosses
our monitors each week, we're rounding them all up in a quick, once-a-week
Friday debunk of fake photos, misleading headlines and bad studies that you
probably shouldn't share over the weekend.

Ready? Here's what was fake on the Internet this week:

1. A U.S. drone did not capture footage of an Islamic State militant having sex
with a donkey. (Or a goat. Take your pick.) The alleged footage from Syria,
which cropped up on LiveLeak before making the rounds on Reddit, does indeed
appear to show some unsavory activity between a man and a highly pixelated
animal. But the date stamp on the video is from 2011, and the time zone
corresponds to Kabul - not Syria. As Adam Weinstein writes at Gawker, this sort
of propagandizing is neither unusual nor new: stuff that "dehumanizes your
adversary as bestial," he writes, "is highly shareable on social media."

FYI Drones have found an ISIS member having sex with a goat
http://t.co/PbSUSfAnrI pic.twitter.com/ojhrVo1E7n

2. A historian did not discover a new text on the miracles of Jesus. Nearly
200,000 people have shared this whopper from faux-news peddlers World News Daily
Report, the same people who - just this week! - brought you stories on the
discovery of an "ape man creature" and El Dorado. Per the so-called satirists,
an Italian historian discovered the parchment, Dan Brown-style, in the archives
of the Vatican. It purportedly contained a first-person account of Jesus
resuscitating a stillborn child. Needless to say, if such a text were indeed
found, it would merit mention outside of the "semi-real or mostly fictitious"
media - in 2,000 years of Biblical scholarship, no one has found a eyewitness
account of Jesus's work. WWJD, World News Daily Report? (Answer: Not make up
fake news.)

3. Ebola zombies are not "rising from the dead." In a story that should have
strained the credulity of even the most gullible "Walking Dead"-watcher, the
troll-y right-wing news hoaxers Big American News claimed, over the course of
multiple articles (!), that Ebola is actually an American bioweapon that raises
its victims from the dead. Well over half a million people have shared the
stories on Facebook, apparently failing to realize that (a) this is not
possible, (b) the "confirmed" photo of the Ebola zombie is from the movie "World
War Z," and (c) that a site with headlines like "Obama is infecting Christmas
with Ebola to destroy Jesus and start a new age of liberal darkness" isn't
exactly trustworthy.

The Ebola zombie attack is for real? O.o

4. Someone did not vandalize a $2.5-million Bugatti by spray-painting male
genitalia on it. But an image that seemed to show the luxury car, complete with
a large red penis on its hood, spread like wildfire on Reddit - where readers
alternately pitied, and lol-ed at, the owner of the car. Said owner is, in fact,
in on the prank: It's the work of a YouTube comedy group, and they did it for an
upcoming video. They're also very pleased with all the attention.

5. No one has Ebola in Kansas City. Ebola rumors are arguably more contagious
than the disease itself, which perhaps explains how one local blog in Kansas
City managed to spark an Internet-wide panic. Tony Botello, of the aptly named
TonysKansasCity.com, reported on Saturday that an infected patient had been
quarantined in the city's Research Medical Center ... complete with multiple
exclamation points, an all-caps headline, and a picture of a fiery mushroom
cloud. Despite the fact that none of these things convey serious reportage, the
report spread quickly on Twitter and ended up in Breitbart, among several other
sites. Kansas City officials have since clarified that while they did see a
feverish patient from Nigeria, he had no other Ebola symptoms, and the disease
has been conclusively ruled out. They're also reportedly looking into how the
rumors spread.

6. A 12-year-old Norwegian girl is not marrying a 37-year-old man. The wedding
blog of blonde-haired, blue-eyed Thea - which chronicles her preparations to
marry a man 25 years her senior - quickly became the most-read blog in Norway
this week, as 2 million people tweeted their horror at the site and called into
Norway's child services to stop the wedding. They needn't have panicked over
Thea: The whole thing's a stunt for Plan Norway, a children's rights advocacy
group. But they should still probably panic about child marriages, the issue
Plan Norway sought to draw attention to: Per that group, 39,000 underaged girls
are forced into marriage every day.

7. Rihanna is (probably) not back on Instagram. Fans rejoiced over rumors that
the singer was back on IG after departing on rather scandalous terms five months
ago. But alas, if @Bahdgalriri is Rihanna's new Instagram account, it's ... not
a very good one. The account has only re-posted pictures that appeared elsewhere
on social media first, whether on Rihanna's (verified) Twitter, or those of her
friends and management.

8. Stevie Wonder is definitely blind. Ignore the "truther" case on this one.
Sixty years of documented history AND a children's book cannot possibly be
wrong.

Did we miss any other notable fake stuff this week? E-mail
caitlin.dewey@washpost.com - or stay tuned until next week, because surely some
more shenanigans will go down in the meantime.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


