                             822 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                    October 15, 2014 Wednesday 10:52 PM EST

Serbia and Albania officially blame each other for what happened during their
Euro 2016 qualifier

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 504 words


It took little time for both the Serbian and Albanian national soccer
associations to state their cases publicly after UEFA officially opened
disciplinary proceedings against the delegations on Wednesday. The disciplinary
proceedings came the day after the 2016 European Championship qualifier between
the historical rivals was abandoned when a drone carrying a pro-Albanian flag
led to fights on the field.

While the the countries' soccer associations have until Oct. 22 to respond to
the charges, both sides posted press releases on Wednesday afternoon on their
respective official Web sites. And perhaps because of the event's freshness and
the longstanding political crisis that tears these two nations apart, neither
side took any responsibility, but instead simply blamed the other.

Per the statement, posted in English, on the Serbian soccer association Web
site:

"FA of Serbia emphasize [sic] that before and during the played part of the
match, and also after the match was abandoned, neither any of Albanian flags had
been burnt nor there had [sic] been any banners with inappropriate content.
Furthermore, we strongly stress the fact that at all times safety was guaranteed
to every member of the Albanian FF delegation.

The translation offered up by Serbia's soccer association is obviously not the
best, but the message is clear - it was Albania's fault. The press release also
states that even though it was English referee Mark Atkinson who decided to
abandon the match, it was the Albanian delegation that decided not to continue
playing, even after it an option was offered to play in an empty stadium.

Albanian players have not denied that, but they have said their reasons for not
returning to the pitch weren't because they didn't want to, but because they
physically or mentally couldn't.

"I have injuries to my face, as does Taulant Xhaka," Kosovo-born Albanian player
Lorik Cana told CNN. "They asked us to play in front of empty stands (instead of
abandonment) - however, we did not feel good because of our injuries."

The Albanian soccer association backed up Cana's statements, but painted a more
emotionally charged picture of what they saw as an unreasonable and unwelcoming
atmosphere in Partizan Stadium. The statement barely mentioned the drone.

The statement reads: "Everything in the game was aggressive," and recounts
"30,000 voices chanting 'Kill Albanians!' and 'Dead Albanians!' It recalls the
Albanian national anthem being preceded by a Serbian "nationalist march, which
was not included in the official program and created an extraordinarily
nationalistic atmosphere in the stadium."

The statement concludes that those reasons and more made it impossible for the
game to develop normally.

At this point, it will be up to UEFA to study the evidence to figure out how
both teams will proceed in the Euro 2016 tournament. The organization is
expected to come to a decision about the matter on Oct. 23.

RELATED: Why did UEFA let the Albania-Serbia Euro 2016 qualifier happen?

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


