                              82 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Surprise, Pakistan Says Fewer Civilians Died by Drones

BYLINE: By DECLAN WALSH; Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 725 words


LONDON -- In a surprise move, Pakistan's government on Wednesday sharply revised
downward its official estimate of civilian casualties caused by American drone
strikes in the tribal belt, highlighting again the contentious nature of
statistics about the covert C.I.A. campaign.

The Ministry of Defense released figures to lawmakers saying that 67 civilians
were among 2,227 people killed in 317 drone strikes since 2008. The remainder of
those killed were Islamist militants, the ministry said.

The figures represented a civilian casualty rate of about 3 percent, falling far
below earlier estimates from independent groups -- and other government
departments -- that reported a rate of 6 percent and higher over the same
period.

Recently, a United Nations special rapporteur on human rights and
counterterrorism, Ben Emmerson, said that the Pakistani government had reported
at least 400 civilian deaths since the drone campaign started in 2004.

In an email, Mr. Emmerson noted that the revised figures were ''strikingly at
odds'' with those he had been given earlier by the Pakistani Foreign Ministry
and said he would be writing to the government seeking clarification.

''It is essential that the government of Pakistan now clarify the true
position,'' he said.

In a twist, the latest figures place the Pakistani government on much the same
page as the C.I.A., which Pakistan has repeatedly condemned for breaching its
sovereignty in running the drone campaign.

Although the drone program remains classified and the Obama administration has
never given an official estimate of civilian casualties, the C.I.A. and
officials from other American agencies have insisted that the strikes have been
very accurate and have killed only a small number of civilians.

And for all the angry denials from Pakistani military and civilian officials, a
steady drip of news media leaks and other evidence suggests that they have
quietly cooperated with at least some drone strikes.

But activists insist that civilian casualties remain a serious problem. The
discrepancy in the various figures highlights both the opaque nature of the
American campaign and the failure of the Pakistani authorities to properly
investigate drone strikes, said Mustafa Qadri, a researcher with Amnesty
International.

The American government should be ''the first place to ask'' about casualty
figures, he said in an email. ''If the strikes are precise and legal, then the
U.S. should disclose the videos of the strikes and their full legal basis.''

A related problem, experts say, is trying to define civilians and casualties in
a remote conflict zone like North Waziristan -- particularly given that the
international debate over the legality of drone strikes remains unresolved.

Ascertaining the truth about what happens in the tribal belt, a dangerous and
lawless area along the Afghan border, is notoriously difficult. And new evidence
from human rights groups, bolstered by witness testimony that was delivered by a
Pakistani family in Washington this week, suggests that the drones are not as
foolproof as American -- and now some Pakistani -- officials have suggested.

Last week, Amnesty International released a report, written by Mr. Qadri, that
concluded that at least 19 civilians were killed in just two drone strikes in
2012, including a woman in North Waziristan who was picking vegetables in a
field with her grandchildren.

But the new official Pakistani figures stated that no civilians were killed in
North Waziristan in 2012 or this year.

The dead woman's son and two grandchildren spoke about the attack at a news
conference in Washington on Tuesday that was arranged by the Brave New
Foundation, a liberal advocacy group that has funded a new documentary about the
drone wars.

One grandchild, Nabila Rehman, 9, described seeing two missiles fired from a
drone kill her grandmother as they worked together in the field. Speaking in
Pashto through an interpreter, the girl also said she had suffered shrapnel
wounds to her right hand.

She was accompanied by her father, a teacher, and her 13-year-old brother,
Zubair ur-Rehman, who said that he preferred cloudy days when bad weather
grounded the drone fleet.

''When the sky brightens and becomes blue, the drones return, and so does the
fear,'' he said.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in
print.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/31/world/asia/pakistan-drone-strikes.html

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


