                             828 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                     November 21, 2013 Thursday 8:13 PM EST

World Digest: Nov. 20, 2013

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 774 words


PAKISTAN          Suspected U.S. strike  outside tribal area

A suspected U.S. drone carried out a rare missile strike in northwest Pakistan
outside the country's remote tribal region Thursday, killing six people,
including at least two Afghan militants,officials said.

The missiles hit an Islamic seminary in Hangu district in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
province, said police officer Fareedullah and intelligence officials. The
intelligence officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not
authorized to talk to journalists.

It was one of the first droneattacks to occur outside Pakistan's tribal region
along the Afghan border and could increase tension between Islamabad and
Washington.

It was also the first drone attack since former Pakistani Taliban chief
Hakimullah Mehsud was killed in a Nov. 1 strike in North Waziristan. Pakistani
officials were outraged by the attack because they said it came a day before
they planned to invite Mehsud to hold peace talks.

- Associated Press

IRAQ          Attacks in Baghdad target business areas

A wave of bombings hit mainly Shiite commercial areas in and near Baghdad on
Wednesday, killing at least 35 people, Iraqiofficials said.

The attacks were part of a surge in violence that has rocked Iraq in recent
months as insurgents seek to thwart the Shiite-led government's effortsto
stabilize the country.

Five blasts involved parked car bombs while at least three were remotely
detonated bombs, police said. The deadliest featured a bomb hidden in a cafe in
Baghdad's southwest Bayaa area, which killed six people.

- Associated Press

SYRIA          Suicide blasts hit troops near capital

Suicide bombers targeted Syrian troops and a hospital Wednesday in the rugged
Qalamoun hills north of Damascus, where rebels are struggling toreverse
government gains that threaten to cut one of their chief supply lines, activists
and officials said.

Fighting in the region has driven thousands of refugees into neighboring
Lebanon, prompting authorities there to allow aid groups to build a camp for
Syrians for the first time since the uprising began three years ago, a U.N.
official said.

Rami Abdulrahman of theBritain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said
the suicide bombers belonged to the al-Qaeda-linked groups Jabhat al-Nusra and
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, citing activists on the ground. Precise
casualty figures were not available.

In Damascus, government forces arrested a leading opposition figure known for
his criticism of the government of President Bashar al-Assad but also for his
condemnation of violence, activists said. Raja al-Naser was secretary general of
a coalitionof opposition groups based in government-held territory.

- Associated Press

NORTHERN IRELAND          Senior official seeks end to killing probes

The top legal official in Northern Ireland declared Wednesday that police and
other state-funded investigators should stop trying to solve killings committed
before the British territory's 1998 peace agreement, arguing that the probes are
wasteful,futile and undermine peacemaking goals.

Attorney General John Larkin's surprise suggestion reignited a long-running,
bitter debate over how to promote truth and justice in a land where most of the
3,700 killings from Northern Ireland's four-decade conflict remain unsolved.

Larkin advises the Catholic-Protestant government forgedby the Good Friday
Agreementof 1998. His statement Wednesday drew immediate criticism from
politicians on both sides,as well as British Prime Minister David Cameron, but
Northern Ireland's police commander voiced support for it.

- Associated Press

1st Greenpeace protester leaves Russian jail: Brazilian Ana Paula Alminhana
Macielbecame the first of 30 Greenpeace activists arrested by Russia in an
Arctic protest two months ago to be freed on bail, and the skipper of the
group's ship, Peter Willcox, and four others were granted bail, in a case that
has sparked international criticism of Russia. Russian courts have granted bail
this week to 17 of the detainees. Hearings are scheduled for 12 more, and one
was denied bail.

Indonesia cools ties with Australia over spying reports: Indonesia has
"downgraded" its relations with Australia and suspended cooperation on
people-smuggling following outrage over reported eavesdropping on senior
Indonesian leaders' phones, officials said. Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister
Tony Abbott told Parliament he would do everything he "reasonably can" to repair
ties with his country's northern neighbor and trade partner.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


