                             824 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                      October 24, 2014 Friday 4:21 PM EST

UEFA awards Serbia a win over Albania in abandoned Euro 2016 qualifier, but
deducts points for bad behavior

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 483 words


Officials from European soccer's governing body met Thursday to mull over what
to do about last week's disastrous Euro 2016 qualifier between Serbia and
Albania. On Friday, UEFA made its decision public. As expected, the fines for
both sides were steep. Each national team will have to pay 100,000 Euros
($127,000). Other consequences, however, were not as predictable.

UEFA awarded Serbia a 3-0 walkover win after officials decided Albania had
forfeited the match when the team refused to play out the remainder of the game
after a drone carrying a pro-Albanian banner flew through the stadium and
sparked fights on the field. The match had been temporarily suspended when the
drone flew into the stadium, and after the melee broke up, the teams were given
the option to return to play out the rest of the game in an empty stadium.
Albania refused, however, citing an "aggressive" atmosphere underlined by
nationalistic chants that were derogatory and threatening to Albanian players.
The side also accused the Serbian side of physically harming their players.

"I am disillusioned because we were claiming a legal verdict from UEFA,"
Albanian football federation president Armand Duka told Albanian television (via
Sky Sports). "I do not understand what precedent this may set when a squad
physically beats the opposing players on the pitch. I do not know if there is a
greater scandal than this."

While the record books will now show Serbia winning 3-0 even though the match in
a 0-0 draw in the 41st minute, Serbia will not benefit from the victory. For
their antics last Tuesday, UEFA deducted deducted three points - the amount
awarded for a win - from Serbia's standings-point total, which keeps it at just
one and well below the four points currently held by both Albania and Denmark in
Group I. Additionally, UEFA ordered Serbia to play its next two matches as a
host team in an empty stadium.

The decisions are all subject to appeal, UEFA stated, and, according to Albanian
lawyer Chimi Shkohoxha, who attended the match as part of the official Albanian
delegation, Albania is already readying theirs. He told The Guardian:

"This is a travesty. It's a cop out. We are totally committed to banishing
racism from football and this judgment appears to fly in the face of that aim.
This is not about the points, it's about fighting racism."

It is unclear if Serbia will appeal the ruling, although it, too, has expressed
their discontent with UEFA's decision.

"I am not happy with the verdict. The Serbian Football Association will issue an
official reaction," Serbian FA vice president Goran Milanovic told Belgrade's
Beta news agency (via Globe and Mail).

Related:

Why did UEFA let the Albania-Serbia Euro 2016 qualifier happen?

UEFA defends decision to not separate Albania and Serbia in 2016 Euro qualifier,
opens disciplinary hearings on teams

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


