                             825 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                     October 29, 2014 Wednesday 7:06 PM EST

No defense on the cheap

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 730 words


In justifying the radical reduction in our military forces,
anti-interventionists have argued that the future belongs to Special Operations
forces, drones and airpower. Big ground forces are so 20th-century, goes the
argument. Unfortunately, our recent experience proves the opposite. Max Boot
explains:

Afghanistan and Iraq laid bare the shortcomings of precision bombing, drone
strikes, and commando raids. In Iraq, all these capabilities proved important,
but none was sufficient to turn the tide; the situation didn't begin to improve
until the U.S. military adopted a population-centric strategy in 2007. The same
was true in Afghanistan, where it did not implement a counterinsurgency strategy
until 2010. Before then, special operations raids had no lasting impact; new
insurgents quickly replaced those captured or killed. Only after U.S. and Afghan
forces entered the provinces of Helmand and Kandahar in massive numbers could
they secure districts the Taliban had long controlled.

Technology can enhance our effectiveness and help limit casualties, but it
cannot in many instances substitute for large numbers on the ground. "In the
past decade, even 570,000 troops proved insufficient for coping with two limited
conflicts against relatively primitive foes who lacked the high-tech weapons
that future adversaries will likely wield," says Boot.

The takeaway is that we are downsizing way t0o fast in order to meet a
preordained budget number, not to plan for reasonably likely threats. "Were the
number to drop to 420,000, the army would have trouble fighting even one ground
war, given that less than one-third of all troops can be sent to battle at any
given time (most of the others are either recovering from deployment or
preparing for it)," argues Boot. "Fighting two wars at a time - once the gold
standard of U.S. military strategy - would be utterly impossible."

We have seen under this president how many things can go wrong in many places
all at once. As the bipartisan National Defense Panel found:

Since the end of the Cold War, the United States has generally measured the
adequacy of its force posture against the standard of defeating adversaries in
two geographically separate theaters nearly simultaneously and at the same time
meeting steady-state demands for U.S. capabilities. The rationale for the two
war force-sizing construct was perhaps best expressed in the 1997 QDR:
"Maintaining this core capability is central to credibly deterring
opportunism-that is, to avoiding a situation in which an aggressor in one region
might be tempted to take advantage when U.S. forces are heavily committed
elsewhere-and to ensuring that the United States has sufficient military
capabilities to deter or defeat aggression by an adversary that is larger, or
under circumstances that are more difficult, than expected. This is particularly
important in a highly dynamic and uncertain security environment. . . . .
Accordingly, we feel it is imperative that as a global power with worldwide
interests, the United States armed forces should be sized and shaped to deter
and defeat large-scale aggression in one theater, preferably in concert with
regional allies and partners, while simultaneously and decisively deterring or
thwarting opportunistic aggression in multiple other theaters by denying
adversaries' objectives or punishing them with unacceptable costs, all the while
defending the U.S. homeland and maintaining priority missions such as active
global counterterrorism.

The supposed premise of big defense cuts - the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan were
ending, threats were diminishing - no long hold up. ("Our concern is that the
threats of armed conflict have proliferated in the last generation, and the
kinds of conflict for which the United States must prepare are much more varied
than they were twenty years ago.")

The notion that we can maintain or enhance or security while drawing down
forces, closing bases and simply tossing away the two-war standard is
wrongheaded and dangerous. Those running for president in 2016 should be
compelled to explain what threats they think we face, what we need to protect
ourselves and how their budget for national security satisfies our defense
requirements. Announcing that we can spend less - and therefore spend more on
the domestic side or "shrink" government - is a position that will not withstand
scrutiny.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


