                             820 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      October 13, 2014 Monday 2:54 PM EST

The Switchboard: Software patent approval rates sink in months following Supreme
Court case

BYLINE: Andrea Peterson

LENGTH: 363 words


Published every weekday, the Switchboard is your morning helping of handpicked
stories from the Switch team.

The patent office is rejecting a lot more software patents.Vox's Timothy B. Lee
looks at the fallout of June Supreme Court Alice v. CLS Bank -- which he reports
has led to lower court decisions invalidating software patents and may be linked
to a September decline in patent lawsuits. "The decision appears to be having
another effect that could be even more important in the long run," Lee writes.
"It's causing the patent office to reject a lot more patents on 'business
methods,' a category of software patent that is notorious for its high
litigation rate."

Grow lights and drones: How California's drought is driving farmers into
high-tech. California's drought has taken half a million acres of farmland out
of action, the Switch's Brian Fung reports. And that's making farmers explore
more high tech agricultural techniques -- including grow lights and drones.

Kmart and Dairy Queen report data breach.  Kmart and Dairy Queen are the latest
in the string of businesses acknowledging cybersecurity compromises involving
customers' credit and debit card information, reports Nicole Perloth at the New
York Times.

Cloud computing is  forcing a reconsideration of intellectual property."We've
used ideas to sculpt the globe since the Industrial Revolution, thanks largely
to the way we handle intellectual property," writes Quentin Hardy at the New
York Times. "When machines, and machines to make identical machines,
mass-produced reliably identical goods, it was because people understood the
same set of instructions." But cloud computing and its constant reproduction of
digital goods may be upending traditional ways of thinking about IP, he argues.

Fueled by stoke, GoPro helps turn rookie selfie snappers into film directors.
While the video camcorder industry imploded with the rise of the smartphone, the
GoPro exploded, reports the Switch's Hayley Tsukayama. "GoPro roared to success
with a $427 million initial public offering in June, valuing the company at $3
billion."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


