                             837 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 31, 2014 Friday 8:14 PM EST

Some work to do on foreign policy

BYLINE: Brian Katulis

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 792 words


President Obama's State of the Union address focused mostly on domestic issues.
Yet how Obama talked about his foreign policy agenda underscores a crisis of
purpose about U.S. engagement in the world.

To advance his national security agenda in the next three years, Obama should
offer a more cohesive strategic argument for global engagement, one that more
clearly articulates the values informing his policies. Economic challenges at
home, including slow job growth, have made many Americans more selective about
which global problems they think the United States should take on. A Pew poll
released last month  found that most Americans think we should mind our own
business internationally.

It won't be sufficient for the administration to state how the president intends
to approach particular national security questions: He needs to articulate why
they matter and what's at stake. Obama has done this before; his 2009 Nobel
Peace Prize acceptance speech  made a compelling moral and strategic argument
for U.S. engagement in the world.

To be sure, Obama outlined sound and pragmatic positions Tuesday on most of the
leading foreign policy questions of the day. He made a measured case for more
time to pursue nuclear talks with Iran without overselling the prospects for
success. He also sketched out how his administration is addressing questions
about National Security Agency (NSA) surveillance and drone strikes while
remaining vigilant to the threats posed by al-Qaeda and its affiliates.

But missing was the connective tissue between the different elements of his
foreign policy agenda. It sounded like a "to do" list of chores in search of a
broader argument for why these policy proposals matter. The lack of an
overarching worldview is partly why Obama made only passing mention of the Syria
conflict and said nothing about the complicated changes in Egypt. It is
important that Obama used his stirring recognition of Sgt. 1st Class Cory
Remsburg to rally support for our veterans - but it's not clear what the
president would like to see as the end result of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars
in which Remsburg served.

At the start of its sixth year, the Obama administration runs the risk of
remaining intellectually stuck, cleaning up the inheritance of the Bush years.
Yet major global changes, including the rise of other powers and widespread
social protests for dignity, require a forward-looking moral framework for U.S.
engagement. A clearer vision is necessary to rally public support and votes in
Congress for key agenda items, such as a possible nuclear deal with Iran and
proposed future trade deals with Europe and Asia. It is important for Obama to
do this because Republicans are sharply divided on foreign policy and Obama's
own party looks for him to lead.

The administration's planned release this year of a new national security
strategy offers a chance to make a clearer argument for global engagement with
three core elements.

First, it must make a case for how its global economic agenda, including
proposed trade agreements with Asia and Europe, would benefit Americans and
expand growth while meeting the president's aspirations  of reducing domestic
inequality.

Second, it must demonstrate how the government will keep Americans safe while
protecting our core values. Obama's record here is mixed: He has brought troops
home and kept the homeland safe, but threats from terrorist networks have
morphed abroad. The principles Obama has outlined for reining in NSA
surveillance and drone strikes must be applied with real actions to rebuild
confidence in U.S. leadership.

Third, Obama must tell the world more clearly what we stand for and what costs
we are willing to bear to advance the causes of freedom and dignity - and not
shy away from the toughest cases. From Ukraine to the Middle East to China, the
struggle to advance freedom endures, and many see a growing American reticence
to engage on this complicated front. Egypt will present an important test - in
the coming weeks, the administration will face calls on whether to certify that
Egypt is on a path toward democracy.

Many people in this country and abroad are still looking for U.S. leadership in
the world. Vague notions of turning the page on the Bush years, pivoting to new
regions of the world and rebalancing to the wider global arena are not
sufficient arguments to make a case for global engagement. Obama has a sound set
of policies, but if he wants to achieve great things in the world in the next
three years, he has to sharpen his argument and answer the question many are
asking about his foreign policy: What's the big idea?

The writer is a senior fellow for national security at the Center for American
Progress. He is on Twitter: @katulis.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


