                             831 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 6, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 857 words


On how to improve collaboration betweengovernment agencies

Zach Tumin is co-author with William J. Bratton of the book "Collaborate or
Perish! Reaching Across Boundaries in a Networked World." He also manages the
Belfer Center's Project on Technology, Security and Conflict in the Cyber Age at
Harvard University and has held senior positions in government. Tumin spoke with
Tom Fox about how federal agencies can improve collaboration and transparency.
Fox is a guest writer for On Leadership, vice president for leadership and
innovation at the nonprofit Partnership for Public Service and heads up the
Partnership's Center for Government Leadership.

Q. What opportunities exist for the federal government to collaborate across
boundaries?

From the U.S. Secret Service to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
federal agencies have long recognized that core missions require collaboration
across boundaries. Today, that's essential. In our digital world - and as
connected as we are by air, sea, land and space - threat and opportunity move
fast. The key to success is to foster networks, be alert to their data and move
in time. As former speaker of the House Tip O'Neill once advised, "Make friends
before you need them."

What strategies can federal leaders employ to encourage collaboration and
transparency among employees?

Managers need to set the course but then get the "change vanguard" moving, as my
colleague [Harvard professor] Steve Kelman has said. This means authorizing and
enabling folks who are eager for reform to nominate initiatives, run experiments
that can test and prove some new value, and then scale up the winners. It takes
a shared vision, resources, cover from above and performance that will deliver.
Take stock of the assets that might be available, from people to platforms to
political support. Persistence is key. It took the Air Force years to convert
the first drone from surveillance-only to one that could also target - and then
to add weapons so it could shoot. Everything about that first predator drone was
built from existing assets. Reconfigured, those assets gave the U.S. a new
advantage and transformed the battlespace. That's the power of collaboration.

How can federal managers use technology to connect employees who are located in
another region or country?

No one has to tell managers that smartphones and tablets are the way of the
world. Friends and family connect over them; commerce and industry require them.
Today, opportunities exist to manage most collaboration with good enough
security using some combination of social media, mobility and the cloud. It's
critical that enterprise security and business units collaborate to make this
possible.

How can federal leaders use social media to communicate more effectively with
the American public?

There can be a great deal of fear associated with using social media among
federal executives. Certainly, misusing it can have serious repercussions.
However, it is an incredible way to engage the American public, learn how
government is doing and improve performance. That can be scary, but it's
essential and ultimately rewarding.

What's key is to sustain whatever level of engagement you promise, whether it's
a constant conversation or constituent service for a particular problem. That
takes planning, resourcing and persistence. But used effectively, social media
should help build support for federal agencies and their workforces. It's
critical that the nation understands the invaluable role federal workers play in
keeping the nation safe, secure and among the most prosperous in the world.

How can the federal government improve cross-agency efforts to help create
greater efficiencies and diminish duplication?

First, collaboration has to pay. Everyone feels overworked. If collaboration
takes work off your plate - if it helps you get a job done that you have to do
anyway, only better, faster or cheaper - that's efficient and earns support. But
sometimes collaboration is important even when it adds work. That's harder, and
it will have to pay in some other way for people to put their shoulders together
with yours.

Second, focus on a business problem that needs solving - not a 'boil the ocean'
problem, but a specific situation. Make it something simple in the extreme and
of non-debatable value, and create a plan around that.

Third, focus on your data and platforms. Can people actually collaborate who
have to? Platforms for collaboration have rules and infrastructure that should
take the friction out. That means making it easier to share information by
standardizing data, opening platforms for sharing and making sure the governance
is in place to assure proper use of data.

Fourth, get the right people involved. You need the right talent, the right
executive sponsor and the right manager. Lastly, put the goals in a performance
plan and create measures. Don't settle for outputs. Focus on outcomes and
measure. It's the only way to take the victory lap.

Excerpted from www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/ask-the-federal-coach.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


