                             833 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 20, 2013 Friday 8:13 PM EST

Imagining the future, ambivalently

BYLINE: Michael O'Sullivan

SECTION: ; Pg. T16

LENGTH: 1002 words


From one perspective, the future looks bright at the American Visionary Art
Museum, where the exhibition "Human, Soul and Machine: The Coming Singularity"
explores man's tenuous relationship with technology.

According to the futurist author and inventor Ray Kurzweil - who is featured in
a 79-minute documentary that loops continuously as part of the show and who will
be honored with the museum's Grand Visionary Award next month - solar power will
provide all of our energy needs, perhaps in as soon as 20 years. Other
projections he makes about the coming golden age of technology are equally
sanguine.

The rest of the show, which fills most of the small Baltimore museum, takes a
somewhat dimmer view. Case in point: a series of posterlike drawings by the
artist known as Rigo 23 (Ricardo Gouveia). In stark black and white with text,
they offer a critique of drone technology. Drones, in the artist's view, make it
easier to kill even as they make it easier to kill the wrong people.

Machines, of course, are simply dumb tools that can be used for good or ill.

At the heart of the show is a question. As machines become smarter - or more
human, if you will - and as humans grow more dependent on them - perhaps, even,
more like machines - are we losing some essential part of ourselves?

That part would be the "soul" referenced in the show's title. "Singularity," as
defined by Wired magazine co-founder Kevin Kelly on a sign near the museum
entrance, is the point at which "all the change in the last million years will
be superseded by the change in the next five minutes." Put another way, the
Singularity is the theoretical tipping point at which artificial intelligence
surpasses human intelligence.

Is such a moment inevitable? Many Singularitarians, as proponents of this belief
are called, say it could happen by the year 2045.

The show looks at the impact of science and technology on our species from
different angles, several of them quite oblique. What does Dean Millien's
gorilla made of tin foil, for example, or Dalton M. Ghetti's minute carvings in
pencil lead have to do with the theme of technological advancement?

Much like scientists, visionary artists also "see potential in the everyday," as
curator and museum director Rebecca Hoffberger writes.

It's a tenuous connection. But as with all of the shows at this defiantly
eccentric museum, "Human, Soul and Machine" serves up a stew that is alternately
heady, eye-pleasing and redolent of secret ingredients. Lindsey Bessanson's tiny
insect sculptures - made from real bug parts and man-made objects such as watch
gears - are among the show's most delightful yet easily overlooked finds.

Other artists include painter Alex Grey, a museum favorite. Here he is
represented by a wall of his signature human figures, revealing, like something
out of an alternative anatomy textbook, the invisible energetic forces that
circulate throughout our bodies.

On the museum's first floor you'll find a short video about Neil Harbisson, a
colorblind artist who in 2003 was outfitted with a head-mounted camera that
enables him to "hear" colors as sound vibrations. Harbisson's op-art
abstractions, which offer visual interpretations of, say, Frank Sinatra's
singing voice, don't answer the question of whether technology makes us less
human. But neither do they argue that Harbisson is a better - or even more
creative - person because of his cybernetic enhancement. Despite the admittedly
cool technology used to produce them, his images are pretty ho-hum.

Fred J. Carter's work is less ambivalent about technology. With an entire
gallery reserved for his paintings and powerfully figurative wood carvings -
including one of a coal miner, complete with a small iron lung on his chest -
the late Virginia artist makes the deepest impression.

His anti-industrial message is clearest in "The Final Battle," a towering,
Januslike human figure in the center of the gallery, one face representing man's
humanity, the other presenting a deathly, machinelike facade.

Carter's art, which includes conventional busts of the Rev. Martin Luther King
Jr. and Albert Einstein, represents a strongly skeptical vision of technology,
particularly because of its role in warfare and the degradation of the
environment. But it makes an even more effective case that no machine will ever
surpass man, at least in one critical aspect. How, Carter's work silently asks,
will a machine ever be moved to tears by a piece of carved wood?

michael.osullivan@washpost.com

Human, Soul and Machine: The Coming Singularity

Through Aug. 31 at the American Visionary Art Museum, 800 Key Hwy., Baltimore.
410-244-1900. www.avam.org. Open Tuesday-Sunday 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; closed
Christmas. $15.95; $13.95 for seniors; $9.95 for students; members and children
younger than 7 free.

The Story Behind the Work

The centerpiece of the "Human, Soul and Machine" exhibition is a sculptural
installation by Kenny Irwin Jr., a California artist who uses his Palm Beach
yard as a private sculpture garden populated by pastel robots made from junk
donated by neighbors. Called "Have Yourself a Happy Little Robotmas," the
installation at the American Visionary Art Museum is an evocation of Irwin's
Christmas tradition of decorating his yard with literally millions of holiday
lights. The room resembles what it might look like had Parliament-Funkadelic's
Mothership crash-landed in Ikea's ball playroom while transporting a truckload
of tacky Christmas decorations.

There also are real toilets and fake animal heads, along with what look like
actual insects preserved in chunks of shellac. According to the wall text, the
installation has something to do with Pakistan and aliens.

In addition to "Robotmas," Irwin is represented at AVAM by a series of
realistically rendered ballpoint-pen drawings based on his fantastical dreams,
more than 60,000 of which he says he can remember as if they actually happened.

- Michael O'Sullivan

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


