                             830 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      December 2, 2013 Monday 8:13 PM EST

4 th i n g s en t r e p r e n e u r s wa n t Wa s h i n g t o n to do

BYLINE: J.D. Harrison

SECTION: ; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 872 words


D uring his opening remarks at a recent hearing, House Small Business Chairman
Sam Graves (R-Mo.) questioned "whether differences between start-ups and small
firms are in fact substantial enough to necessitate different policies."

In the discussion that followed, several entrepreneurs made it quite clear that,
as one of them put it, the needs of "a storefront" are very different than the
needs of "a rocket ship."

"We are not a small business, we are a big business in the making," said Anton
Gelman, founder and chief executive of Cont3nt, a news content distribution firm
based at the 1776 start-up campus in the District. "I have a tremendous amount
of respect for people who [run small businesses], but the start-up that I run
right now is a very different thing. We act very differently, we think very
differently and we require very different resources."

Small, local businesses and fast-growth, technology-driven start-ups have often
been lumped together in Washington, but policymakers are starting to take notice
of the subtle yet important distinctions that often allow start-ups to produce
more jobs.

How to build on that knowledge? Gelman and his fellow entrepreneurs on the panel
offered a list of recommendations. Here are the top items on their wish list for
Washington.

Back patent rights

1.Allison Lami Sawyer, co-founder and chief executive of Rebellion Photonics, a
technology firm in Houston that builds gas-detection cameras, told lawmakers
that the country's patent laws pose a serious threat to start-ups.

"I'm always afraid larger companies or patent trolls are going to sue me, even
when they know they'll lose - and they will lose, because our [intellectual
property] is very strong, but they will sue me just to put me out business just
so they can get a cheaper acquisition price on my company," Sawyer said.

She asked the legislators to push for patent reform bills such as the one known
as the Innovation Act of 2013, which was recently approved by the House
Judiciary Committee and is meant to curb the number of frivolous patent-related
lawsuits.

Give investor tax credits

2.Several of the entrepreneurs on the panel threw their support behind tax
incentives that encourage individuals to invest in promising young firms - an
idea pushed by Jeff Reid, director of the Georgetown Entrepreneurship Initiative
at Georgetown University's McDonough School of Business.

Reid highlighted the success of North Carolina's Qualified Business Investor Tax
Credit, which gives investors a 25 percent tax credit up to $50,000 on the value
of their investments in certain companies, including early-stage start-ups.

"It leverages the private investment, and I think it should expand to other
states and perhaps the federal tax system, as well," Reid said. He later
responded to concerns from lawmakers over the potential for lost government
revenue by saying, "I'm pretty sure this would be one of the best deals you
could get."

Rethink contracting rules

3.Most of Sawyer's cameras are being built for oil and gas companies, which help
them detect leaks of poisonous and explosive gases, though her company has done
some work in the past for the Defense Department.

It could do so much more, she said, but it isn't worth the hassle.

"It's really quite tragic, because we have the designs ready to go for a
stunning drone camera," Sawyer said, explaining that her firm's cameras produce
in real time the chemical imaging the military used to locate and later kill
Osama bin Laden. Currently, they must run camera footage through a computer to
collect that type of data, which can take days.

"Our drone would see in real time. It's a very cool product that could have very
real consequences, but you won't get it for a decade, minimum," she said, as her
firm is passing on the opportunity "because defense procurement is so complex
and the infrastructure we would require is not worth it."

She urged policymakers to take a fresh look at procurement policies and find
ways to give preference to nimble, innovative young firms rather than giant
defense contractors, many of whom have cut back on research and development
under the pressures of sequestration and other budget cuts.

Ease Immigration limits

4.One subject that garnered passionate pleas from all four entrepreneurs on the
panel was immigration reform. Despite House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio)
recently shooting down the chances of a bill passing this year, All four urged
lawmakers to take steps to ease restrictions on highly trained and
entrepreneurial immigrants.

"Half of my team is abroad, and they are all U.S.-educated entrepreneurs, they
graduated college here, they couldn't get a visa, they had to go abroad," Gelman
said.

Right now, the number of applications for what are known as H-1B visas, which
are reserved for highly trained foreigners who want to work in the United
States, consistently outpaces the number allotted. Lawmakers on both sides of
the aisle have introduced bills to lift the cap, but they have been held up by
disputes over exactly how many visas to allow as well as feuds over more
contentious immigration issues, such as (e.g. border security and a path to
citizenship).

jd.harrison@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2013 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


