                             836 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      January 27, 2014 Monday 8:14 PM EST

World Digest for Jan. 27, 2014

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 831 words


ISRAEL          Netanyahu: Settlers should keep homes

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu believes that all Jewish settlers
should have the right to remain in their homes in a future Palestine, an
official in his office said Sunday, offering a novel approach to one of the
stickiest issues in Mideast peace talks.

The comments expanded upon Netanyahu's remarks over the weekend in Davos,
Switzerland, where he told reporters at the World Economic Forum that he did not
intend to uproot any Israelis in a peace deal.

Given the Palestinians' staunch opposition to absorbing settlers, Netanyahu's
latest condition could pose an additional obstacle to a possible agreement. It
could, however, offer a creative option to a major stumbling block.

Netanyahu has said he wants to retain major settlement "blocs," home to the vast
majority of settlers, as part of any deal. The Palestinians have signaled they
would give up their claims to the lands where the blocs are located under a land
swap giving them additional territory from what is now inside Israel. But
experts think that about 100,000 settlers live outside of these blocs, and their
fate under any final peace deal is unclear.

- Associated Press

EGYPT          Presidential vote held before parliament's

Egypt will hold a presidential vote before parliamentary polls, interim
President Adly Mansour said Sunday, a change to a political roadmap that could
pave the way for the swift election of the country's army chief, Gen. Abdel
Fattah al-Sisi, to the presidency.

Parliamentary elections were supposed to be held first, under the timetable
drawn up after the army overthrew President Mohamed Morsi in July.

Some Egyptians have campaigned for the change, saying the country needs an
elected leader to direct government at a time of economic and political crisis
and to forge a political alliance before the parliamentary elections. But the
decision is likely to deepen tensions in Egypt, which is struggling to cope with
waves of political violence.

- Reuters

Thailand          Protest leader fatally shot, police say

One of the leaders of anti-government protests in Thailand was shot and killed
Sunday when violence erupted as demonstrators in Bangkok tried to block early
voting for an election next week, police said.

Piya Utayo, a spokesman for Thailand's national police, identified the dead man
as Suthin Taratin. "At least five other people were injured," he said.

Anti-government demonstrators swarmed dozens of polling stations Sunday,
chaining doors and gates shut and blocking hundreds of thousands of voters from
casting advance ballots.

Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra has called elections for Feb. 2 in an attempt
to defuse protests that have dragged on since November and flared into
occasional violence.

- Reuters

Tunisia approves new constitution: After decades of dictatorship and two years
of arguments and compromises, Tunisians on Sunday finally have a constitution
laying the foundations for a new democracy. The document is one of the most
progressive constitutions in the Arab world. It passed the national assembly
Sunday by 200 votes out of 216 in the Muslim Mediterranean country that inspired
uprisings across the region after overthrowing a dictator in 2011.

Somali militants commander killed in strike; U.S. is blamed:Sahal Iskudhuq, an
al-Shabab commander believed to be close to the Somali militant group's top
leader, was killed Sunday by a missile fired by a suspected U.S. drone, another
rebel commander said. A Somali intelligence official confirmed the attack,
describing the victim as a "dangerous" militant, but a spokesman for the U.S.
military's Africa Command said he was not aware of the drone strike.

Immigrants sew lips shut in protest:Thirteen Moroccan migrants held in a
reception center in Rome for more than two months have sewed their mouths shut
in protest of the length of their detention, police and immigrant rights
campaigners said Sunday. Italy has struggled to absorb thousands of immigrants
in recent years, and rights groups have complained about conditions at the
centers.

Holocaust survivor returns Hungarian honor in protest:Holocaust survivor and
historian Randolph L. Braham is returning the Medium Cross of Order of Merit of
the Hungarian Republic to protest what he says are that government's efforts to
rewrite history and exonerate the country from its role in the Holocaust.
Braham's "The Politics of Genocide: The Holocaust in Hungary" is considered one
of the most important books about the subject. He received the award in 2011.

Search resumes for bodies in Canadian senior-home blaze:Crews resumed searching
for the remains of 22 people presumed killed in a fire at a Quebec seniors
residence after suspending activities earlier Sunday because of frigid
temperatures and swirling snow. Officials have confirmed 10 dead. The cause of
Thursday's blaze is under investigation.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


