                             840 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      February 17, 2014 Monday 8:14 PM EST

Shipbuilder Huntington Ingalls diversifies with recent acquisition

BYLINE: Marjorie Censer

SECTION: ; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 613 words


As contractors cope with shrinking budgets, shipbuilder Huntington Ingalls is
diversifying.

The contractor, which is based in Newport News but has an office at the Navy
Yard, earlier this year acquired  S.M. Stoller Corp., which provides
environmental, nuclear and technical consulting and engineering services.

The deal will help Huntington Ingalls expand its work, said Mike Petters ,
Huntington Ingalls's chief executive, in an interview earlier this month. But
don't expect that expansion to be overseas. Most countries want to build their
own naval ships, he said.

"We haven't seen the international arena as a place that makes good sense for
us," he said.

Engility unit settles with Justice Department

Contractor MPRI- which is now part of Chantilly-based Engility- has agreed to
pay $3.2 million to resolve allegations that it submitted false labor charges on
an Army contract, the Justice Department said last week.

The Justice Department alleged that MPRI falsely billed between March 2005 and
October 2010 for employees who had not worked on its contract to help the Army
improve Afghanistan's national security sector.

Under the settlement, there was no determination of liability and the claims
remain allegations, the Justice Department said.

Engility said in a statement that the contract actions related to the settlement
"took place under previous management more than two years before Engility was
created."

"The decision to settle was a business decision based upon the company's desire
to resolve the matter and move forward," the statement added, noting that the
company does not admit any liability.

Lockheed Martin teams with AeroVironment

Bethesda-based contracting giant Lockheed Martin earlier this month said it will
partner with California-based AeroVironment to pursue marketing an
AeroVironment-built drone to a broader group of customers.

"It's basically a joint marketing agreement," said Paul Lemmo, Lockheed's senior
vice president for corporate strategy and business development. "We'll work
together to identify customers and hopefully convince them this is the right
platform for their needs."

The agreement centers around AeroVironment's Global Observer drone, which can
operate for about a week at an altitude of 55,000 feet to 65,000 feet, according
to Steven Gitlin of AeroVironment.

Gitlin said the aircraft can be used to host equipment that enables, for
instance, communication or surveillance.

Under the partnership, Lemmo said Lockheed will be able to help AeroVironment
adapt the aircraft for a whole variety of potential customers, from
international governments to the Department of Homeland Security.

Thycotic expands D.C. office

For large companies and government agencies, passwords can be a major pain
point.

When an administrator who has access to passwords quits or employees constantly
forget their passwords and call for assistance, the inefficiency can add up,
said Jonathan Cogley, the chief executive of Thycotic.

Thycotic, based in the District, is trying to solve that problem. The company
has three products: Secret Server, which manages an organization's privileged
passwords; Password Reset Server, which allows employees to reset their own
passwords; and Group Management Server, meant to allow managers, not just IT
administrators, to control access to key areas.

Cogley said the company has been able to attract a wide range of customers, from
financial services companies to airlines to government agencies.

Thycotic is now up to about 40 people in its District office and plans to tear
down a wall to expand into more office space this spring.

marjorie.censer@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


