                             848 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      June 4, 2014 Wednesday 11:32 PM EST

He had to make the deal

BYLINE: Kathleen Parker

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 761 words


The exchange of five Guantanamo detainees for the release of Army Sgt. Bowe
Bergdahl has reminded us of three unpleasant facts of life:

The United States does negotiate with terrorists; the president will circumvent
laws as circumstances require; Republicans and Democrats will be summarily
outraged as party affiliations seem to require.

We might also add that processes will be "truncated," as President Obama
described the exchange, and these are "hard choices," as Hillary Clinton put it,
cleverly employing the title of her new book.

Which is to say, war is tricky and we have no idea what we're willing to do
until the ball is in our court.

It is easier now to wish we had not invaded Iraq, given the absence of weapons
of mass destruction. But in the wake of 9/11, when the Western world was
convinced that Saddam Hussein had WMD, eliminating a destabilizing force in the
region seemed to many a viable strategy.

It seemed so to then-Sen. Clinton, who voted for the resolution to use military
force against Iraq, but not to Barack Obama, then an Illinois state senator who
didn't have to decide.

As president - how time flies - Obama has followed through on his campaign
promises to end the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq but not to close Guantanamo.
Promises are sometimes harder to keep when the facts are in your face. Obama
also has increased drone "warfare," eliminating enemies as well as civilians and
at least one U.S. citizen deemed to be a combatant without, shall we say, due
process.

So yes, he is the non-war president, except . . . and he follows the law and
protects the Constitution, unless . . . and he wants to close Guantanamo, but
encountered the same daunting obstacles that George W. Bush did.

Yes, yes, Bush created the problem. Noted. To the point of this column, however,
when Obama was faced with whether to release prisoners in exchange for Bergdahl,
he was forced to make an executive decision. And yes, he sidestepped the law
requiring 30 days notification to Congress, but the law's timetable was
untenable, given the reportedly narrow window of opportunity. Whether the
president indeed had been discussing the possibility with Congress remains a
matter of dispute.

A top GOP aide confirmed to me that no such discussion took place before last
weekend's exchange and that, when the idea was floated more than two years ago,
it met with strong, bipartisan opposition from congressional leaders.

Obama has justified his decision on the basis of precedent - other presidents
have released prisoners as wars wind down - and on the principle that we don't
leave our people behind.

Equivalency is a fragile argument here. Bush's wars and Obama's drones are
clearly not the same, though you might find those in Afghanistan or Pakistan who
would argue otherwise. And George Washington's release of British prisoners
during the Revolutionary War can't be compared to freeing Taliban warriors.
Rather than returning home to reclaim their civilian lives, jihadists likely
return even more resolved to continue a war that ends only after everyone on the
planet converts to Islam.

What is often similar, however, is the moment of truth when a president has to
make his own call because he thinks beyond any reasonable doubt that it is the
right decision. History doesn't always reward these decisions, but the titans of
hindsight are usually compensated for style over content.

It is possible that some of the current criticism is tied to partisan pride as
well as the opening of old wounds. Seeing the five bearded detainees was a vivid
reminder of 9/11 and its chief perpetrator, Osama bin Laden. The sight of
Bergdahl's father, bearded and speaking Arabic and Pashto as he invoked Allah in
the Rose Garden with the president, was both strange and creepy.

Obama critics naturally saw the president's mouth tip in a smile, though it
could be interpreted as a grimace. What was he to do, grab the microphone? Stare
grimly at a father announcing the release of his boy after five years in
captivity?

There is nothing trivial about these events, but the questions raised are,
nonetheless, "Homeland"-ishly intriguing: Did Bob Bergdahl convert to Islam? Did
his son? Did Bowe Bergdahl abandon his post, as fellow soldiers claim? Is he a
traitor?

Until the Army provides answers, we'll have to make do with speculation.
Meanwhile, the only question that required an immediate response was, did the
United States want Bergdahl back and what were we willing to trade?

This was indeed a hard choice - and the answer had to be yes.

kathleenparker@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


