                             845 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        May 16, 2014 Friday 12:29 AM EST

The sound and the fury - and the tweet

BYLINE: Charles Krauthammer

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 796 words


Mass schoolgirl kidnapping in Nigeria - to tweet or not to tweet? Is hashtagging
one's indignation about some outrage abroad an exercise in moral narcissism or a
worthy new way of standing up to bad guys?

The answer seems rather simple. It depends on whether you have the power to do
something about the outrage in question. If you do, as in the case of the Obama
administration watching Russia's slow-motion dismemberment of Ukraine, it's
simply embarrassing when the State Department spokeswoman tweets the hashtag
#UnitedForUkraine.

That is nothing but preening, a visual recapitulation of her boss's rhetorical
fatuousness when he sternly warns that if the rape of this U.S. friend
continues, we are prepared to consider standing together with the "international
community" to decry such indecorous behavior - or some such.

When a superpower, with multiple means at its disposal, reverts to rhetorical
emptiness and hashtag activism, it has betrayed both its impotence and
indifference. But if you're an individual citizen without power, if you lack
access to media, drones or special forces, then hashtagging your solidarity with
the aggrieved is a fine gesture and perhaps even more.

The mass tweet is, after all, just the cyber equivalent of the mass petition.
And people don't sneer at petitions. Historically, they've been a way for
individuals, famous or anonymous, to make their views known and, by weight of
number, influence authorities who, in democratic societies, might respond to
such expressions of popular sentiment.

The hashtag campaign for the Nigerian girls -  originated in Nigeria by
Nigerians - was meant to do exactly that: pressure the Nigerian government to
respond more seriously to the kidnapping. It has already had this effect. And
attention from abroad has helped magnify the pressure.

As always, however, we tend to romanticize the power of the tweet. For a while,
Twitter (and other social media) was seen as a game-changer that would empower
the masses and invert the age-old relationship between the ruler and ruled.

This is mostly rubbish. Yes, the tweet improves upon the mass petition because
tweets contain an instant return address that allows for mass mobilization.
People can be summoned to gather together somewhere - Tahrir Square, for
example.

At which point, alas, the age-old dynamics of power take hold. If the tyrant,
brandishing guns and tanks, is cruel and determined enough, your tweets will
mean nothing. Try it at Tahrir or Tiananmen, in Damascus or Tehran. They will
shoot and torture you, then maybe even let you keep your precious smartphone.

Michelle Obama's tweeting #BringBackOurGirls for the nearly 300 schoolgirls
kidnapped by Boko Haram terrorists poses an interesting case of the
semi-official tweet. This was no exercise in vanity. She does advise the man who
does deploy the forces and who in this case provided serious concrete support -
intelligence, reconnaissance, on-the-ground advisers - to help fight the evil.

What was peculiar about her tweet, however, was its uniqueness: It's the first
time she's expressed herself so personally and publicly about a foreign crisis.
And she was nicely candid about the reason: "In these girls, Barack and I see
our own daughters."

The identity of the victims here - young, black and female - undoubtedly helps
explain the worldwide reaction. Two months earlier, Boko Haram had raided a
Christian school and, after segregating the boys, brutally murdered 59 of them.
That elicited no hashtag campaign against Boko Haram. Nor was there any through
the previous years of Boko Haram depredations - razing Christian churches,
burning schools, killing infidels of all ages.

Nonetheless, selective outrage is not necessarily hypocrisy. There are a million
good causes in the world, and one cannot be devoted to all of them. People
naturally gravitate to those closest to their heart. Thus last week's unlikely
sight: a group of congresswomen holding a news conference demanding immediate
U.S. action - including the possible use of drones - against Boko Haram.

These were members, like Sheila Jackson Lee, not heretofore known for hawkish
anti-jihadist sentiments. No matter. People find their own causes. Their
sincerity is to be credited and their commitment welcomed.

The American post-9/11 response to murderous jihadism has often been
characterized, not least by our own president, as both excessive and morally
suspect. There is a palpable weariness with the entire enterprise. Good,
therefore, that new constituencies for whom jihadism and imposed Shariah law
ranked low among their urgent concerns should now be awakening to the principal
barbarism of our time.

Trending now (once again): anti-jihadism, a.k.a. the War on Terror.

letters@

www.charleskrauthammer.com

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


