                             857 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 7, 2014 Thursday 2:54 AM EST

World Digest: Aug. 6, 2014

SECTION: A section; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 494 words


IRAQ          Car bomb attacks kill 51 in Baghdad

Car bombs tore through Baghdad on Wednesday, killing 51 people, as the Iraqi
army said an airstrike killed 60 militants in the northern city of Mosul.

Baghdad police said 31 people were killed in the densely populated Shiite area
of Sadr City and 11 were killed in the nearby area of Ur when car bombs
exploded.

Nine were killed in the southeast of the city shortly afterward by two more car
bombs.

Baghdad has been on edge since the Islamic State group seized large swaths of
the country's north, including Mosul. Although the Sunni fighters have stopped
short of advancing on the capital, there has been a steady campaign of car bombs
in the city.

Wednesday's attacks came as state-run TV said an airstrike in Mosul killed about
60 suspected militants and freed about 300 people held by the Islamic State.

Meanwhile, police found eight bullet-riddled and handcuffed corpses around
Baghdad.

- Associated Press

LIBYA          Extremists tighten grip on Benghazi

An umbrella group for eastern Libya's militias said Wednesday that it had
overrun three more army bases in Benghazi and seized large amounts of heavy
weapons as it tightened its grip on the country's second city.

The Benghazi Revolutionary Shura Council, composed of militias such as Ansar
al-Sharia, posted pictures of its leaders in front of tanks, multiple-rocket
launchers and artillery they claimed to have seized at the bases.

Ansar al-Sharia, branded a terrorist group by Washington, is accused of plotting
the 2012 assaults in Benghazi that killed four Americans, including Ambassador
J. Christopher Stevens.

- Associated Press

Suspected U.S. drone kills 7 militants in Pakistan: A U.S. drone fired two
missiles at a compound in northwestern Pakistan, killing seven militants,
Pakistani intelligence officials said. The strike occurred in the town of Datta
Khel in North Waziristan, where Pakistan has been pressing an offensive against
militants since June.

5 police officers killed in attack on checkpoint in Egypt:Militants attacked a
police checkpoint near a Mediterranean resort area frequented by Egyptians,
killing five police officers and losing four of their own, the Interior Ministry
said. The attack occurred in the coastal province of Matrouh.

Ugandan lawmakers push torevive anti-gay law:Ugandanlawmakers are launching a
campaign to revive a recently invalidated anti-gay measure and hope to have it
passed within weeks, a member of parliament said. Last week, Uganda's
Constitutional Court nullified the law on a technicality. The law was criticized
by many Western nations.

18 al-Qaeda militants killed,Yemen says:Yemen's Defense Ministry said the army
repulsed an assault by al-Qaeda militants near a southern city, killing 18 of
them and losing two soldiers. It said the militants attacked a battalion as it
was making its way to Sayoun, in Hadramaut province.

- From news services

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


