                             856 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                        July 25, 2014 Friday 2:47 AM EST

Pakistani official: U.S. failing to halt militants fleeing offensive

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung

SECTION: A section; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 671 words


U.S. forces in Afghanistan and their Afghan allies have failed to intercept
Taliban and other militants fleeing across the border from an ongoing Pakistani
military offensive, a senior Pakistani official said Thursday.

"Please do not permit these people to disappear," said the official, in
Washington for talks with the Obama administration.

"Take them out. Eliminate them.  . . . There should be a hammer and anvil," the
official said, but the "Pakistan hammer saw no evidence of the anvil on the
other side."

The complaint came as U.S. forces have been withdrawn from positions near the
border in eastern Afghanistan and Afghan troops in eastern Afghanistan are still
solidifying their positions there.

Administration officials and skeptical lawmakers, while supporting the offensive
in the tribal region of North Waziristan, have questioned whether Pakistan's
campaign to rout militants in the region includes members of the Haqqani
network, the AfghanTaliban-allied group that has been responsible for numerous
cross-border attacks on U.S. forces.

The United States has long accused Pakistani intelligence of supporting and
maintaining ties with the Haqqani network. Lawmakers have included a restriction
on funds to Pakistan in the fiscal 2015 defense budget unless Defense Secretary
Chuck Hagel certifies that Pakistani military operations "have significantly
disrupted the safe haven and freedom of movement of the Haqqani network."

The Pakistani official said that no militant group will be immune from the
offensive, which began a month ago with extensive airstrikes and is continuing
with about 150,000 ground troops. The government has evacuated hundreds of
thousands of civilians from the region.

"How can you carry out a military operation that is costing the lives of
hundreds of soldiers and officers, and costing us hundreds of millions of
dollars, and for us to let any one particular group . . . escape?" he said.
"Everyone has to be taken out.

"If there are any militants that are found fleeing into Afghanistan, we would
love to see them taken out by the U.S., ISAF [the U.S.-led international force]
and Afghan forces," said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity
to discuss diplomatic conversations with the United States.

U.S. and Pakistani officials agree that relations between them have much
improved since Nawaz Sharif was elected prime minister last year. Pakistan
launched the offensive, encouraged by the United States, after Sharif tried and
failed to conduct peace negotiations with the Pakistani Taliban.

The Pakistan-headquartered Afghan Taliban maintains close ties with the
Pakistani Taliban, whose objective is to overthrow Pakistan's elected government
and impose strict Islamic law.

The U.S. defense budget includes nearly $1 billion in aid to Pakistan, most of
it designated for development and economic assistance. Restrictions proposed by
Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Carl Levin (D-Mich.) would apply to
hundreds of millions of dollars the United States is due to reimburse Pakistan
for counterterrorism operations.

While Pakistan seeks no additional funds for its military operations, the
official said, it would like more intelligence sharing to aid in the
counterterrorism operations.

CIA drone strikes against militants in Pakistan's tribal regions resumed last
month after a six-month hiatus. U.S. officials have said that they would like to
phase out the Pakistan strikes as U.S. combat forces withdraw from Afghanistan.

Pakistan has said little about the resumption, including six strikes in North
Waziristan, according to tallies by the New America Foundation. The official
said Pakistan has made its ongoing opposition clear.

"The drone strikes should take place on the other side" of the border, he said.
"We want to make it very clear. We are never informed as to when they are taking
place, where they are taking place, and who is the target for the simple reason
that we have made clear, both privately as well as publicly, our opposition."

deyoungk@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


