                             858 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 10, 2014 Sunday 12:27 AM EST

U.S. ramps up airstrikes in Iraq against Islamic State

SECTION: A section; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 252 words


The U.S. military ramped up its campaign against Islamic militants in northern
Iraq on Friday, with fighter jets and drones conducting additional airstrikes
outside the Kurdish regional capital of Irbil, officials said.

The Pentagon said the strikes "successfully eliminated" militant targets and
destroyed artillery being used by the Islamic State extremist group to shell
Kurdish forces.

The first strikes took place at dawn Washington time, with two F/A-18 combat
jets flying from the aircraft carrier USS George H.W. Bush in the Persian Gulf.
The aircraft dropped 500-pound, laser-guided bombs on a "mobile artillery piece"
near Irbil, said Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary.

Islamic State fighters were "using this artillery to shell Kurdish forces
defending Irbil where U.S. personnel are located," he said in a statement. "As
the president made clear, the United States military will continue to take
direct action against [Islamic State militants] when they threaten our personnel
and facilities."

Hours later, an MQ-1 Predator drone armed with Hellfire missiles struck an
Islamic State mortar position. When "fighters returned to the site moments
later, the terrorists were attacked again and successfully eliminated," Kirby
said.

That strike was followed by additional bombing against an Islamic State convoy
of seven vehicles and a mortar position near Irbil. The Pentagon said four
aircraft executed two passes over the convoy, dropping a total of eight
laser-guided bombs.

- Karen DeYoung

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


