                             851 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 20, 2014 Friday 12:38 AM EST

SECTION: ; Pg. T28

LENGTH: 3753 words


Mini Reviews

A check mark (g) denotes a show recommended by our critics.

Newly Reviewed                       gAVENUE Q

At Olney Theatre Center through July 6

The scathing irreverence of "Avenue Q" sounds even spikier 11 years after the
show's Broadway debut. One must credit the sheer genius of its "Sesame
Street"-busting premise, but kudos also go to Olney Theatre Center's zippy
revival, staged with well-calibrated abandon by artistic director Jason Loewith.
The creators of "Avenue Q" must have had second sight or something, because
their 2003 musical resonates today, touching on jobless college grads, gay
issues, race and sexual impulse control. Olney's uniformly first-rate cast, some
of them voicing and manipulating puppets as their characters' avatars, sing a
crackerjack score. The shorter second act loses some momentum now that the
initial shock of the show's incorrectness has passed. Yet there's still that
musical theater itch to end on a hopeful note. In the finale, "For Now," the
characters come to accept life's ups and downs: "Everyone's a little bit
unsatisfied / Everyone goes 'round a little empty inside." That's the spirit!

- Jane Horwitz

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday and Wednesday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2. 2001
Olney-Sandy Spring Rd., Olney. 301-924-3400. www.olneytheatre.org.
$43.50-$63.50.

CLOAK AND DAGGER

At Signature Theatre through July 6

A wan parody of noirish detective flicks of yore, "Cloak and Dagger" has as its
stock in trade uninspired show tunes interrupted by blue quips denoting an age
before political correctness. As in: "Sorry I'm late. I was doing a midget in
the alley." The musical, directed by Eric Schaeffer, revels in B-movie
stereotypes of yore. I'm pretty sure Ed Dixon, the musical's composer, lyricist,
co-star and book writer, means to send up the caricatures that once were staples
of pulpy gumshoe stories. Instead of radiating affection, though, "Cloak and
Dagger" sends out wave after wave that says: lame. The sight of two veteran
actors, Dixon and Christopher Bloch, wearing stringy wigs and fake bosoms and
speaking in supposedly comic Asian and Irish accents comes across in 2014 as
lazy and desperate. "Cloak and Dagger" aspires to a grade of humor that is the
lowest and easiest.

- Peter Marks

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7, Tuesday and
Wednesday at 7:30. 4200 Campbell Ave., Arlington. 703-820-9771.
www.signature-theatre.org. $29-$93.

gGROUNDED

At Studio Theatre through June 29

This propulsive drama chronicles several years in the life of a female American
fighter pilot. When this brash aviator accidentally gets pregnant, her career
takes a new turn: Instead of soaring above the Earth, sovereign and
self-reliant, she finds herself part of a team, steering a drone from a trailer
in the Nevada desert. As she peers down through her monitor at Afghanistan, day
after day, the activity of watching becomes first an uneasy thrill and then
something more threatening. In a fireball performance, Lucy Ellinson portrays
the Pilot. At work, she tracks militants and contemplates explosions and flying
body parts; at home, her daughter wants to play My Little Pony. The experiences
seem a world apart - just as the cramped gray images on the drone monitor seem
irreconcilable with the blue sky she once winged through. A fascinating
exploration of personality, "Grounded" is, of course, all the more interesting
because the controversial subject of drone warfare is so much in the news. The
play also ponders instances and ramifications of watching and being watched. In
its thought-provoking final moments, we in the audience are swept up into this
brooding dynamic. To what extent are we - watching a play - too comfortable
being the voyeurs of an ongoing war?

- Celia Wren

Friday-Saturday and Wednesday-Thursday at 8, Sunday at 2 and 7. 1501 14th St.
NW. www.studiotheatre.org. $39-$59.

HAPPY DAYS

At Atlas Performing Arts Center through July 5

One of Washington theater's most able character actors, Nancy Robinette, uses
her gift for off-kilter line readings and existential angst of the comedic kind
to worthy effect in Samuel Beckett's 1961 piece. That the staging and her
performance aren't quite transcendental doesn't mean lovers of the avant-garde
won't enjoy the production. Robinette plays Winnie, a middle-aged woman buried
up to her waist and unable to extricate herself from what looks like a big sand
dune in Scena Theatre's spare staging. This may be Theater of the Absurd, yet
there's nothing all that obscure about Winnie's situation - trapped by impending
mortality, haunted by opportunities lost and love soured. It's the manner in
which Beckett explores these ideas, combining a kind of blank verse, which comes
at things sideways, and visual symbolism that is literal. Every person watching
can choose whatever metaphor hits them. Robinette's embodiment of Winnie feels a
little undercooked - technically together, but emotionally still marinating.
Expect Robinette to add a pinch more seasoning as she goes along.

- J.H.

Friday-Saturday and Thursday at 8, Sunday at 3. 1333 H St. NE. 202-399-7993.
www.atlasarts.org. www.scenatheater.org. $10-$40.

HEALING WARS

At Arena Stage through June 29

The poignant essence of Liz Lerman's world-premiere dance-theater piece reveals
itself on a simple wood-and-steel bench where a performer in street clothes,
Paul Hurley, parks himself and proceeds to remove his artificial right leg. Soon
dancer Keith A. Thompson - a ghost from the Civil War, perhaps - joins the
seated Hurley, and together the representatives of two ghastly wars more than a
century apart sway in unison. The sequence occurs near the end of a 75-minute
work that is not uniformly of this caliber of emotional or narrative clarity, an
indication that "Healing Wars" is still struggling to achieve the kind of
cohesiveness that would optimally frame its most powerful moments. Too often,
spoken portions of the work drain the energy of, rather than give definition to,
the dance and movement occurring around them. As a result, the evening
oscillates between periods of lyrical beauty and patches of obtuse dryness.
Still, Lerman - the highly regarded founder of the Liz Lerman Dance Exchange -
is a smart and seasoned director-choreographer. So a hybrid project such as
"Healing Wars," tackling a subject as charged as how we minister to wounded
warriors' bodies and souls, is worth a look. It also may appeal to fans of film
and stage actor Bill Pullman, who appears in "Healing Wars" with his wife,
choreographer Tamara Hurwitz Pullman.

- P.M.

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7:30, Tuesday and
Wednesday at 7:30. 1101 Sixth St. SW. 202-488-3300. www.arenastage.org.
$50-$119.

PURO TANGO 2

At Gala Hispanic Theatre through Sunday

Bandoneon player Nario Recoba could practically anchor a show by himself. In
GALA Hispanic Theatre's current offering, the Uruguayan native sits onstage,
near his two bandmates, balancing his instrument (a type of concertina) on one
knee. Recoba doesn't distract from the production, a glorified song cabaret with
a little dance thrown in. But if your eye strays from the singers or from the
sultry hoofers, you may notice that Recoba, telegraphing zest, is particularly
fun to watch. That enthusiasm no doubt invited "Puro Tango 2," which follows the
theater's 2012 production "Puro Tango." Tuneful, but unlikely to thrill people
who are not serious tango enthusiasts, the current show unfurls on a set that
resembles a Disneyland version of a South American seaport plaza. Nelson Pino,
Maria de los Angeles and Elisa Cordova stand on the plaza crooning songs, making
way occasionally for Argentine dancers Jeremias Massera and Mariela Barufaldi,
who display the requisite sensual physicality. Cecilia de Feo appears
periodically to serve as an emcee figure, supplying perfunctory patter linking
the songs. Could we have seen the birth of a franchise? Are "Puro Tango 3" and
"Puro Tango 4" slinking down the pike? If so, here's hoping they at least
feature Recoba, or some equally engaging bandoneon virtuoso.

- C.W.

Friday and Saturday at 8, Sunday at 2. 3333 14th St. NW. 202-234-7174.
www.galatheatre.org. $18-$42.

Continuing          BOEING, BOEING

At Signature Theatre through June 29

"Boeing, Boeing" is an old-school sex farce with lots of stammering and
jabbering as the American bachelor and his increasingly eager sidekick, Robert,
a nerd from Wisconsin, try to keep three stewardesses from finding out about
each other. The cad's Paris apartment set is practically all doors, ideal for
near-misses and sudden shouts that amount to "No! Don't go in there!" No Rules
Theatre's production often works a little too hard at the hijinks; it feels
breathless and hardworking as it tries to wrench laughs out of the scenario. All
three women are tempestuous, with international variations. Once the scheme is
set up, keeping it up falls to Robert - the fish out of water, a rube in a den
of minxes. The script will remind you of the mix-ups "Frasier" used to hone to a
high, happy farcical polish. This conniption-riddled "Boeing" has some of that
lift, but with a little too much jolting turbulence along the way.

- Nelson Pressley

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 3. 4200 Campbell Ave.,
Arlington. www.norulestheatre.org. $15-$50.

gCOCK

At Studio Theatre through June 29

You feel, at certain knuckle-gnawing moments of Mike Bartlett's sizzling
seriocomedy of straight-gay indecision, that something is about to explode -
that something being the head of its fence-straddling protagonist, John. He's a
young man in such sexual flux - not just torn between two lovers, but drawn,
halved and crushed - that he's utterly undone by choice. The freedom to be with
whomever you want may look like a gift to most people. To John, it's a torment,
especially because of the partners of opposite temperament he's attracted to:
assertive, needy, demanding people who can't for the life of them ascertain why
John would have even the most microscopic scintilla of doubt about being with
them, now and forever. As one of those partners is a man and the other a woman,
the setup of "Cock" has the potential to propel us into the realm of the
simple-minded rom-com. But this crackling play, staged with acerbic brio by ace
director David Muse, is a far slyer work. It's an exploration of how we have to
define ourselves for the sake of others and, as such, falls enjoyably into line
with the best drama of a relationship-prober like Neil LaBute.

- P.M.

Friday and Wednesday-Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7. 1501
14th St. NW. 202-332-3300. www.studiotheatre.org. $20-$75.

gFREUD'S LAST SESSION

At Theater J through July 6

Sigmund Freud cracks five pretty good jokes in the first five minutes of Mark
St. Germain's easygoing two-character drama. St. Germain wants you to like
Freud, even though he depicts the godfather of psychoanalysis as aggressive,
mean and probably on his last legs. He's 83, and oral cancer is ravaging his
mouth. And it's 1939, so World War II is revving up. The old atheist appears to
be looking, one last time, for God. Why else would Freud have summoned C.S.
Lewis to his office for what turns out to be about an hour-long theological
debate? Theater J hardly needs St. Germain's gingerly approach to venture into
matters of faith; that's where this troupe lives. Yet even if the banter in this
imaginary meeting is a little eager to please, there's nothing wrong with the
soothing tone of this show. The acting is fine-grained, with Rick Foucheux's
richly wound-up Freud as a frequently amusing counterpoint to Todd Scofield's
serene Lewis. As a play, "Freud's Last Session" may glide along fairly easily,
but Foucheux's central performance has a magnificently unsettled edge.

- N.P.

Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8, Wednesday and Thursday at 7:30. 1529 16th St.
NW. 800-494-8497. www.theaterj.org. $30-$65.

KWAIDAN

At Universalist National Memorial Church through Sunday

An old man's head scrolls eerily down the length of his torso, apparently
disconnected from his neck. A masked woman stalks down a staircase with a mirror
in her hands. Candles line the floor of a corridor en route to a room seemingly
draped in white shrouds. The striking and eerie images don't just unfurl in
front of you. In Spooky Action Theater's ingeniously devised and mostly
well-executed Japanese-ghost-story fantasia, they surround you, absorb you,
sometimes loom above or below you. The site-specific production scales the
levels and roams the nooks of the Universalist National Memorial Church, whose
ecclesiastical architecture and furnishings enhance the play's air of mysterious
solemnity. It must be said that the acting is not on par with the visuals: The
performers don't always display the kind of stage presence, physical and vocal
command, and interpretive finesse that would make "Kwaidan" a completely
satisfying production. Indeed, in its least successful moments (principally some
pre-show stage business and various sequences involving unconvincing special
effects), the show evokes a haunted house mounted by college students. Still,
audiences interested in unconventional and immersive theater experiences - and
people who relish surprising and resonant images - will find the hour-long
"Kwaidan" worth their time.

- C.W.

Friday and Saturday at 7 and 8:30, Sunday at 3 and 4:30. 1810 16th St. NW.
www.spookyaction.org. $25-$35.

gORDINARY DAYS

At Round House Theatre through June 29

If life really were more like a musical, you'd be content if that life
percolated as vibrantly as does "Ordinary Days," Adam Gwon's sweet, fleet and
tender survey of four youngish New Yorkers fighting through the emotional noise
and dramatic traffic to arrive at a clearer sense of who they are and what they
want to be. It's a beguiling little tale, set to Gwon's effervescent,
urban-romantic melodies and performed here under Matthew Gardiner's superlative
direction by four smashing actors: Samuel Edgerly, Erin Weaver, Will Gartshore
and Janine Divita. As each actor has a highlight moment or two in this 85-minute
show, identifying a favorite is kind of silly. One tale revolves around
strangers, the other around lovers. In the former, a connection is made after
one finds the other's misplaced treasure, the book containing all of the notes
for her dissertation on Virginia Woolf, and arranges to give it back to her. In
the latter, a cohabiting pair learn that building a city nest requires more
compromise and patience than they've bargained for. The two stories converge
only tangentially, in that random way people in a large metropolis may brush
past each other, once or maybe as many as 100 times, in a Starbucks, a park or a
museum.

- P.M.

Friday at 8, Saturday at 3 and 8, Sunday at 3 and 7, Thursday at 7:30. 4545 East
West Hwy., Bethesda. 240-644-1100. www.roundhousetheatre.org. $35-$50.

gPRIVATE LIVES

At Lansburgh Theatre through July 13

The play careers merrily, and fleetly, through the brittle skirmishes that ensue
after Bianca Amato's Amanda and James Waterston's Elyot, five years miserably
divorced, wind up in adjoining hotel suites in the south of France with their
far less appealing new spouses. The sleek Amanda finds herself saddled with
stick-in-the-mud Victor (Jeremy Webb), and dapper Elyot has settled for a clingy
crybaby, Sybil (Autumn Hurlbert). Still nursing the wounds from their own
marriage, they've picked Victor and Sybil, it seems, just to give themselves a
breather. On an elegant set of twin balconies we begin to see that this Amanda
and Elyot are not so much besotted with as addicted to each other. Amato and
Waterston radiate a youthful vigor: This is a couple, we're made to feel, with
their best years ahead, giving us all the more reason to hope that, ultimately,
they'll realize they're meant to spend that time with each other.

- P.M.

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7:30, Tuesday and
Wednesday at 7:30. 450 Seventh St. NW. 202-547-1122. 877-487-8849.
www.shakespearetheatre.org. $20-$110.

THE PROSTATE DIALOGUES

At Theater J through June 29

To the crowded ranks of narrators who've recounted brushes with mortality
through a diagnosis of cancer, add the storyteller Jon Spelman. In his new
one-man show, he amiably philosophizes about the surprising types of
enlightenment that disease offers. To the extent that Spelman is a folksy,
soothing, manly guide, "The Prostate Dialogues" is an agreeable way to spend 75
minutes. The subject he's mining, though, has been treated in the confessional
form on many other occasions over the years. These medical case histories with a
human touch remind us of what we all could be up against. "The Prostate
Dialogues" is an account of Spelman's physical travails - "I pee all the time;
it's a real drag" - and anxious decision-making before and after cancer has been
detected. The more explicit aspects of Spelman's "Dialogues" have to do with the
prostate's role in the male reproductive process and the journey the narrator
takes to learn about the potential side effects of having the gland removed.
This leads him to the meetings of self-help groups whose conversations revolve
around erectile dysfunction and various types of       penile prosthetic
devices. Director Jerry Whiddon rightly steers Spelman on a direct and
unaffected route. The informality allows the speaker's warmth to fill the room
as he shares the life-affirming outlook that, despite the material's
familiarity, compels us all to wish him well.

- P.M.

Friday at 8, Saturday and Sunday at 5, Tuesday at 7:30. 1529 16th St. NW.
800-494-8497. www.theaterj.org. $30.

TITUS ANDRONICUS

At Gallaudet University through Sunday

In this case, blood is slicker than writer. The writer in question is one
William Shakespeare, composer of numerous masterpieces, and also "Titus
Andronicus." It is this turgid, pulpy revenge tragedy that the commedia
dell'arte troupe Faction of Fools has decided to tackle. And, as you might
expect, the company has a lot of fun with the Grand Guignol aspects of "Titus,"
even if it can't find similar inspiration in the long stretches of exposition
that bog this enterprise down. What seems a fairly straightforward assignment -
filtering bombastic, undistinguished "Titus" through the caricatures of commedia
- turns out to be harder than it looks. The production dutifully records the
heads (and other extremities) that roll after the Roman general Titus returns to
the imperial city with the captured Goth queen, Tamora, who bewitches the new
emperor, Saturninus. It is Titus's daughter, Lavinia, who suffers most
dreadfully in the carnage that ensues. The cast, while energetic, is called on
to juggle a lot, and at times a sense of the characters' relationships is
sacrificed to the necessity of simply getting through a lot of outsize gesturing
and unwieldy plot. Some surgical trimming would perhaps sharpen the focus and
permit the humor to, er, really flow.

- P.M.

Friday and Saturday at 8, Sunday at 2. 800 Florida Ave. NE. 800-838-3006.
www.factionoffools.org. $25.

THE TOTALITARIANS

At Woolly Mammoth Theatre through June 29

As its fans know, Woolly Mammoth Theatre has an affinity for explosive drama.
And sometimes, it simply steps on a mine. "The Totalitarians" is one of those
unpleasant misfires that occur in the life of a theater company accustomed to
taking chances. The convoluted plot of "The Totalitarians" has us in Nebraska,
where Penny Easter's campaign for statewide office is managed by Francine, an
ambitious if ideologically neutral apparatchik. Francine is married to Jeffrey,
a doctor who is afraid to tell his patients how sick they are. Among those he's
not leveling with is the terminally ill Ben, a conspiracy theorist who convinces
the highly suggestible Jeffrey that Penny is at the center of a plot to turn
Nebraska over to a totalitarian regime. Francine will hear none of it, because
she's come up with a meaningless slogan - "Freedom From Fear" - that both the
candidate and public adore. So sure, why not: Earnest Jeffrey joins nutty Ben's
undersubscribed underground organization. Not much care is exhibited here in
tying the strands of the story together, as evidenced by the predictable
resolution of assorted events in guns and blood.

- P.M.

Friday and Wednesday-Thursday at 8, Saturday at 3 and 8, Sunday at 2 and 7. 641
D St. NW. 202-393-3939. www.woollymammoth.net. $35-$75.

gTHE WONDERFUL WORLD OF DISSOCIA

At Anacostia Playhouse through June 28

Zany characters give a bracingly weird luster to the intensely funny and
unsettling play that Theater Alliance has staged. Giving visual expression to
contemporary Scottish playwright Anthony Neilson's 21st-century, R-rated
Wonderland, set designer Collin Ranney inks the walls of the cavernous Playhouse
space with blotches of blue, green and pink that evoke a kindergartner's
painting. When we first encounter this decidedly uncozy landscape, it appears to
stand in for the apartment inhabited by Lisa, the play's Alice figure. Lisa has
been out of sorts lately, so when a watch-repair specialist diagnoses her
problem as a lost hour, she agrees to seek her missing stretch of time in the
land of Dissocia. During the course of her quest, she meets, among other oddball
figures, the Oathtaker, the friendly but neurotic Insecurity Guards and Jane,
whose job it is to be the victim of every crime in the area. Jane moonlights as
a bomber pilot in Dissocia's ongoing war with a sinister figure known as the
Black Dog King. As danger becomes more apparent, wordplay runs riot and the
lunatic logic of Dissocia stymies Lisa's search for her hour, you begin to
wonder whether the story is all that it seems. "Dissocia" is not a play for
timid theatergoers. Its lost-in-the-fun-house storytelling can be relentless,
but audiences who appreciate distinctive and provocative visions will find this
production a memorable experience.

- C.W.

Friday and Thursday at 8, Saturday at 2 and 8, Sunday at 2. 2020 Shannon Pl. SE.
202-290-2328. www.anacostiaplayhouse.com. www.theateralliance.com. $20-$35.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


