                             868 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Morsel Too Minuscule For All-Consuming N.S.A.

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4899 words


When Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, sat down with President
Obama at the White House in April to discuss Syrian chemical weapons,
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and climate change, it was a cordial, routine
exchange.

The National Security Agency nonetheless went to work in advance and intercepted
Mr. Ban's talking points for the meeting, a feat the agency later reported as an
''operational highlight'' in a weekly internal brag sheet. It is hard to imagine
what edge this could have given Mr. Obama in a friendly chat, if he even saw the
N.S.A.'s modest scoop. (The White House won't say.)

But it was emblematic of an agency that for decades has operated on the
principle that any eavesdropping that can be done on a foreign target of any
conceivable interest -- now or in the future -- should be done. After all,
American intelligence officials reasoned, who's going to find out?

From thousands of classified documents, the National Security Agency emerges as
an electronic omnivore of staggering capabilities, eavesdropping and hacking its
way around the world to strip governments and other targets of their secrets,
all the while enforcing the utmost secrecy about its own operations. It spies
routinely on friends as well as foes, as has become obvious in recent weeks; the
agency's official mission list includes using its surveillance powers to achieve
''diplomatic advantage'' over such allies as France and Germany and ''economic
advantage'' over Japan and Brazil, among other countries.

Mr. Obama found himself in September standing uncomfortably beside the president
of Brazil, Dilma Rousseff, who was furious at being named as a target of N.S.A.
eavesdropping. Since then, there has been a parade of such protests, from the
European Union, Mexico, France, Germany and Spain. Chagrined American officials
joke that soon there will be complaints from foreign leaders feeling slighted
because the agency had not targeted them.

James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, has repeatedly
dismissed such objections as brazen hypocrisy from countries that do their own
share of spying. But in a recent interview, he acknowledged that the scale of
eavesdropping by the N.S.A., with 35,000 workers and $10.8 billion a year, sets
it apart. ''There's no question that from a capability standpoint we probably
dwarf everybody on the planet, just about, with perhaps the exception of Russia
and China,'' he said.

Since Edward J. Snowden began releasing the agency's documents in June, the
unrelenting stream of disclosures has opened the most extended debate on the
agency's mission since its creation in 1952. The scrutiny has ignited a crisis
of purpose and legitimacy for the N.S.A., the nation's largest intelligence
agency, and the White House has ordered a review of both its domestic and its
foreign intelligence collection. While much of the focus has been on whether the
agency violates Americans' privacy, an issue under examination by Congress and
two review panels, the anger expressed around the world about American
surveillance has prompted far broader questions.

If secrecy can no longer be taken for granted, when does the political risk of
eavesdropping overseas outweigh its intelligence benefits? Should foreign
citizens, many of whom now rely on American companies for email and Internet
services, have any privacy protections from the N.S.A.? Will the American
Internet giants' collaboration with the agency, voluntary or otherwise, damage
them in international markets? And are the agency's clandestine efforts to
weaken encryption making the Internet less secure for everyone?

Matthew M. Aid, an intelligence historian and author of a 2009 book on the
N.S.A., said there is no precedent for the hostile questions coming at the
agency from all directions.

''From N.S.A.'s point of view, it's a disaster,'' Mr. Aid said. ''Every new
disclosure reinforces the notion that the agency needs to be reined in. There
are political consequences, and there will be operational consequences.''

A review of classified agency documents obtained by Mr. Snowden and shared with
The New York Times by The Guardian, offers a rich sampling of the agency's
global operations and culture. (At the agency's request, The Times is
withholding some details that officials said could compromise intelligence
operations.) The N.S.A. seems to be listening everywhere in the world, gathering
every stray electron that might add, however minutely, to the United States
government's knowledge of the world. To some Americans, that may be a comfort.
To others, and to people overseas, that may suggest an agency out of control.

The C.I.A. dispatches undercover officers overseas to gather intelligence today
roughly the same way spies operated in biblical times. But the N.S.A., born when
the long-distance call was a bit exotic, has seen its potential targets explode
in number with the advent of personal computers, the Internet and cellphones.
Today's N.S.A. is the Amazon of intelligence agencies, as different from the
1950s agency as that online behemoth is from a mom-and-pop bookstore. It sucks
the contents from fiber-optic cables, sits on telephone switches and Internet
hubs, digitally burglarizes laptops and plants bugs on smartphones around the
globe.

Mr. Obama and top intelligence officials have defended the agency's role in
preventing terrorist attacks. But as the documents make clear, the focus on
counterterrorism is a misleadingly narrow sales pitch for an agency with an
almost unlimited agenda. Its scale and aggressiveness are breathtaking.

The agency's Dishfire database -- nothing happens without a code word at the
N.S.A. -- stores years of text messages from around the world, just in case. Its
Tracfin collection accumulates gigabytes of credit card purchases. The fellow
pretending to send a text message at an Internet cafe in Jordan may be using an
N.S.A. technique code-named Polarbreeze to tap into nearby computers. The
Russian businessman who is socially active on the web might just become food for
Snacks, the acronym-mad agency's Social Network Analysis Collaboration Knowledge
Services, which figures out the personnel hierarchies of organizations from
texts.

The spy agency's station in Texas intercepted 478 emails while helping to foil a
jihadist plot to kill a Swedish artist who had drawn pictures of the Prophet
Muhammad. N.S.A. analysts delivered to authorities at Kennedy International
Airport the names and flight numbers of workers dispatched by a Chinese human
smuggling ring.

The agency's eavesdropping gear, aboard a Defense Department plane flying 60,000
feet over Colombia, fed the location and plans of FARC rebels to the Colombian
Army. In the Orlandocard operation, N.S.A. technicians set up what they called a
''honeypot'' computer on the web that attracted visits from 77,413 foreign
computers and planted spyware on more than 1,000 that the agency deemed of
potential future interest.

The Global Phone Book

No investment seems too great if it adds to the agency's global phone book.
After mounting a major eavesdropping effort focused on a climate change
conference in Bali in 2007, agency analysts stationed in Australia's outback
were especially thrilled by one catch: the cellphone number of Bali's police
chief.

''Our mission,'' says the agency's current five-year plan, which has not been
officially scheduled for declassification until 2032, ''is to answer questions
about threatening activities that others mean to keep hidden.''

The aspirations are grandiose: to ''utterly master'' foreign intelligence
carried on communications networks. The language is corporate: ''Our business
processes need to promote data-driven decision-making.'' But the tone is also
strikingly moralistic for a government bureaucracy. Perhaps to counter any
notion that eavesdropping is a shady enterprise, signals intelligence, or
Sigint, the term of art for electronic intercepts, is presented as the noblest
of callings.

''Sigint professionals must hold the moral high ground, even as terrorists or
dictators seek to exploit our freedoms,'' the plan declares. ''Some of our
adversaries will say or do anything to advance their cause; we will not.''

The N.S.A. documents taken by Mr. Snowden and shared with The Times, numbering
in the thousands and mostly dating from 2007 to 2012, are part of a collection
of about 50,000 items that focus mainly on its British counterpart, Government
Communications Headquarters or G.C.H.Q.

While far from comprehensive, the documents give a sense of the agency's reach
and abilities, from the Navy ships snapping up radio transmissions as they
cruise off the coast of China, to the satellite dishes at Fort Meade in Maryland
ingesting worldwide banking transactions, to the rooftops of 80 American
embassies and consulates around the world from which the agency's Special
Collection Service aims its antennas.

The agency and its many defenders among senior government officials who have
relied on its top secret reports say it is crucial to American security and
status in the world, pointing to terrorist plots disrupted, nuclear
proliferation tracked and diplomats kept informed.

But the documents released by Mr. Snowden sometimes also seem to underscore the
limits of what even the most intensive intelligence collection can achieve by
itself. Blanket N.S.A. eavesdropping in Afghanistan, described in the documents
as covering government offices and the hide-outs of second-tier Taliban
militants alike, has failed to produce a clear victory against a low-tech enemy.
The agency kept track as Syria amassed its arsenal of chemical weapons -- but
that knowledge did nothing to prevent the gruesome slaughter outside Damascus in
August.

The documents are skewed toward celebration of the agency's self-described
successes, as underlings brag in PowerPoints to their bosses about their
triumphs and the managers lay out grand plans. But they do not entirely omit the
agency's flubs and foibles: flood tides of intelligence gathered at huge cost
that goes unexamined; intercepts that cannot be read for lack of language
skills; and computers that -- even at the N.S.A. -- go haywire in all the usual
ways.

Mapping Message Trails

In May 2009, analysts at the agency learned that Iran's supreme leader,
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, was to make a rare trip to Kurdistan Province in the
country's mountainous northwest. The agency immediately organized a high-tech
espionage mission, part of a continuing project focused on Ayatollah Khamenei
called Operation Dreadnought.

Working closely with the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, which handles
satellite photography, as well as G.C.H.Q., the N.S.A. team studied the Iranian
leader's entourage, its vehicles and its weaponry from satellites, and
intercepted air traffic messages as planes and helicopters took off and landed.

They heard Ayatollah Khamenei's aides fretting about finding a crane to load an
ambulance and fire truck onto trucks for the journey. They listened as he
addressed a crowd, segregated by gender, in a soccer field.

They studied Iranian air defense radar stations and recorded the travelers' rich
communications trail, including Iranian satellite coordinates collected by an
N.S.A. program called Ghosthunter. The point was not so much to catch the
Iranian leader's words, but to gather the data for blanket eavesdropping on Iran
in the event of a crisis.

This ''communications fingerprinting,'' as a document called it, is the key to
what the N.S.A. does. It allows the agency's computers to scan the stream of
international communications and pluck out messages tied to the supreme leader.
In a crisis -- say, a showdown over Iran's nuclear program -- the ability to tap
into the communications of leaders, generals and scientists might give a crucial
advantage.

On a more modest scale, the same kind of effort, what N.S.A. calls ''Sigint
development,'' was captured in a document the agency obtained in 2009 from
Somalia -- whether from a human source or an electronic break-in was not noted.
It contained email addresses and other contact details for 117 selected
customers of a Mogadishu Internet service, Globalsom.

While most on the list were Somali officials or citizens, presumably including
some suspected of militancy, the document also included emails for a United
Nations political officer in Mogadishu and a local representative for the
charity World Vision, among other international institutions. All, it appeared,
were considered fair game for monitoring.

This huge investment in collection is driven by pressure from the agency's
''customers,'' in government jargon, not only at the White House, Pentagon,
F.B.I. and C.I.A., but also spread across the Departments of State and Energy,
Homeland Security and Commerce, and the United States Trade Representative.

By many accounts, the agency provides more than half of the intelligence nuggets
delivered to the White House early each morning in the President's Daily Brief
-- a measure of success for American spies. (One document boasts that listening
in on Nigerian State Security had provided items for the briefing ''nearly two
dozen'' times.) In every international crisis, American policy makers look to
the N.S.A. for inside information.

Pressure to Get Everything

That creates intense pressure not to miss anything. When that is combined with
an ample budget and near-invisibility to the public, the result is aggressive
surveillance of the kind that has sometimes gotten the agency in trouble with
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, a United States federal court that
polices its programs for breaches of Americans' privacy.

In the funding boom that followed the Sept. 11 attacks, the agency expanded and
decentralized far beyond its Fort Meade headquarters in Maryland, building or
expanding major facilities in Georgia, Texas, Colorado, Hawaii, Alaska,
Washington State and Utah. Its officers also operate out of major overseas
stations in England, Australia, South Korea and Japan, at overseas military
bases, and from locked rooms housing the Special Collection Service inside
American missions abroad.

The agency, using a combination of jawboning, stealth and legal force, has
turned the nation's Internet and telecommunications companies into collection
partners, installing filters in their facilities, serving them with court
orders, building back doors into their software and acquiring keys to break
their encryption.

But even that vast American-run web is only part of the story. For decades, the
N.S.A. has shared eavesdropping duties with the rest of the so-called Five Eyes,
the Sigint agencies of Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. More limited
cooperation occurs with many more countries, including formal arrangements
called Nine Eyes and 14 Eyes and Nacsi, an alliance of the agencies of 26 NATO
countries.

The extent of Sigint sharing can be surprising: ''N.S.A. may pursue a
relationship with Vietnam,'' one 2009 G.C.H.Q. document reported. But a recent
G.C.H.Q. training document suggests that not everything is shared, even between
the United States and Britain. ''Economic well-being reporting,'' it says,
referring to intelligence gathered to aid the British economy, ''cannot be
shared with any foreign partner.''

As at the school lunch table, decisions on who gets left out can cause hurt
feelings: ''Germans were a little grumpy at not being invited to join the 9-Eyes
group,'' one 2009 document remarks. And in a delicate spy-versus-spy dance,
sharing takes place even with governments that are themselves important N.S.A.
targets, notably Israel.

The documents describe collaboration with the Israel Sigint National Unit, which
gets raw N.S.A. eavesdropping material and provides it in return, but they also
mention the agency's tracking of ''high priority Israeli military targets,''
including drone aircraft and the Black Sparrow missile system.

The alliances, and the need for stealth, can get complicated. At one highly
valued overseas listening post, the very presence of American N.S.A. personnel
violates a treaty agreed to by the agency's foreign host. Even though much of
the eavesdropping is run remotely from N.S.A.'s base at Fort Gordon, Ga.,
Americans who visit the site must pose as contractors, carry fake business cards
and are warned: ''Don't dress as typical Americans."

''Know your cover legend,'' a PowerPoint security briefing admonishes the N.S.A.
staff members headed to the overseas station, directing them to ''sanitize
personal effects,'' send no postcards home and buy no identifiably local
souvenirs. (''An option might be jewelry. Most jewelry does not have any
markings'' showing its place of origin.)

Bypassing Security

In the agency's early years, its brainy staff members -- it remains the largest
employer of mathematicians in the country -- played an important role in the
development of the first computers, then largely a tool for code breaking.

Today, with personal computers, laptops, tablets and smartphones in most homes
and government offices in the developed world, hacking has become the agency's
growth area.

Some of Mr. Snowden's documents describe the exploits of Tailored Access
Operations, the prim name for the N.S.A. division that breaks into computers
around the world to steal the data inside, and sometimes to leave spy software
behind. T.A.O. is increasingly important in part because it allows the agency to
bypass encryption by capturing messages as they are written or read, when they
are not encoded.

In Baghdad, T.A.O. collected messages left in draft form in email accounts
maintained by leaders of the Islamic State of Iraq, a militant group. Under a
program called Spinaltap, the division's hackers identified 24 unique Internet
Protocol addresses identifying computers used by the Lebanese militant group
Hezbollah, making it possible to snatch Hezbollah messages from the flood of
global communications sifted by the agency.

The N.S.A.'s elite Transgression Branch, created in 2009 to ''discover,
understand, evaluate and exploit'' foreign hackers' work, quietly piggybacks on
others' incursions into computers of interest, like thieves who follow other
housebreakers around and go through the windows they have left ajar.

In one 2010 hacking operation code-named Ironavenger, for instance, the N.S.A.
spied simultaneously on an ally and an adversary. Analysts spotted suspicious
emails being sent to a government office of great intelligence interest in a
hostile country and realized that an American ally was ''spear-phishing'' --
sending official-looking emails that, when opened, planted malware that let
hackers inside.

The Americans silently followed the foreign hackers, collecting documents and
passwords from computers in the hostile country, an elusive target. They got a
look inside that government and simultaneously got a close-up look at the ally's
cyberskills, the kind of intelligence twofer that is the unit's specialty.

In many other ways, advances in computer and communications technology have been
a boon for the agency. N.S.A. analysts tracked the electronic trail left by a
top leader of Al Qaeda in Africa each time he stopped to use a computer on his
travels. They correctly predicted his next stop, and the police were there to
arrest him.

And at the big N.S.A. station at Fort Gordon, technicians developed an automated
service called ''Where's My Node?'' that sent an email to an analyst every time
a target overseas moved from one cell tower to another. Without lifting a
finger, an analyst could follow his quarry's every move.

The Limits of Spying

The techniques described in the Snowden documents can make the N.S.A. seem
omniscient, and nowhere in the world is that impression stronger than in
Afghanistan. But the agency's capabilities at the tactical level have not been
nearly enough to produce clear-cut strategic success there, in the United
States' longest war.

A single daily report from June 2011 from the N.S.A.'s station in Kandahar,
Afghanistan, the heart of Taliban country, illustrates the intensity of
eavesdropping coverage, requiring 15 pages to describe a day's work.

The agency listened while insurgents from the Haqqani network mounted an attack
on the Hotel Intercontinental in Kabul, overhearing the attackers talking to
their bosses in Pakistan's tribal area and recording events minute by minute.
''Ruhullah claimed he was on the third floor and had already inflicted one
casualty,'' the report said in a typical entry. ''He also indicated that Hafiz
was located on a different floor.''

N.S.A. officers listened as two Afghan Foreign Ministry officials prepared for a
meeting between President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and Iranian officials,
assuring them that relations with the United States ''would in no way threaten
the interests of Iran,'' which they decided Mr. Karzai should describe as a
''brotherly country.''

The N.S.A. eavesdropped as the top United Nations official in Afghanistan,
Staffan de Mistura, consulted his European Union counterpart, Vygaudas Usackas,
about how to respond to an Afghan court's decision to overturn the election of
62 members of Parliament.

And the agency was a fly on the wall for a long-running land dispute between the
mayor of Kandahar and a prominent local man known as the Keeper of the Cloak of
the Prophet Muhammad, with President Karzai's late brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai,
as a mediator.

The agency discovered a Taliban claim to have killed five police officers at a
checkpoint by giving them poisoned yogurt, and heard a provincial governor tell
an aide that a district police chief was verbally abusing women and clergymen.

A Taliban figure, Mullah Rahimullah Akhund, known on the United States
military's kill-or-capture list by the code name Objective Squiz Incinerator,
was overheard instructing an associate to buy suicide vests and a Japanese
motorbike, according to the documents.

And N.S.A. listened in as a Saudi extremist, Abu Mughira, called his mother to
report that he and his fellow fighters had entered Afghanistan and ''done
victorious operations.''

Such reports flowed from the agency's Kandahar station day after day, year after
year, and surely strengthened the American campaign against the Taliban. But
they also suggest the limits of intelligence against a complex political and
military challenge. The N.S.A. recorded the hotel attack, but it had not
prevented it. It tracked Mr. Karzai's government, but he remained a difficult
and volatile partner. Its surveillance was crucial in the capture or killing of
many enemy fighters, but not nearly enough to remove the Taliban's ominous
shadow from Afghanistan's future.

Mining All the Tidbits

In the Afghan reports and many others, a striking paradox is the odd intimacy of
a sprawling, technology-driven agency with its targets. It is the one-way
intimacy of the eavesdropper, as N.S.A. employees virtually enter the office
cubicles of obscure government officials and the Spartan hide-outs of drug
traffickers and militants around the world.

Venezuela, for instance, was one of six ''enduring targets'' in N.S.A.'s
official mission list from 2007, along with China, North Korea, Iraq, Iran and
Russia. The United States viewed itself in a contest for influence in Latin
America with Venezuela's leader then, the leftist firebrand Hugo Chávez, who
allied himself with Cuba, and one agency goal was ''preventing Venezuela from
achieving its regional leadership objectives and pursuing policies that
negatively impact U.S. global interests.''

A glimpse of what this meant in practice comes in a brief PowerPoint
presentation from August 2010 on ''Development of the Venezuelan Economic
Mission.'' The N.S.A. was tracking billions of dollars flowing to Caracas in
loans from China (radar systems and oil drilling), Russia (MIG fighter planes
and shoulder-fired missiles) and Iran (a factory to manufacture drone aircraft).

But it was also getting up-close and personal with Venezuela's Ministry of
Planning and Finance, monitoring the government and personal emails of the top
10 Venezuelan economic officials. An N.S.A. officer in Texas, in other words,
was paid each day to peruse the private messages of obscure Venezuelan
bureaucrats, hunting for tidbits that might offer some tiny policy edge.

In a counterdrug operation in late 2011, the agency's officers seemed to know
more about relations within a sprawling narcotics network than the drug dealers
themselves. They listened to ''Ricketts,'' a Jamaican drug supplier based in
Ecuador, struggling to keep his cocaine and marijuana smuggling business going
after an associate, ''Gordo,'' claimed he had paid $250,000 and received nothing
in return.

The N.S.A., a report said, was on top of not just their cellphones, but also
those of the whole network of ''buyers, transporters, suppliers, and middlemen''
stretching from the Netherlands and Nova Scotia to Panama City and Bogotá,
Colombia. The documents do not say whether arrests resulted from all that
eavesdropping.

Even with terrorists, N.S.A. units can form a strangely personal relationship.
The N.S.A.-G.C.H.Q. wiki, a top secret group blog that Mr. Snowden downloaded,
lists 14 specialists scattered in various stations assigned to Lashkar-e-Taiba,
the Pakistani terrorist group that carried out the bloody attack on Mumbai in
2008, with titles including ''Pakistan Access Pursuit Team'' and ''Techniques
Discovery Branch.'' Under the code name Treaclebeta, N.S.A.'s hackers at
Tailored Access Operations also played a role.

In the wiki's casual atmosphere, American and British eavesdroppers exchange the
peculiar shoptalk of the secret world. ''I don't normally use Heretic to scan
the fax traffic, I use Nucleon,'' one user writes, describing technical tools
for searching intercepted documents.

But most striking are the one-on-one pairings of spies and militants; Bryan is
assigned to listen in on a man named Haroon, and Paul keeps an ear on Fazl.

A Flood of Details

One N.S.A. officer on the Lashkar-e-Taiba beat let slip that some of his
eavesdropping turned out to be largely pointless, perhaps because of the
agency's chronic shortage of skilled linguists. He ''ran some queries'' to read
intercepted communications of certain Lashkar-e-Taiba members, he wrote in the
wiki, but added: ''Most of it is in Arabic or Farsi, so I can't make much of
it.''

It is a glimpse of the unsurprising fact that sometimes the agency's expensive
and expansive efforts accomplish little. Despite the agency's embrace of
corporate jargon on goal-setting and evaluation, it operates without public
oversight in an arena in which achievements are hard to measure.

In a world of ballooning communications, the agency is sometimes simply
overwhelmed. In 2008, the N.S.A.'s Middle East and North Africa group set about
updating its Sigint collection capabilities. The ''ambitious scrub'' of
selectors -- essentially search terms -- cut the number of terms automatically
searched from 21,177 to 7,795 and the number of messages added to the agency's
Pinwale database from 850,000 a day to 450,000 a day.

The reduction in volume was treated as a major achievement, opening the way for
new collection on Iranian leadership and Saudi and Syrian diplomats, the report
said.

And in a note that may comfort computer novices, the N.S.A. Middle East analysts
discovered major glitches in their search software: The computer was searching
for the names of targets but not their email addresses, a rather fundamental
flaw. ''Over 500 messages in one week did not come in,'' the report said about
one target.

Those are daily course corrections. Whether the Snowden disclosures will result
in deeper change is uncertain. Joel F. Brenner, the agency's former inspector
general, says much of the criticism is unfair, reflecting a naïveté about the
realpolitik of spying. ''The agency is being browbeaten for doing too well the
things it's supposed to do,'' he said.

But Mr. Brenner added that he believes ''technology has outrun policy'' at the
N.S.A., and that in an era in which spying may well be exposed, ''routine
targeting of close allies is bad politics and is foolish.''

Another former insider worries less about foreign leaders' sensitivities than
the potential danger the sprawling agency poses at home. William E. Binney, a
former senior N.S.A. official who has become an outspoken critic, says he has no
problem with spying on foreign targets like Brazil's president or the German
chancellor, Angela Merkel. ''That's pretty much what every government does,'' he
said. ''It's the foundation of diplomacy.'' But Mr. Binney said that without new
leadership, new laws and top-to-bottom reform, the agency will represent a
threat of ''turnkey totalitarianism'' -- the capability to turn its awesome
power, now directed mainly against other countries, on the American public.

''I think it's already starting to happen,'' he said. ''That's what we have to
stop.''

Whatever reforms may come, Bobby R. Inman, who weathered his own turbulent
period as N.S.A. director from 1977 to 1981, offers his hyper-secret former
agency a radical suggestion for right now. ''My advice would be to take
everything you think Snowden has and get it out yourself,'' he said. ''It would
certainly be a shock to the agency. But bad news doesn't get better with age.
The sooner they get it out and put it behind them, the faster they can begin to
rebuild.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/world/no-morsel-too-minuscule-for-all-consumin
g-nsa.html

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: ALLIES AND SPY TARGETS: President Obama with other G-20 leaders
in St. Petersburg, Russia, in early September, standing between President Dilma
Rousseff of Brazil, left, and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
SCOLDED: John Emerson, left, the American envoy to Germany. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SEAN
GALLUP/GETTY IMAGES)
SPY CHIEF: James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, in
September. He has strongly defended intelligence gathering practices.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN KASTER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
EARS ON THE WORLD: The National Security Agency's complex at Fort Gordon, Ga.
Much of the agency's eavesdropping is run from stations at home and abroad, far
beyond its Maryland headquarters. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GOOGLE EARTH)
IN THE MIDEAST A:n image from the Syrian opposition's Shaam News Network of
children and adults the rebels said had been killed in a toxic gas attack. At
left, Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, fourth from left, was
tracked in the country's north by the N.S.A. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SHAAM NEWS NETWORK,
VIA A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES
TWITTER FEED KHAMENEI.IR (@KHAMENEI_LEADER)) (A10)
WINDOWS WITH VIEWS ON EVERYTHING: Part of the National Security Agency's campus
in Fort Meade, Md. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK SEMANSKY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Documents disclosed by Edward J. Snowden show the N.S.A.'s official mission
goes far beyond terrorism. (A11) CHART: A Week's Worth of Eavesdropping: This
National Security Agency chart shows the varied sources of 103 ''accesses'' to
communications or computers collected  in a single week in 2009 at the N.S.A.'s
big station in San Antonio. (A11)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


