                             865 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      October 14, 2014 Tuesday 3:06 AM EST

Use of air base is unchanged, Turkey says

BYLINE: Liz Sly;Craig Whitlock

SECTION: A section; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 999 words


SANLIURFA, TURKEY - Turkey denied Monday that it has reached any "new agreement"
with the United States to allow the use of Incirlik Air Base in southern Turkey
for attacks on the Islamic State militant group, despite suggestions from the
Obama administration that a deal had been reached.

A statement issued by the office of Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said talks
are continuing between Ankara and Washington over whether to permit U.S. forces
to use Incirlik in the fight against the Islamic State, a radical al-Qaeda
offshoot that has captured parts of Syria and Iraq. However, "there is no new
agreement on the Incirlik issue," the statement said.

"There are requests and expectations and the negotiations continue," it added.

The Obama administration has been pressing Turkey to allow warplanes to use
Incirlik -  where the United States bases aircraft under existing NATO
agreements - as part of an effort by a U.S.-led coalition to roll back Islamic
State gains.

U.S. officials said Sunday that Turkey had agreed to allow the coalition to use
Turkish military bases for the fight against the Islamic State and to use
Turkish territory as part of a training program for moderate Syrian opposition
fighters.

"That's a new commitment and one that we very much welcome," Susan E. Rice,
President Obama's national security adviser, said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
"They have said that their facilities inside of Turkey can be used by the
coalition forces - American and otherwise - to engage in activities inside of
Iraq and Syria."

Rice did not specify what kind of military activities the United States would be
allowed to conduct from Turkish bases to support operations in Syria. A Defense
Department planning team is scheduled to travel to Turkey this week to finalize
the plans, U.S. officials said.

In a reflection of the sensitivity of the matter, U.S. officials on Monday were
reluctant to further address or clarify the issue for fear of irritating the
Turks. "We are grateful for steps Turkey is taking to support the coalition, to
include training and the use of some facilities," said a U.S. defense official
who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

Turkey has allowed the United States for some time to use Incirlik, located less
than 100 miles from the Syrian border, to help with deliveries of humanitarian
aid to needy civilians inside Syria. That has not changed, said a Turkish
official who spoke on the condition of anonymity in order to discuss sensitive
diplomatic issues.

Turkey has also allowed the U.S. Air Force to conduct drone surveillance
missions over northern Iraq from Incirlik for years but has drawn the line at
arming the drones or permitting the United States to use other aircraft for
airstrikes.

Opening up the base for warplanes would make it much easier for the United
States to launch strikes against Islamic State fighters in Syria, instead of
having to rely on much more distant air bases in the Persian Gulf. It also would
represent a powerful signal of Turkey's willingness to fully engage in the
international coalition formed by the United States to fight the militants.

But Turkey has insisted it will not allow attacks from its soil unless the war
is also extended to include Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, whom Turkish
leaders believe is responsible for creating the conditions that have enabled the
extremists to flourish.

"The Assad regime should be the target for a real solution in Syria," Turkish
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in an address at Istanbul's Marmara
University on Monday. He also reiterated Turkey's demands for the imposition of
a no-fly zone and the creation of a safe haven in northern Syria, conditions
that the United States so far has not accepted.

Turkey did not dispute a statement Sunday by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel that
an agreement has been reached to train moderate Syrian rebels in Turkey, a step
that Turkey has long sought. But it was not immediately clear who would train
the rebels or precisely where.

Amid the confusion over Incirlik, the Islamic State launched a new offensive to
capture the last neighborhoods of the Syrian border town of Kobane that it does
not already control.

Bolstered by reinforcements of men and weaponry that arrived overnight, the
jihadists launched a wave of up to six suicide bombings against Kurdish
positions in the town, pushing the defenders back several blocks and raising
fears that the town's fall could be imminent.

The gains came despite an intensified wave of coalition airstrikes, with the
U.S. Central Command reporting that seven took place around Kobane over the
previous 24 hours. Fighter jets from Saudi Arabia participated in the strikes
alongside U.S. fighters and bombers, according to a Central Command statement.

Witnesses said there were more strikes late Monday, after the statement was
issued, but that could not be independently confirmed.

The strikes have helped Kurdish fighters with the People's Protection Units, or
YPG, hold out against the Islamic State onslaught for the past 10 days.

But Kurdish activists expressed fears Monday that the fighters would not be able
to survive much longer.

"The airstrikes are continuous, but it doesn't make any difference," said
Mustafa Abdi, who is monitoring the battle from the Kurdish border. "The
situation is getting worse."

The Central Command said warplanes struck one large and one small Islamic State
unit southwest of Kobane, damaged a militant staging location and destroyed a
heavy-machine-gun position.

Three airstrikes northeast of Kobane hit an Islamic State unit and buildings,
and another strike northwest of the north-central Syrian city of Raqqah, an
Islamic State stronghold, struck a militant garrison, the command said.

Up to 200,000 new refugees have fled into Turkey in recent weeks from Kobane,
where  Kurdish defenders have faced Islamic State attacks from three sides.

liz.sly@washpost.com

craig.whitlock@washpost.com

William Branigin in Washington contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


