                             871 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 2, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the East China Sea, a Far Bigger Test of Power Looms

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER; Jane Perlez contributed reporting from Beijing, and
Martin Fackler from Tokyo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1209 words


WASHINGTON -- In an era when the Obama administration has been focused on new
forms of conflict -- as countries use cyberweapons and drones to extend their
power -- the dangerous contest suddenly erupting over a pile of rocks in the
East China Sea seems almost a throwback to the Cold War.

Suddenly, naval assets and air patrols are the currency of a shadow conflict
between Washington and Beijing that the Obama administration increasingly fears
could escalate and that American officials have said could derail their complex
plan to manage China's rise without overtly trying to contain it. As in the Cold
War, the immediate territorial dispute seems to be an excuse for a far larger
question of who will exercise influence over a vast region.

The result is that, as the Chinese grow more determined to assert their
territorial claims over a string of islands once important mainly to fishermen,
America's allies are also pouring military assets into the region -- potentially
escalating the once obscure dispute into a broader test of power in the Pacific.

Now a maritime outpost that had modest strategic significance is taking on
enormous symbolic import. South Korea, which has broader concerns about China's
regional power, is building a new naval base for 20 warships, including
submarines, arguing that it has to protect vital shipping lanes in the East
China Sea for its exports -- including many electronics headed to China.

The Japanese, after largely depending on American bases on Okinawa to back up
their own limited patrols in the area, plan to build a new army base by 2016 on
a small, inhabited island near the disputed islands, known as the Senkaku in
Japan and the Diaoyu in China.

The Japanese are also planning to deploy more F-15s and radar planes to Okinawa
and a new helicopter carrier, and, for the first time, have considered buying
unarmed American drones to patrol the area, part of a three-year-long shift in
military strategy to focus on their southern islands and on China. That is part
of a fundamental change in the national mind-set toward a Japan that is more
willing and able to defend itself than anytime since World War II, in part
because of doubts about America's own commitment to the region.

As Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. left on Sunday for a trip that will take
him to the capitals of all three major contestants -- Tokyo, Seoul and Beijing
-- the administration's public message is that all sides need to cool down and
keep nationalistic talk from making a tense situation worse.

Mr. Biden will encounter countries that are now re-examining how civilian and
military officials interact: Over the past few weeks, for very separate reasons,
Japan and China have each approved the creation of a national security council.
For Japan, it is an effort to strengthen the hand of the prime minister in times
of crises, a concept the Japanese body politic long resisted because of the
legacies of World War II.

For China, it appears to be an effort by President Xi Jinping to exercise a
degree of control over all sources of national power that his immediate
predecessor, Hu Jintao, never fully mastered. Interestingly, as China sent its
aircraft carrier to another potential trouble spot, the South China Sea, its
path avoided the disputed islands, perhaps a sign that the Chinese realize they
may have overplayed their hand.

Still, in private, American officials say they are worried that a small incident
-- a collision like the one between an American intelligence plane and the
Chinese air force a dozen years ago off Hainan Island -- could rapidly worsen
the situation.

On ABC's ''This Week'' on Sunday, Tom Donilon, who was Mr. Obama's national
security adviser until earlier this year and a principal architect of the
administration's approach to China, said a similar ''risk of miscalculation'' is
what ''we need to be very concerned about going forward here.'' A senior
administration official said Mr. Biden's message would be that the United States
will ''seek crisis management mechanisms and confidence-building measures to
lower tensions and reduce risk of escalation or miscalculation.''

But one of Mr. Obama's current advisers said, ''It's pretty clear this isn't
really about the islands.'' Declining to speak on the record about a sensitive
strategic issue, the official added that it was about a desire by some in China,
including the People's Liberation Army and perhaps the new political leadership,
''to assert themselves in ways that until recently they didn't have the military
capability to make real.''

The adviser added: ''They say it's in response to our efforts to contain them,
but our analysis is that it's really their effort to push our presence further
out into the Pacific.''

In fact, on his last trip to Asia as secretary of defense, Robert M. Gates said
in January 2011 that he believed the long-term goal of the Chinese was to push
the United States to ''the second island chain,'' farther out in the Pacific,
keeping American air and naval assets ever farther from the region around
China's coast. Two years later, Obama officials will not utter that view in
public, but it is a running theme in American intelligence assessments about the
Chinese military, tempered by evidence that some Chinese officials worry about
blowback if they overreach.

That has been a repeated cycle in Mr. Obama's relations with the Chinese. In
2010, a series of episodes, touched off by American arms sales to Taiwan and the
ramming of a Japanese coast guard ship in the Senkakus by an inebriated Chinese
sea captain, led China to cut off military-to-military relations between Beijing
and Washington and the sale of rare-earth metals, used for electronics, to the
Japanese.

Both proved temporary, and by the end of the year some senior Chinese officials,
led by the state councilor, Dai Bingguo, warned that China's actions were
driving countries in the region into American hands. ''Some say China wants to
replace the United States and dominate the world,'' Mr. Dai wrote in an article
that Mr. Donilon frequently cited. ''That is simply a myth.''

But Mr. Dai is gone from power, and the Obama administration is now trying to
figure out how to interpret each new Chinese action under Mr. Xi, of which the
recent ''air defense identification zone'' was considered the most calculated
and, perhaps, the most muscular. Many countries claim such zones; China knew it
was claiming it over disputed territory.

Mr. Obama's immediate response was to send two unarmed B-52 bombers on what the
Pentagon called ''routine'' runs over the territory; they were routine, but the
timing and symbolism were lost on no one. Now the White House faces the more
complex task of its longer-term response. To make the promise of his ''Asian
pivot'' real, the president will have to convince Congress, and allies in the
region, that he means to devote more military, diplomatic and economic attention
there -- not to contain China, he insists, but to preserve and extend America's
longtime role as a keeper of the peace in the Pacific.

That will be challenging at a time of Pentagon budget cuts, a national mood to
focus on problems at home and a national security apparatus focused on Iran,
Syria and the future of the Middle East.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/02/world/asia/in-the-east-china-sea-a-far-bigger-
test-of-power-looms.html

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A group of islands in the East China Sea that both Japan and
China claim to control. American officials are worried that a collision or other
event in the area could rapidly escalate tensions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KYODO, VIA
REUTERS)  MAP

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


