                             876 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 23, 2013 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

When '60 Minutes' Checks Its Journalistic Skepticism at the Door

BYLINE: By DAVID CARR.

Email: carr@nytimes.com; Twitter: @carr2n

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; THE MEDIA EQUATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1435 words


Last week, a study commissioned by the president concluded that the National
Security Agency had reached too far into the private lives of Americans. The
study, which came after a series of journalistic revelations exposing the
agency's surveillance practices, recommended numerous reforms that would curb
the N.S.A.'s prerogatives. President Obama said he was ''open to many'' of the
suggestions.

It was exactly the kind of news-making moment that ''60 Minutes'' -- America's
leading purveyor of serious television news -- has often been responsible for
creating. For more than four decades, the program has exposed C.I.A. abuses,
rogue military contractors and hundreds of corporate villains.

But where was ''60 Minutes'' on the N.S.A. story? The Sunday before the damning
study, the program produced a segment that scanned as a friendly infomercial for
the agency. Reported by John Miller, a CBS News reporter, the piece included
extensive interviews with Gen. Keith Alexander, the director of the N.S.A.

In a scene that served as something of a metaphor for the whole segment, the
producers negotiated access to the Black Chamber, a supersecret area where the
nation's top code breakers work. The door is briefly opened, we see a deserted
office hall that looks like any other and then the door is closed. We get a look
in, but we learn nothing.

Coming as it does on the heels of the now-discredited Benghazi report -- in
which ''60 Minutes'' said it was fooled by an eyewitness who was apparently
nothing of the kind -- the N.S.A. segment raises the question of whether the
program has not just temporarily lost its mojo, but its skepticism as well. It
didn't help that the day after the piece aired, a federal judge ruled that the
agency's program of collecting phone records was most likely unconstitutional.

In between its coverage of Benghazi and the N.S.A., ''60 Minutes'' drew
criticism for letting Amazon promote a drone delivery program that is years from
actually happening, if it happens at all. It was a fanciful look at the
commercial future, though Charlie Rose, the reporter, also asked Jeff Bezos, the
chief executive of Amazon, some tough questions: whether providing cloud
services to the C.I.A. was a conflict, and whether its ''ruthless'' pursuit of
market share was fair.

Let's stipulate that ''60 Minutes'' has been and continues to be a journalistic
treasure, which just this year has done hard-hitting pieces on the damaging
practices of credit report agencies, the high rate of suicide among returning
veterans, and how tainted pain medication that caused fungal meningitis killed
dozens and sickened hundreds. Mr. Rose also landed an interview with the Syrian
president, Bashar al-Assad, about chemical weapons. At a time when both the
definition and execution of news has dimmed, ''60 Minutes'' stands out.

Historically, the news that ''60 Minutes'' was in the lobby or on the phone has
struck fear in the hearts of both the stalwart and the venal. The show made its
targets quake and audiences thrill as it did the hard, often amazing work of
creating consequence and accountability.

But in the last few months, there have been significant lapses into
credulousness, when reporters have been more ''gee whiz'' than ''what gives?''
The news that ''60 Minutes'' is calling could be viewed as less ominous and more
of an opportunity. More than once this year, the show has traded skepticism for
access.

When it comes to the access game, everyone, even ''60 Minutes,'' plays ball on
occasion. When it seeks to lighten things up, as it did with Taylor Swift, or
Maggie Smith of ''Downton Abbey,'' no one expects hidden cameras or brutal
interrogations. Everyone, including the audience, knows the score.

But viewers expect the show to bring its A game, and deserve it, when it takes
on a huge issue like the N.S.A., to serve as a stand-in for the American people
and ask the uncomfortable questions.

Mr. Miller is a former high-ranking official in the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence and a former spokesman of the F.B.I. whose worldview is
built on going after bad guys and keeping the rest of us safe. In his report,
Mr. Alexander was allowed to parse his responses, suggesting that the collection
and retention of telephone metadata from Americans is not a big deal -- it is --
and that the agency is ''not collecting everybody's email, we're not collecting
everybody's phone things.'' The report delivered to the president last week said
that the agency was doing a great deal of both and that it should stop.

After taking over ''60 Minutes'' from Don Hewitt less than 10 years ago, Jeffrey
Fager has managed to maintain the journalistic momentum of the news division's
crown jewel. In 2011, he was named chairman of CBS News, and since then has
earned high marks for helping restore hard news at the evening news program and
developing a distinct identity for ''CBS This Morning'' by emphasizing topical
coverage.

But people inside and outside the news division have questioned whether those
dual roles are stretching him too thin. An internal CBS investigation into the
Benghazi fiasco cited fundamental lapses in execution, including missed
opportunities to check the story of Dylan Davies, a contractor who had told
conflicting accounts about his whereabouts on the night of the attacks on the
American diplomatic mission.

Of course, any news organization can be fooled -- The New York Times famously
fell short with its reports of supposed weapons of mass destruction in the
run-up to the Iraq war -- but it was hard to watch the N.S.A. segment and not
wonder who was minding the store.

On what planet is it fine for someone like Mr. Miller, a former federal law
enforcement official, to be the one to do a big segment on a major government
security agency? Mr. Miller got the story because the N.S.A. said yes to his
pitch -- why would it not? -- but other journalists at ''60 Minutes'' without
his potential conflicts were interested as well. No matter how the deal was
brokered, the optics were terrible and the N.S.A. got its hands on a megaphone
with nary a critic in sight.

Mr. Fager would not speak on the record, perhaps in part because he was pummeled
after initially defending the Benghazi broadcast; when it fell apart, he was
forced to put Lara Logan, the reporter, and the producer on leave. But while
declining to comment, he made it clear that he very much had his eye on the ball
at ''60 Minutes'' and pushed back against any notion of institutional malaise.

Mr. Miller was more than happy to explain his N.S.A. segment, which he said he
would not change if he had the chance. As a reporter, he has a blend of insider
knowledge and careful inquiry that has been lauded by many, including me,
especially during the school shootings in Newtown, Conn. He is nothing if not
confident, dismissing his critics as ankle-biting, agenda-ridden bloggers who
could not be compelled to get out of their pajamas and do actual reporting.

''I fully reject the criticism from you and others,'' he told me. ''The N.S.A.
story has been a fairly one-way dialogue. There has been no conversation and
when you do hear from the N.S.A., it is in a terse, highly vetted statement.''

''We went there, we asked every question we wanted to, listened to the answers,
followed up as we wished, and our audience can decide what and who they believe.
As we constructed it, the N.S.A. was a story about a debate, not a villain, and
we added to that debate with important information. I fail to understand how a
shrill argument for the sake of creating televised drama would have accomplished
anything.''

Mr. Miller is a highly respected reporter, and stand-up enough to come on the
phone and defend his work. (He is reportedly heading back into government to
work for his former boss, William Bratton, in the New York City Police
Department.) But I'm pretty sure that the credentials that make him valuable on
a mass shooting are the same ones that create a conflict on the N.S.A. segment.
And Ms. Logan, who raced past conflicting information to a predetermined
conclusion and pulled the program into a ditch in the process, should get more
than Christmas off for her lapses.

The DNA of ''60 Minutes'' is adversarial, investigative and most of all
accurate. It would be a cheap and easy trick to roll Mike Wallace back from the
grave for the sake of contrast, but of course the N.S.A. would not have let him
near the place. Maybe that is the point. ''60 Minutes'' is a calling, not an
assignment, and the program should not be the kind of outfit that leaves its
skepticism at the door to get inside.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/23/business/media/when-60-minutes-checks-its-jour
nalistic-skepticism-at-the-door.html

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A ''60 Minutes'' segment about the N.S.A., reported by John
Miller, right, included extensive interviews with Gen. Keith Alexander, the
agency's director. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CBS) (B1)
 Jeffrey Fager, executive producer of ''60 Minutes'' and chairman of CBS News.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRET HARTMAN/REUTERS) (B4)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


