                             870 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 1, 2013 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Machine Age

BYLINE: By KIM STEELE.

Kim Steele, whose photographs are in the Museum of Modern Art and other
collections, focuses on industry and technology.

SECTION: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; EXPOSURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 185 words


Form and function have always fascinated me. I thoroughly enjoy being in grand
spaces; I like feeling the magnitude of a dam looming over me, or the crackling
of electricity everywhere about me. For 40 years I have tried to capture these
forms, to convert them into images that bespeak their power and strength.

In the last century, America ruled almost every area of industry -- steel,
aviation, shipbuilding. Now our world is technology. I have been shooting
machines like one the size of a 737 that zaps cancerous tumors, and an unmanned
drone that collects images that help find people in disasters. Ironically, some
of these gigantic new machines -- like the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland
and the Scripps cyclotron -- are focused on very small particles, but their
scale and significance are revealed in these images.

To shoot new technology on film, with my ancient Hasselblad, was very exciting;
the camera, made of metal, just like so many of the materials I have
photographed, provides a rich contrast to the digital world. Prophetically,
Hasselblad just discontinued the 503 series camera (mine).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/01/opinion/sunday/machine-age.html

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The detector assembly of the Large Hadron Collider at CERN,
Meyrin, Switzerland, 2011.
A Northrop Grumman RQ-4 Global Hawk, a surveillance drone at Air Force Plant 42,
Palmdale, Calif., 2011. (SR6)
The beam line at the new proton beam facility for the treatment of both
cancerous tumors and certain no cancerous conditions, under construction at
Scripps Proton Therapy Center in San Diego, 2012. (SR6-SR7)
 Facebook's server farm in Prineville, Ore., 2013. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KIM STEELE
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (SR7)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


