                             879 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2014 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abolish the Corporate Income Tax

BYLINE: By LAURENCE J. KOTLIKOFF.

Laurence J. Kotlikoff, a professor of economics at Boston University, is the
author, with Scott Burns, of ''The Clash of Generations: Saving Ourselves, Our
Kids, and Our Economy.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 896 words


BOSTON -- JOBS don't grow out of thin air, especially well-paying ones. They
require, among other things, companies that are willing to operate where you
live. Just ask the Seattle-based District 751 of the machinists' union, which
was worried that Boeing will build its new 777X airliner someplace far away
where it is cheaper to produce. Last month the union offered contract
concessions, as its president explained, to ensure ''the long-term success'' of
Boeing in Washington State. And on Friday, Boeing machinists approved a contract
with concessions to keep assembly of the plane in the area.

In recent decades, American workers have suffered one body blow after another:
the decline in manufacturing, foreign competition, outsourcing, the Great
Recession and smart machines that replace people everywhere you look. Amazon and
Google are in a horse race to see how many humans they can put out of work with
self-guided delivery drones and driverless cars. You wonder who will be left
with incomes to buy what these robots deliver.

What can workers do to mitigate their plight? One useful step would be to lobby
to eliminate the corporate income tax.

That might sound like a giveaway to the rich. It's not. The rich, including
Boeing's stockholders, can take their companies and run -- and not just from
Washington State to, say, North Carolina. To avoid our federal corporate tax,
they can, and often do, move their operations and jobs abroad. Apple's tax
return says it all: The company, according to one calculation, paid only 8.2
percent of its worldwide profits in United States corporate income taxes, thanks
to piling up most of its profits and locating far too many of its operations
overseas.

I, like many economists, suspect that our corporate income tax is economically
self-defeating -- hurting workers, not capitalists, and collecting precious
little revenue to boot.

The United States may well have the highest effective marginal corporate income
tax rate of any developed country. Jack Mintz, a public finance economist and
director of the School of Public Policy at the University of Calgary, puts the
rate close to 35 percent, which is also the statutory rate. Other economists,
using different techniques, calculate the marginal rate to be as low as 23
percent. But both figures are miles above zero.

They are also miles above our 13 percent average corporate income tax rate --
the ratio of corporate taxes to total corporate profits. The fact that the
marginal tax rate, whether 23 percent, 35 percent or somewhere in between, is so
much larger than the average rate suggests that a sizable share of corporate
profits and production is ending up overseas and untaxed.

Making, rather than just stating, this case requires constructing a large-scale
computer simulation model of the United States economy as it interacts over time
with other nations' economies, and then seeing how the model reacts when you
change the American corporate income tax. I've developed such a model with three
colleagues through the Tax Analysis Center, a nonpartisan research group. Our
findings make a very strong, worker-based case for corporate tax reform.

In the model, eliminating the United States' corporate income tax produces rapid
and dramatic increases in American investment, output and real wages, making the
tax cut self-financing to a significant extent. Somewhat smaller gains arise
from revenue-neutral corporate tax base broadening, specifically cutting the
corporate tax rate to 9 percent and eliminating all corporate tax loopholes.
Both policies generate welfare gains for all generations in the United States,
but particularly for young and future workers. Moreover, all Americans can
benefit, though by less, if foreign countries also cut their corporate tax
rates.

The size of the potential economic and welfare gains are stunningly large and
don't reflect any extreme supply-side (a k a, voodoo economics) assumptions.
Fully eliminating the corporate income tax and replacing any loss in revenues
with somewhat higher personal income tax rates leads to a huge short-run inflow
of capital, raising the United States' capital stock (machines and buildings) by
23 percent, output by 8 percent and the real wages of unskilled and skilled
workers by 12 percent. Lowering the corporate rate tax to 9 percent while also
closing loopholes is roughly revenue neutral and also produces very rapid
increases in capital (by 17 percent), output (by 6 percent) and real wages (by 8
percent).

Eliminating the corporate tax and raising income tax rates or lowering the
corporate tax rate and eliminating its loopholes are not the only options.
Elsewhere, I have proposed eliminating the corporate income tax, but making
shareholders pay income taxes on their companies' profits as they accrue. This
leaves companies with no tax reason to avoid operating in the United States but
ensures that shareholders, not wage earners, make up for any revenue losses
through higher personal tax payments.

It's been a long time since the typical American worker received a raise in her
real pay. In fact, average weekly earnings, exclusive of fringe benefits but
adjusted for inflation, are 10 percent lower today than they were in 1966. This
is America's nightmare, not its dream. Turning things around requires getting a
lot of things right, starting, I'd argue, with corporate tax reform.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/06/opinion/abolish-the-corporate-income-tax.html

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY CHRISTOPHER SERGIO)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


