                             874 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 17, 2013 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

After 45 Years, as Incendiary as Ever

BYLINE: By JON PARELES, BEN RATLIFF and NATE CHINEN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; NEW MUSIC; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1230 words


Perhaps ''White Light/White Heat'' can't be the surprise it was when it arrived
in 1968. The second album by the Velvet Underground, ''White Light/White Heat''
has been canonized, analyzed, annotated, emulated and contextualized as a
cornerstone of punk and experimental rock. Generations of listeners have been
aware of the insistent, relentless drone of its extended songs, the outbursts of
scrabbling dissonance and earsplitting distortion from Lou Reed's lead guitar,
the equally insistent presence of John Cale's electric viola and keyboards, the
deadpan tales of drugs and sex and death in Mr. Reed's lyrics and the pithy
drive, amid the cacophony, of Sterling Morrison's rhythm guitar and Maureen
Tucker's steadfast drums.

Yet even as a known quantity, the album is still incendiary. Its
45th-anniversary reissue was in the works before Mr. Reed's death on Oct. 27,
although it makes a worthy memorial. The original album -- just six songs -- is
presented in stereo and mono versions with a handful of other studio tracks,
most of which have already been released. A third disc presents a tape from the
band's April 30, 1967, show at an Upper East Side club called the Gymnasium,
recorded a month after the band released its first album, ''The Velvet
Underground and Nico''; most of it has not appeared before.

Time and respect have not tamed the original ''White Light/White Heat.'' It
holds the joyful amphetamine jitters of the title song, the deadpan gallows
humor of the flinty jam and short-story reading of ''The Gift,'' the seething
viola drone of ''Lady Godiva's Operation,'' the delicacy and foreboding and
anticipation of ''Here She Comes Now'' and the frenetic, feedback-screeching,
mind-splitting guitar finale of ''I Heard Her Call My Name.'' Then there's the
17-minute ''Sister Ray,'' a flippant chronicle of heroin, debauchery and casual
murder amid a hypnotic meltdown of a jam that overloads amplifiers as it mutates
from soul vamp to brawl to meditation to breakneck sprint.

The concert disc from 1967 has its own ''Sister Ray,'' no longer dominated by
the organ that infuses the album version with Minimalism; the live version turns
instead toward scrappy garage-rock and hints of raga. At the Gymnasium, the
Velvets showed their blues-rock foundation, especially in ''Booker T.'' -- an
instrumental 12-bar blues in which Mr. Reed tries his own version of the terse,
twangy guitar licks of Steve Cropper from Booker T. and the MGs -- and a
previously undiscovered Velvets song, ''I'm Not a Young Man Anymore,'' built
around a guitar lick that deserved to resurface.

The set also includes songs from the band's debut album, like a ''Run Run Run''
with even more unhinged guitar, and songs the Velvets would record for ''White
Light/White Heat'' in a matter of months. By the time those songs got to the
studio, they were even wilder.

ERIC REED

''Reflections of a Grateful Heart'' (WJ3)

The jazz pianist Eric Reed, now in his mid-40s, has been making effective
small-group records -- trio and quartet, mostly -- for half his life. But he's
also been developing a sideline that looks increasingly like a central strength:
solo-piano gospel records.

''Mercy and Grace,'' from 10 years ago, set up and rearranged some of the core
gospel songs of the last two centuries -- ''Wade in the Water,'' ''What a Friend
We Have in Jesus,'' ''Jesus Loves Me'' -- like that. The new ''Reflections of a
Grateful Heart'' tends toward music from the pianist's own lifetime: two songs
written and recorded by Richard Smallwood; one each by Thomas Whitfield, Edwin
Hawkins and Dr. Billy Taylor; and five by Mr. Reed himself, in the same clear,
careful mood as the others.

Mr. Reed has energy and technique, with a lot of options for dealing with any
kind of song. On his previous record he chose his spots to make some of the old
material rock and rumble, striking the keys hard and jostling them with
improvising strategies and rhythmic phrasing from the last half-century of the
jazz tradition. Here he does something different: He achieves a greater unity
with wall-to-wall serenity. It's contemplative, and deeper into gospel in and of
itself.

The record is defined by the spirit of the hymn or the solo performance, a will
to calm, condense and purify. Some of these songs are best known as recorded
with piano and choir, or just with piano and a single voice; with ''In Case
You've Forgotten,'' recorded by Whitfield in 1990, he takes a song of intense
emotions, defined by the interplay between Whitfield's voice and piano, and
streamlines it into an instrumental version of radical calm, adding small and
elegant improvisations within a slow rubato. If you know these songs, you'll
want to hear them this way, with different lighting and framing; if you don't,
you can use this record to clear your head. BEN RATLIFF

VOLCáN

''Volcán'' (5Passion)

This has been a good year, maybe a banner year, for those working at the
intersection of traditional Cuban music and state-of-the-art improvisation. The
grand master of Afro-Cuban jazz piano, Chucho Valdés, released a breezily
impressive album whose title, ''Border-Free,'' felt like a rejection of
stylistic dogma; younger virtuosos like Roberto Fonseca, a pianist, and Pedrito
Martínez, a conga and batá drummer, showed a similar resolve. And the American
pianist Michele Rosewoman celebrated the 30th anniversary of her radical but
grounded experiment New Yor-Uba.

Now comes a last-minute arrival to the speedway, in the form of ''Volcán,'' the
debut recording by an all-star collective: the pianist Gonzalo Rubalcaba, the
drummer Horacio Hernandez, the bassist Armando Gola and the percussionist
Giovanni Hidalgo. Recorded in Miami, it's a relaxed but accomplished album, at
ease within a crisp atmosphere of folkloric futurism. Every track, standard and
original alike, has a streamlined surface that softens the whirring complexities
beneath the hood.

Mr. Rubalcaba, 50, is the first among equals in this band: He contributed the
only new compositions, including the sinuous title track, and he produced the
album, releasing it on his own 5Passion label. As on ''XXI Century,'' the album
he released last year, he finds a way to showcase his silvery subtleties of
touch as well as his embrace of processed texture, playing both acoustic piano
and a small arsenal of synthesizers (Kurzweil, Korg and Virus). Paired with Mr.
Gola's nimble electric bass playing, the results can scan as a form of new-world
fusion.

Dizzy Gillespie is a common touchstone for these musicians, and their darting,
heavily percussive version of his ''Salt Peanuts'' pays an almost breathlessly
giddy homage. The same spirit of fond license can be found on tunes by Mr.
Valdés (''Pon la Clave'') and Chico Buarque (''Ano Novo''), each one deftly
rearranged to highlight the group's polyrhythmic poise. ''Corsário,'' by João
Bosco, appears in two versions, one of which features a smoky, stately vocal
performance by Maridalia Hernández, who overdubbed her part in the Dominican
Republic.

The years of history between these musicians -- in Mr. Rubalcaba's bands and
elsewhere -- comes across, notably on ''Volcán Durmiente'' and ''Sin Punto
...,'' two of the originals. And the message is simultaneously one of rootedness
and universality. NATE CHINEN

The Velvet Underground: ''White Light/White Heat: 45th Anniversary Super Deluxe
Edition'' (Polydor/Universal)

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/17/arts/music/releases-from-velvet-underground-er
ic-reed-and-volcan.html

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (C2)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


