                              88 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             March 10, 2014 Monday
                                 Every Edition

Law firms are looking to the sky for business

BYLINE: Catherine Ho

SECTION: Pg. A12

LENGTH: 647 words


From surveying sugar cane fields in Hawaii to scanning the bottom of the Arctic
Ocean for marine mammals, the use of unmanned aircraft systems - more commonly
known as drones - is taking off. And law firms are taking notice.

Banking on the fact that drones will become more mainstream in commercial and
private use, two major U.S. law firms announced last week that they are starting
drone practice groups - Richmond-based LeClairRyan and Atlanta-based McKenna
Long & Aldridge.

LeClairRyan's drone group, based in Annapolis, is led by Tim Adelman and Doug
McQueen, a flight instructor and United Airlines pilot, respectively, in
addition to being aviation attorneys. McKenna Long's practice is headed by Mark
Dombroff, a partner in the firm's McLean office and a former in-house lawyer at
the Federal Aviation Administration.

The announcements follow recent indications by the FAA that the agency plans to
issue proposed rules regulating small civil unmanned aircraft later this year.
In 2013, the FAA authorized the first commercial flight by an unmanned aircraft,
a research vessel chartered by ConocoPhillips that was launched over the skies
of Alaska to scan the sea floor to survey marine mammals and ice before
drilling. The FAA estimates there could be as many as 7,500 small commercial
drones in use in the United States by 2018.

"We want to help [companies] shape rulemaking and get a seat at the table, then
actually operate in a world they had a hand in creating," Dombroff said.

There are thousands of companies building drones and trying to market and sell
them, but they are running into hurdles because the federal government has yet
to create regulations to govern them, Adelman said.

"They're they're having a hard time expanding their business," said Adelman, who
has advised drone manufacturers AirCover and Leptron, and has worked with
universities and law enforcement agencies on the legal implications of using
drones. "But as we see these new rules come out in next year or two, you'll see
an explosion of manufacturers and end users."

LeClairRyan and McKenna Long are looking to expand their work representing
companies that design, manufacture and operate drones in shaping the upcoming
FAA regulations, as well as guiding companies through the FAA certification
process. The FAA must certify any aircraft, manned or unmanned, that goes into
the sky, and anyone who wants to operate a vehicle has to go through an
application process.

The drone practice groups at both firms will not bring in new lawyers, but
rather include attorneys already at the firms who specialize in aviation,
intellectual property, employment, government contracting and general business
law.

"We figured putting it all into a package would be helpful," Adelman said.

While Amazon's package-delivery octocopter drone may not become a reality for
years, there are many uses for drones in agriculture and real estate that could
be on the cusp of becoming more commonplace, he said.

"If someone stole my tractor and it's on a 1,500-acre farm, if you were to get
20 patrolmen to walk all over the farm, it would take all day," Adelman said. "I
could fly a [drone] in half an hour and scan the area quickly.

"If real estate agents wanted to take a picture of a house, they could pay a
pilot and it could cost $500, whereas if I had a [drone], it would cost cents."

Police and sheriffs departments in Queens Anne's County, Md.; Arlington, Tex.;
Mesa County, Colo.; and Miami-Dade County, Fla., have already started
experimenting with unmanned aircraft for fire fighting, photography and other
uses. Facebook is reportedly in talks to buy Titan Aerospace, a drone production
company that is developing solar-powered atmospheric satellites that could bring
Web access to parts of the world with limited Internet connections.

"It's a very exciting frontier," Dombroff said.

catherine.ho@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


