                             884 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Conflict Erupts in Public Rebuke on C.I.A. Inquiry

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and JONATHAN WEISMAN; Eric Schmitt and Charlie Savage
contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1662 words


WASHINGTON -- A festering conflict between the Central Intelligence Agency and
its congressional overseers broke into the open Tuesday when Senator Dianne
Feinstein, chairwoman of the Intelligence Committee and one of the C.I.A.'s
staunchest defenders, delivered an extraordinary denunciation of the agency,
accusing it of withholding information about its treatment of prisoners and
trying to intimidate committee staff members investigating the detention
program.

Describing what she called a ''defining moment'' for the oversight of American
spy agencies, Ms. Feinstein said the C.I.A. had removed documents from computers
used by Senate Intelligence Committee staff members working on a report about
the agency's detention program, searched the computers after the committee
completed its report and referred a criminal case to the Justice Department in
an attempt to thwart their investigation.

The 6,300-page report has been at the center of a bitter dispute between the
committee and the agency, which says it contains many inaccuracies that must be
corrected before it is released.

Ms. Feinstein's disclosures came a week after it was first reported that the
C.I.A. last year had monitored computers used by her staff in an effort to learn
how the committee may have gained access to the agency's own internal review of
the detention and interrogation program that became perhaps the most criticized
part of the American government's response to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Ms. Feinstein said the internal review bolstered the conclusions of the
committee's still-classified report on the program, which President Obama
officially ended in January 2009 after sharply criticizing it during the 2008
presidential campaign.

For an intelligence community already buffeted by controversies over electronic
surveillance and armed drone strikes, the rupture with Ms. Feinstein, one of its
closest congressional allies, could have broad ramifications.

Ms. Feinstein has proved to be a bulwark for intelligence agencies in recent
years: publicly defending the National Security Agency's telephone and Internet
surveillance activities, the C.I.A.'s authority over drone strikes and the
F.B.I.'s actions under the Patriot Act against a growing bipartisan chorus of
critics.

''Feinstein has always pushed the agency in private and defended it in public,''
said Amy B. Zegart, who studies intelligence issues at Stanford University.
''Now she is skewering the C.I.A. in public. This is a whole new world for the
C.I.A.''

Ms. Feinstein, who had refused to comment on the dispute between the C.I.A. and
her committee, took the Senate floor on Tuesday morning to say the agency's
actions had breached constitutional provisions for the separation of powers and
''were a potential effort to intimidate.''

''How this will be resolved will show whether the Intelligence Committee can be
effective in monitoring and investigating our nation's intelligence activities,
or whether our work can be thwarted by those we oversee,'' she said.

Hours later, John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director, forcefully denied Ms.
Feinstein's assertions that the agency had carried out a broad effort to spy on
the committee's work.

''Nothing could be further from the truth,'' Mr. Brennan said in response to
questions during an appearance at the Council on Foreign Relations in
Washington.

Referring to Justice Department inquiries now underway, Mr. Brennan urged Senate
critics to await the results of those reviews before leveling accusations
against the C.I.A.

''When the facts come out on this, I think a lot of people who are claiming that
there has been this tremendous sort of spying and monitoring and hacking will be
proved wrong,'' he said.

Jay Carney, the White House spokesman, declined to say whether Mr. Obama had
spoken to Mr. Brennan, who served as a White House adviser during the
president's first term, about the C.I.A. controversy. ''Well, let me just say,
folks here and in the administration have been in regular consultation with
Chairman Feinstein about the broader issues here,'' Mr. Carney said. ''We've
made clear that we want to see the report's findings declassified.''

In her 45-minute speech, Ms. Feinstein gave the fullest public account of the
years of back-room jousting between her committee and the C.I.A. over the
agency's detention program, and its use of secret prisons and brutal
interrogation techniques like waterboarding that critics described as torture.

The dispute came to a head in mid-January when Mr. Brennan told members of the
committee that the agency had carried out a search of computers used by
committee investigators at a C.I.A. facility in Northern Virginia, where the
committee was examining documents the agency had made available for its report.

Ms. Feinstein said on Tuesday that during the meeting, Mr. Brennan told her that
the C.I.A. had searched a ''walled-off committee network drive containing the
committee's own internal work product and communications'' and that he was going
to ''order further forensic evidence of the committee network to learn more
about activities of the committee's oversight staff.''

The C.I.A. had carried out the search to determine whether committee
investigators may have gained unauthorized access to the internal review of the
detention program that the agency had carried out without informing the
committee. Ms. Feinstein on Tuesday vigorously disputed this allegation, saying
the document had been included -- intentionally or not -- as part of a dump of
millions of pages the C.I.A. had provided for the Intelligence Committee.

Mr. Brennan, in a January letter to Ms. Feinstein that a government official who
did not want to be identified released on Tuesday, said the committee had not
been entitled to the internal review because it contained ''sensitive,
deliberative, pre-decisional C.I.A. material''-- and therefore was protected
under executive privilege considerations.

The letter, attached to a statement that Mr. Brennan issued to the agency's
employees on Tuesday, raised questions about Ms. Feinstein's statements earlier
in the day concerning at what point the committee came into possession of the
internal review.

The C.I.A.'s acting general counsel has referred the matter to the Justice
Department as a possible criminal offense, a move Ms. Feinstein called a
strong-arm tactic by someone with a conflict of interest in the case. She said
that that official had previously been a lawyer in the C.I.A.'s Counterterrorism
Center -- the section of the spy agency that was running the detention and
interrogation program -- and that his name is mentioned more than 1,600 times in
the committee's report.

Ms. Feinstein did not name the lawyer, but she appeared to be referring to
Robert Eatinger, the C.I.A.'s senior deputy general counsel. In 2007, The New
York Times reported that when a top C.I.A. official in 2005 destroyed videotapes
of brutal interrogations of Al Qaeda detainees, Mr. Eatinger had been one of two
lawyers to approve their destruction.

Ms. Feinstein specifically mentioned the destruction of the tapes as
justification for her staff's removal of copies of parts of the internal C.I.A.
review from the Northern Virginia facility and decision to take the documents to
the committee's offices on Capitol Hill.

She said it was necessary to ''preserve and protect'' a copy of the review,
which she said ''corroborates critical information'' of the committee's own
investigation.

Ms. Feinstein said that on two occasions in 2010, the C.I.A. had removed
documents totaling hundreds of pages from the computer server used by her staff
at the Northern Virginia facility. She did not provide any details about the
documents, but said that when committee investigators confronted the C.I.A. they
received a number of answers -- first a denial that the documents had been
removed, then an explanation that they had been removed by contractors working
at the facility, then an explanation that the removal of documents was ordered
by the White House.

When the committee approached the White House, she said, it denied giving such
an order.

Ms. Feinstein's broadside rallied Senate Democrats, but divided Republicans.

Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, said that he supported Ms.
Feinstein ''unequivocally'' and that he was ''disappointed'' in the C.I.A.'s
conduct. When Mr. Reid brought up the speech at a closed-door lunch of Senate
Democrats, Ms. Feinstein received a standing ovation.

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who for years has done battle with
the C.I.A. over the agency's detention and interrogation program, called the
allegations ''very disturbing'' and suggested an independent investigative body
might need to be impaneled to get to the bottom of the dispute.

Most Republicans on the Intelligence Committee, however, either refused to
comment on the chairwoman's charges or said she had no right to air such
grievances in public.

''You have to understand, as a longtime member of both the House and Senate
Intelligence Committees, I personally don't believe anything that goes on in the
Intelligence Committee should be discussed publicly,'' said Senator Richard M.
Burr, Republican of North Carolina.

But such conflicts with the executive branch tend to unite congressional
Republicans and Democrats like little else.

In 2006, when the F.B.I. searched the Capitol Hill office of Representative
William J. Jefferson, Democrat of Louisiana, for evidence of corruption, his
most vocal defender was a Republican, Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, who said the
raid was a violation of the Constitution's protection of congressional speech
and debate.

''The Senate is bigger than any one senator,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy of
Vermont, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, trying to rally lawmakers
behind Ms. Feinstein.

''The members of the Senate must stand up in defense of this institution, the
Constitution and the values upon which this nation was founded,'' he said.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/12/us/cia-accused-of-illegally-searching-computer
s-used-by-senate-committee.html

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Senator Dianne Feinstein (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LO SCALZO/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1)
Senator Dianne Feinstein, the chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee,
accused the C.I.A. of intimidating panel staff. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN
CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 John O. Brennan of the C.I.A. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHIP SOMODEVILLA/GETTY IMAGES)
(A3)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


