                             889 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Alibaba Counts on a Growing Chinese Economy and New Consumers

BYLINE: By FARHAD MANJOO.

Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; STATE OF THE ART; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1269 words


When American tech upstarts float their companies on the stock market, they
often sell investors on a familiar dream -- ''disrupting'' an existing industry.
It doesn't matter if the industry is advertising, software, commerce or some
other sector. The start-up will usually claim that its business is a great
technological leap forward that will greatly lower costs and improve service for
customers and leave rivals unable to respond. Therefore, buy some stock.

Alibaba's I.P.O. filing breaks with that well-worn theme. Instead of promising
to disrupt an existing market, the Chinese e-commerce giant wants to do
something far more straightforward, but potentially far more lucrative -- insert
itself at the center of a new, already expanding market being forged by powerful
economic and cultural forces far beyond the company's control.

That new market is China itself, particularly its ascendant middle class and its
growing appetite for spending rather than saving.

Instead of disruption, Alibaba is betting on existing trends staying more or
less the same: that China will continue to change into the world's largest
consumer gold mine, and Jack Ma, Alibaba's charismatic co-founder and chairman,
will continue to sit at the apex of the consumerist revolution.

Alibaba's long-term goal highlights the difference in scope between Chinese
Internet firms and their American counterparts. You may think of Jeffrey P.
Bezos, Amazon's chief executive, as an ambitious man, but he is really only
betting that in the future, Americans will shift some of the dollars they are
already spending from offline stores into his online store. He isn't betting
that Americans will start spending twice as much on everything as they do now.

That is precisely Mr. Ma's bet. And as investors weigh Alibaba's stock offering,
they will have to consider which approach -- Amazon's disruption or Alibaba's
going along with an existing trend -- is better.

The numbers seem to be on Alibaba's side. ''Our business benefits from the
rising spending power of Chinese consumers,'' the firm says in its filing.

The crux of Alibaba's pitch to investors is that Chinese customers will begin to
act much more like American customers. Today, much of the Chinese population
doesn't spend very much money compared with their counterparts in the West. Only
about a third of China's gross domestic product is made up of consumer spending,
significantly lower than the consumption rate of other countries. By comparison,
about two-thirds of the United States' economy is made up of consumer spending.

Mr. Ma is counting on these habits changing in his favor. Alibaba is betting
that the Chinese will continually increase their spending and that a huge pool
of new money will flood through China's economy.

Every economic metric suggests that is a very good bet. According to a recent
report by McKinsey & Company, China's middle class will continue to grow at a
staggering pace well into the next decade. ''The evolution of the middle class
means that sophisticated and seasoned shoppers -- those able and willing to pay
a premium for quality and to consider discretionary goods and not just basic
necessities -- will soon emerge as the dominant force,'' the report states.

The McKinsey researchers noted that in 2000, just 4 percent of urban Chinese
households earned a middle-class wage. By 2022, the study predicted, more than
75 percent of urban households will have joined the ranks of the middle class,
with income among that group twice as much as it is today. The growth of this
vast new market is occurring across the country and many of these newly wealthy
people are hooked on online shopping.

''You're really seeing consumer behavior change in all kinds of ways in China,''
said Kelland Willis, an analyst who studies global retail trends at the research
firm Forrester.

While the growing middle class has resulted in a growing population that can
afford to shop, Ms. Willis said that many newly wealthy Chinese had been
initially wary of spending money in the new ways that the Internet allowed for.
Alibaba's genius has been in recognizing and constantly adapting to society's
evolving views about shopping. The company has been adept at finding the reasons
that people might be suspicious about spending money, then looking for novel
fixes.

''What you see them doing is trying to understand exactly what the Chinese
consumer wants and then experimenting with technological solutions to address
those problems,'' she said.

That plan has worked phenomenally well so far. As the I.P.O. filing points out,
Alibaba already commands a vast portion of the Chinese e-commerce market. Of the
302 million Internet shoppers in China, 231 million already shop at Alibaba's
properties. More than 76 percent of the total value of all mobile commerce in
China flows through Alibaba.

What is more, offline retail in China is a far less developed part of the
economy than in the United States. This means that unlike American e-commerce
companies, Alibaba isn't fighting against brick-and-mortar stores or even
another online retailer. Instead, it is riding a bigger tide. As wealth grows,
Alibaba is pushing to make shopping of all kinds a safer and more widely
practiced part of Chinese life.

A big example is Alipay, the online payment system that Alibaba introduced in
2004. In the United States, online payment companies like PayPal were meant to
replace older, more costly and slower ways of paying, like personal checks or
money transfers. But in China, online payments weren't really a replacement of
an old way of doing business. For many people just entering the consumptive
middle class, the whole idea of paying large sums in any way, whether offline or
online, has always been risky. Fraud and trickery abounded and buyer protections
weren't an ingrained part of consumerism.

Thus, unlike PayPal, Alibaba didn't just need to come up with a faster or more
efficient way of paying. It needed to find a payment method that would allay
people's fears that paying for goods was a bad idea in the first place.

Its innovation was escrow. When a buyer purchases an item from a seller using
Alipay, the firm holds the buyer's money in an account. Only when the buyer
informs Alipay that she has received her goods does the payment firm release the
money to the seller.

This sounds like a simple, perhaps even obvious, idea. It's hardly a
technological breakthrough. But that's exactly the point. The Chinese market
didn't need an extremely sophisticated way of paying for goods. It simply needed
a way to pay for goods that wasn't rife with fraud. Alipay satisfied that
minimum requirement, adding a badly needed sense of buyer protection over the
consumer market. It has become a juggernaut. According to Alibaba, the payment
site now commands about half the market for electronic commerce in China.

Many of Alibaba's other innovations have followed a similar pattern. To
Americans, Alibaba's breakthroughs may look comically backward compared with the
technological wizardry being peddled by Amazon, Google, Facebook and Apple.
There are no unmanned drones, robotic warehouses, self-driving cars or
software-based assistants.

But as admirable as they may be, these American efforts at disruption are also
far riskier than Alibaba's simple plan to ride a cultural wave. Nobody knows if
self-driving cars will pan out or if we will ever be O.K. with aerial drones
delivering our toothpaste. But the idea of serving a gigantic new consumer
market with a set of tools to make shopping easier and safer? That's not
disruptive. It's obvious. And often, what is obvious wins.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/08/technology/alibaba-bets-on-a-growing-chinese-e
conomy-and-new-consumers.html

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Workers at the headquarters of Alibaba in Hangzhou, China.
Alibaba hopes to tap China's ascendant middle class. (PHOTOGRAPH BY QILAI SHEN
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B8)  DRAWING (DRAWING BY STUART GOLDENBERG)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


