                             887 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 23, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Catholic Roots of Obama's Activism

BYLINE: By JASON HOROWITZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2685 words


CHICAGO -- In a meeting room under Holy Name Cathedral, a rapt group of black
Roman Catholics listened as Barack Obama, a 25-year-old community organizer,
trained them to lobby their fellow delegates to a national congress in
Washington on issues like empowering lay leaders and attracting more believers.

''He so quickly got us,'' said Andrew Lyke, a participant in the meeting who is
now the director of the Chicago Archdiocese's Office for Black Catholics. The
group succeeded in inserting its priorities into the congress's plan for
churches, Mr. Lyke said, and ''Barack Obama was key in helping us do that.''

By the time of that session in the spring of 1987, Mr. Obama -- himself not
Catholic -- was already well known in Chicago's black Catholic circles. He had
arrived two years earlier to fill an organizing position paid for by a church
grant, and had spent his first months here surrounded by Catholic pastors and
congregations. In this often overlooked period of the president's life, he had a
desk in a South Side parish and became steeped in the social justice wing of the
church, which played a powerful role in his political formation.

This Thursday, Mr. Obama will meet with Pope Francis at the Vatican after a
three-decade divergence with the church. By the late 1980s, the Catholic
hierarchy had taken a conservative turn that de-emphasized social engagement and
elevated the culture wars that would eventually cast Mr. Obama as an
abortion-supporting enemy. Mr. Obama, who went on to find his own faith with the
Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr.'s Trinity United Church of Christ, drifted from his
youthful, church-backed activism to become a pragmatic politician and the
president with a terrorist ''kill list.'' The meeting this week is a potential
point of confluence.

A White House accustomed to archbishop antagonists hopes the president will find
a strategic ally and kindred spirit in a pope who preaches a gospel of social
justice and inclusion. Mr. Obama's old friends in the priesthood pray that
Francis will discover a president freed from concerns about re-election and
willing to rededicate himself to the vulnerable.

But the Vatican -- aware that Mr. Obama has far more to gain from the encounter
than the pope does, and wary of being used for American political consumption --
warns that this will hardly be like the 1982 meeting at which President Ronald
Reagan and Pope John Paul II agreed to fight Communism in Eastern Europe.

''We're not in the old days of the great alliance,'' said a senior Vatican
official who was granted anonymity to speak frankly about the mind-set inside
the Holy See. While Mr. Obama's early work with the church is ''not on the radar
screen,'' the official said, his recent arguments with American bishops over
issues of religious freedom are: Catholic leaders have objected to a provision
in the administration's health care law that requires employers to cover
contraception costs, and have sharply questioned the morality of the
administration's use of drones to fight terrorism.

As in many reunions, expectations, and the possibility for disappointment, run
high.

A Fast Learner

In 1967, as the modernizing changes of the Second Vatican Council began to
transform the Catholic world, Ann Dunham, Mr. Obama's mother, took her chubby
6-year-old son occasionally to Mass and enrolled him in a new Catholic
elementary school in Jakarta, Indonesia, called Santo Fransiskus Asisi. At
school, the future president began and ended his days with prayer. At home, his
mother read him the Bible with an anthropologist's eye.

Pious he was not. ''When it came time to pray, I would pretend to close my eyes,
then peek around the room,'' Mr. Obama wrote in his memoir ''Dreams From My
Father.'' ''Nothing happened. No angels descended. Just a parched old nun and 30
brown children, muttering words.''

In 1969, Mr. Obama transferred to a more exclusive, state-run school with a
mosque, but a development in the United States would have a greater impact on
his future career. American Catholic bishops responded to the call of the Second
Vatican Council to focus on the poor by creating what is now known as the
Catholic Campaign for Human Development, an antipoverty and social justice
program that became one of the country's most influential supporters of
grass-roots groups.

By the early 1980s, when Mr. Obama was an undergraduate at Columbia University,
the campaign was financing a project to help neighborhoods after the collapse of
the steel mills near Chicago. The program's leaders, eager to expand beyond
Catholic parishes to the black Protestant churches where more of the affected
community worshiped, sought an African-American for the task. In 1985, they
found one in Mr. Obama, a fledgling community organizer in New York who answered
a want ad for a job with the Developing Communities Project. The faith-based
program aimed to unify South Side residents against unsafe streets, poor living
conditions and political neglect. Mr. Obama's salary was less than $10,000 a
year.

The future president arrived in Chicago with little knowledge of Catholicism
other than the Graham Greene novels and ''Confessions'' of St. Augustine he had
read during a period of spiritual exploration at Columbia. But he fit seamlessly
into a 1980s Catholic cityscape forged by the spirit of Vatican II, the
influence of liberation theology and the progressivism of Cardinal Joseph L.
Bernardin, the archbishop of Chicago, who called for a ''consistent ethic of
life'' that wove life and social justice into a ''seamless garment.''

On one of his first days on the job, Mr. Obama heard Cardinal Bernardin speak at
an economic development meeting. He felt like a Catholic novice there, he wrote
in his memoir, and later decided ''not to ask what a catechism was.'' But he was
a quick study.

''He had to do a power analysis of each Catholic church,'' said one of his
mentors at the time, Gregory Galluzzo, a former Jesuit priest and disciple of
the organizer Saul Alinsky. Mr. Obama, Mr. Galluzzo said, soon understood the
chain of command and who had influence in individual parishes.

Mr. Obama had a small office with two cloudy glass-block windows on the ground
floor of Holy Rosary, a handsome red brick parish on the South Side, where he
would pop down the hall to the office of the Rev. William Stenzel, raise a
phantom cigarette to his lips and ask, ''Want to go out for lunch?'' Besides
sneaking smoke breaks with the priest on the roof, Mr. Obama listened to him
during Mass. ''He was on an exposure curve to organized religion,'' Father
Stenzel said.

The future president's education included evangelizing. Mr. Obama often plotted
strategy with the recent Catholic convert who had hired him, Gerald Kellman,
about how to bring people into the program and closer to the church. The effort
to fill the pews ''was what Bernardin really bought into,'' Mr. Kellman said.

To expand congregations as well as the reach of his organizing program, Mr.
Obama went to Holy Ghost Catholic Church in South Holland, Ill., to ask Wilton
D. Gregory, an African-American bishop and a rising star in the hierarchy, for a
grant for operating costs. Archbishop Gregory, who now leads the Archdiocese of
Atlanta, recalled Mr. Obama as a persuasive man who ''wanted to engage the
people of the neighborhood.'' He recommended that Cardinal Bernardin release the
funds.

As the months went on, Mr. Obama became a familiar face in South Side black
parishes. At Holy Angels Church, considered a center of black Catholic life, he
talked to the pastor and the pastor's adopted son about finding families willing
to adopt troubled children. At Our Lady of the Gardens, he attended peace and
black history Masses and conferred with the Rev. Dominic Carmon on programs to
battle unemployment and violence. At the neo-Gothic St. Sabina, he struck up a
friendship with the Rev. Michael L. Pfleger, the firebrand white pastor of one
of the city's largest black parishes. The two would huddle in a back room and
commiserate about the liquor stores and payday loan businesses in the
neighborhood.

But even as Mr. Obama effectively proselytized for the church and its role in
improving the community, and even as he opened meetings in the backs of churches
with the Lord's Prayer and showed a comfort with faith that put the people he
hoped to organize at ease, Catholic doctrine did not tempt him. He was not
baptized Catholic, priests said. But it was amid the trappings of Catholicism,
according to his fellow organizers, that the future president began to express a
spiritual thirst.

As Mr. Obama helped expand the program from Catholic parishes to megachurches
and Protestant congregations, he felt that need slaked by the prevailing black
liberation theology, inspired by the civil rights movement and preached by
African-American ministers like Mr. Wright of Trinity. The notion that Jesus
delivered salvation to communities that expressed faith through good deeds
suited Mr. Obama's instincts -- and perhaps his interests.

For an ambitious black politician, Mr. Galluzzo said, ''it was not politically
advantageous to be in a Catholic church.''

Mr. Obama nevertheless maintained his Catholic connections, so much so that when
he turned up in the basement of the Holy Name complex in 1987, ''there was a
need to clarify'' that he was not a member of the flock, said the Rev. David
Jones, who was at the meeting. And some members still tried to draw him in, in
more ways than one.

''He was a man of integrity, very much to my disappointment,'' joked Cynthia
Norris, then the director of the Chicago Archdiocese's black Catholics office,
who found the young Mr. Obama appealing. The future president, who was dating
another woman, did turn to Ms. Norris for a Harvard Law School recommendation,
and kept in touch during a trip to Europe in 1988.

''I wander around Paris, the most beautiful, alluring, maddening city I've ever
seen; one is tempted to chuck the whole organizing/political business and be a
painter'' on the banks of the Seine, Mr. Obama scribbled to Ms. Norris, along
with ''Love, Barack,'' on one side of a postcard. On the other was a picture of
the Cathedral of Notre-Dame.

A Partnership Falters

Mr. Obama entered Harvard in 1988, the same year he was baptized at Trinity, the
power church of Chicago's black professional class. Trinity served Mr. Obama
well through his dizzying political ascent, which coincided with a period in
which black Catholic churches in Chicago closed and the hierarchy shifted away
from the progressive social engagement that had characterized Mr. Obama's early
years here.

In 1997, the year Mr. Obama was sworn in as an Illinois state senator, Cardinal
Francis George succeeded Cardinal Bernardin as archbishop of Chicago. One of the
church's leading conservative intellectuals, called ''Francis the Corrector'' by
local liberal priests, Cardinal George was emblematic of the bishops installed
by John Paul II and his successor, Benedict XVI. Some of them looked with
skepticism at the social justice wing that had financed Mr. Obama's organizing
efforts, and later sought to block his election as president by suggesting that
Catholics could not in good conscience vote for a candidate who supported
abortion rights.

Mr. Obama still won the Catholic vote in 2008. In his campaign, he had held out
the goal of finding common ground between supporters and opponents of abortion
rights, chiefly by reducing unintended pregnancies and increasing adoptions.
Cardinal George quickly dashed those hopes. ''The common good can never be
adequately incarnated in any society when those waiting to be born can be
legally killed at choice,'' he said in November 2008 in his opening address as
president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops.

Mr. Obama, seeking to avoid confrontation with the church, invited Cardinal
George to the White House in March 2009; said at a news conference that April
that abortion rights were ''not my highest legislative priority''; and told
graduates at the University of Notre Dame in May, after some initial boos from
the crowd, that Cardinal Bernardin had touched ''my heart and mind.'' He
recalled his years in Chicago's Catholic parishes and said that after branching
out to work with other Christian denominations, ''I found myself drawn not just
to the work with the church; I was drawn to be in the church.''

Two months later, speaking to reporters from Catholic publications, he said
again that the Campaign for Human Development and Cardinal Bernardin had
inspired him. ''I think that there have been times over the last decade or two
where that more holistic tradition feels like it's gotten buried under the
abortion debate,'' he said.

Church leaders were unimpressed. A week after his session with Catholic
reporters, Mr. Obama met with Benedict, who pointedly offered him a Vatican
document on bioethics that condemned abortion and stem cell research. The
relationship deteriorated further during Mr. Obama's push for health care
reform, specifically the provision on contraception, which will be argued before
the Supreme Court on Tuesday.

Still, Mr. Obama had not lost all his friends in the church. As the president's
relations with Catholic leaders reached their nadir, Father Stenzel, Mr. Obama's
old smoke-break friend, visited the White House. As they walked into the Oval
Office, Mr. Obama joked to his staff that the priest had given him his first
office in Chicago. Father Stenzel reminded him that his old surroundings were
far humbler: ''The office I gave you had two rows of glass-block windows!''

Pope Francis' Impression

Mr. Obama's parish days seemed far behind him when he won re-election in 2012
with a slimmer margin of Catholic votes. Not only did Catholic conservatives
view him as a secularist forcing them to pay for contraceptives, but some of his
old allies in the church's left wing criticized his use of drones and lack of
emphasis on the poor.

But the election of Pope Francis last March seemed to breathe new life into the
Catholic Church and, potentially, into the relationship between Mr. Obama and
the institution that gave him his start. While far from an ideological
progressive, Francis does sometimes appear cloaked in Cardinal Bernardin's
''seamless garment.'' His de-emphasis of issues like abortion and same-sex
marriage and his championing of the poor and vulnerable -- articulated in his
mission statement, ''The Joy of the Gospel'' -- have impressed a second-term
president who argues that income inequality undermines human dignity.

''Whether you call that the 'seamless garment' or 'the joy of the Gospel' or
what, I've said to the president I consider that a pretty Catholic way of
looking at the world,'' said Denis McDonough, the White House chief of staff,
who is Roman Catholic. Mr. McDonough added that the
community-organizer-turned-president had expressed admiration to him about ''how
important it is for the Holy Father to be so in the community.''

Last month, Catholic activists made their case for social justice on Capitol
Hill. Afterward, relaxing over beers and a buffet in the Russell Senate Office
Building, they discussed whether Cardinal George, who is retiring as archbishop
of Chicago, would be replaced by Archbishop Gregory, who helped secure Mr.
Obama's church grant application in the 1980s. Among them was Mr. Lyke, the man
who had received coaching from Mr. Obama years earlier in the basement of Holy
Name Cathedral. He characterized Francis and Mr. Obama as a match made in
heaven.

Mr. Lyke's view is not universal. Vatican officials have made clear Mr. Obama
will not get special treatment, and leaders of the Catholic Campaign for Human
Development, also gathered in the Russell Building, saw the coming papal
audience as a chance for Mr. Obama to return to the church's social justice
values, not the other way around.

Dylan Corbett, one of the Campaign for Human Development leaders, said the
president was ''welcome to the conversation'' that the pope was driving about
income inequality and poverty. He added with a grin, ''We're happy to have him
back, actually.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/23/us/the-catholic-roots-of-obamas-activism.html

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: When Barack Obama arrived in Chicago in 1985, he was given a
small office in what was then Holy Rosary Church and is now New Day Ministries,
above and left. He would sneak smoking breaks on the roof with the Rev. William
Stenzel, far left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOE WRINN/HARVARD UNIVERSITY, VIA A.P.
TAYLOR GLASCOCK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Mr. Obama sent a postcard to Cynthia Norris when he visited Paris in the summer
of 1988. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GABRIELLA DEMCZUK THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Cardinal Joseph L. Bernardin, left,  and Cardinal Francis George. (A18)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


