                             882 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Search for a Niche, and You Might Find a Crowd

BYLINE: By JENNA WORTHAM

SECTION: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; BITS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1024 words


Entrepreneurs have a term for outsized problems they want to tackle or
bigger-than-life bets they want to make: ''moon shots.'' Examples include
Google's driverless cars and Amazon's delivery-by-drone. Tristan Walker decided
that his moon shot would be revolutionizing the skin-care and beauty-product
industry for African-Americans.

To Mr. Walker, who helped build the social media darling Foursquare and held the
coveted position of entrepreneur-in-residence at Andreessen Horowitz, the
Silicon Valley venture capital firm, it seemed a sure bet. His time at
Andreessen Horowitz had given him insight into what makes a good company and
what investors are likely to support. In addition, this new business, Walker &
Company, would address a problem that he and his friends encounter.

''The demographic is starved for a company that cares about it,'' he said,
noting that while blacks tend to be among the early adopters and consumers of
social technologies, it is rare for companies to acknowledge that or to market
to them directly.

Mr. Walker, like a handful of other entrepreneurs, sees a new growth trend, one
that recognizes the value -- and opportunity -- in appealing to audiences that
Silicon Valley often overlooks.

''There is opportunity in the niche,'' he said. ''Some of the most successful
businesses started there and broadened out.''

Given his niche market, however, he did not have an easy time convincing
investors. Although he eventually raised $2.4 million in venture financing, his
idea was first met with a ''hell of a lot of skepticism,'' which he welcomed as
a challenge.

''The opportunity is pretty profound,'' he said.

Other entrepreneurs have found themselves targeting unlikely audiences, although
not necessarily by design. When Aarthi Ramamurthy began working on a service
that lets people try high-end gadgetry, like camera equipment, before buying it,
she expected to attract the tech set.

''I thought it would be Google and Facebook employees with disposable income,''
she said. But as it turns out, she added, it's the ''middle of the country that
is very interested'' in the service.

Ms. Ramamurthy's company, Lumoid, is based in San Francisco, but much of the
early adoption of its business occurred in states like Texas and Idaho. Thanks
in part to the proliferation of smartphones, social media and e-commerce, and to
the general Internet proficiency that is helping to change the definition of an
early adopter, she has found that her service enjoys wider appeal than she had
expected.

Similarly, Katrina Lake, chief executive and founder of Stitch Fix, an online
styling company that sends customers boxes of clothing tailored just for them,
said her service was quickly adopted by people in New York and San Francisco who
wanted help finding cool clothes. But the service was received almost as well by
women in Wyoming, Alabama and Minnesota -- so much so that the company is
considering opening a warehouse closer to those states to reduce shipping costs.

Ms. Lake said she had expected her market to be busy women in their 20s and 30s
who have no time to shop but want nice clothes for brunches and engagement
parties. ''But it turns out that concept really resonated with moms and people
who were busy with their kids and families,'' she said.

Initially, the investors she approached expressed doubts about the need for
another e-commerce delivery product and questioned the need for a mail-order
stylist. But the unexpected traction with a broader audience changed the
conversation.

''The fact that we were so mom-friendly helped quell their fears,'' she said.

For now, only a slice of Silicon Valley is aware of the overlooked audiences out
there. But Kartik Hosanagar, a professor of online commerce at the Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania, said that even the smallest companies
would soon have to start paying attention to so-called unconventional markets.

''There are still two Silicon Valleys,'' Mr. Hosanagar said. ''Young
entrepreneurs in San Francisco, working at a tech firm, surrounded by the tech 1
percent, solving problems for the 1 percent. And there are companies that manage
to break through that and become relevant. The Googles, Twitters and Facebooks
of the world.''

The companies that break out, he said, are successful because they are adept at
appealing to all users. But even those tech giants must think ever more broadly
if they are to have continued success and growth. Signs suggest that these
companies are trying to extend their reach and understand the complexity and
diversity of their users and potential users.

In November, The Wall Street Journal reported that Twitter had hired a
multicultural strategist to help advertisers target black, Hispanic and
Asian-American users. Google has Project Loon, which aims to ''use a global
network of high-altitude balloons to connect people in rural and remote areas
who have no Internet access at all.'' And Facebook has worked to make its
service more accessible on cellphones; its executives have expressed interest in
penetrating markets in Africa, South America and Asia.

Andre Charoo, the former head of business development at Cinemagram, a start-up
that lets people create and share short videos, said the service first took off
among black Twitter users last year because popular rappers and celebrities were
among the early adopters.

''It was a good sign that adoption would grow and we would eventually cross the
chasm,'' Mr. Charoo said. ''Another great sign was it seemed like every teenager
was using Cinemagram.''

But as the months passed, the techie crowd did not follow. In addition, the
service struggled to keep up technologically, which slowed its growth. Since
then, the service has been outpaced by the rival services Vine and Instagram
Video.

Mr. Charoo, who is now working at a start-up called Hired, says he thinks it is
crucial for companies to ''be applicable to the early-adopter crowd as well as
solve some problem for the average person in Middle America.''

''Starting in any of those communities is fine,'' he added, but ''the ones that
actually make it somehow appeal to both audiences eventually.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/technology/search-for-a-market-niche-and-you-m
ight-find-a-crowd.html

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Tristan Walker, who wants to  revolutionize the skin-care and
beauty-product industry for African-  Americans, sees value  and opportunity in
appealing to  an audience that Silicon Valley  often overlooks. His products
include the Bevel line, top right. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHESTER HIGGINS JR./THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


