                             880 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Modern Civility, Retail Division

BYLINE: By HENRY ALFORD.

HENRY ALFORD is the author of ''Would It Kill You to Stop Doing That? A Modern
Guide to Manners.'' Circa Now appears monthly.

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Style Desk; CIRCA NOW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1202 words


Retail is not without its dark alleys. As with those other public areas prone to
a high incidence of bad manners (airplanes and restaurants), stores can be
breeding grounds for the impulsive and the exigent. Enter the customer who
greets unexpected delays with donkeylike braying. Enter the salespeople who
clump idly in lush profusion but who then atomize upon approach.

As for the sometimes complicated relationship struck up between customer and
sales associate, Emily Post put the onus on the former party.

''Is the customer always right? It would not seem likely,'' she wrote in her
1922 book, ''Etiquette.'' ''Unfailing patience and good temper are qualities
exacted of every saleswoman, whereas there is nothing to restrain the ill humor
or unreasonableness of a customer except her own good breeding.''

But Ms. Post might have changed her tune had she met today's answer to her
proverbial saleswoman.

A few years back, a friend of mine went clothes shopping at an upscale New York
City department store with his favorite gal pal. After trying on a pair of pants
and inspecting them in a mirror to his and his friend's satisfaction, he
sauntered back to the dressing room. Whereupon the English salesman who had been
assisting the duo whispered to the gal pal, ''A bit tight across the bum, don't
you think?''

Regardless of the origins of such lapses of decorum -- be they generated by
store employee or by customer -- they occur with enough frequency as to require
parsing. Indeed, it's even possible to imagine that the customer-salesperson
relationship will, with time, grow more fraught, given recent threats to human
merchants: Amazon announced in December that it hoped one day to use drones to
deliver packages, and last week gained a patent for what it calls ''anticipatory
shopping.'' To speed delivery, the company will read a customer's browsing
history and send an item to a shipping hub before the customer has even bought
it.

In an effort to reduce confusion, I compiled what I consider the five most
common manners-related conundrums of retail and posed them, on separate
occasions, to four experts. They were a boutique owner (Alison Houtte of Hooti
Couture, a vintage store in Brooklyn), an environmental psychologist who
specializes in retail (Paco Underhill, author of ''Why We Buy: The Science of
Shopping''), a fashion designer (Peter Som) and an avid shopper (10-year-old
Lola Owett, a student at Friends Seminary in Manhattan whose favorite store is
Century 21). May their comments, some of which have been condensed, serve as
balm.

Is it O.K. for a customer to talk on his cellphone while at the cash register?

Miss Owett: No. The other people in line will get angry.

Ms. Houtte: If your wallet's open and we're making a deal, honey, you talk to
whoever you want to. You're not my new B.F.F. But if you're not buying, then I'm
going to walk to my stereo and pump it up.

Mr. Underhill: It relates partly to age: The older we are, the more compulsion
we have to answer the phone when it rings. If you're 50-plus, there's generally
a certain urgency to it because in the past there were very few calls that
weren't personal.

Mr. Som: As long as it's incredibly loud so everyone in the store can hear your
conversation. For maximum impact, make sure the conversation is wildly personal.
Maybe cry.

How many times can you send a salesperson back for a different size or garment?

Miss Owett: It depends on the day. If it's a very busy day, it should be five to
10 times. If it's a slow day, it could be 25 to 30 times. I'll usually leave the
dressing room and go look for the right size by myself, unless it's shoes. With
shoes, usually you try on four pairs and then it works out.

Ms. Houtte: I'm not here to look pretty. If you want to send me back 100 or 15
times, that's O.K. But if I feel like you're wasting my time, I'll say, ''I've
got to call my accountant.'' We had a customer in here for two or three hours
once without a sale. So I told her, ''We have a little mouse situation in the
dressing room.'' She ran out of here! I'm very proud of myself for that idea. I
mean, we're not a lost girls home. We're not a women's shelter.

What's the best way to get a harried salesperson's attention?

Mr. Underhill: One thing is to understand the nature of the environment that
you're coming into and make choices accordingly. If you walk in on a busy
Saturday, stomping your feet is not a good idea. Most salespeople are trained to
acknowledge you first rather than say hello. They'll look you in the eye or wave
hello. If someone offers you help in the first minute of your standing in front
of a cosmetics display, you're less likely to make a purchase.

Miss Owett: If the salesperson is working with someone else, it's rude to
interrupt them. You should find a salesperson who's walking around the store or
who's working at a rack.

Mr. Som: When ''Hi, I have a question'' doesn't work, just flail your arms and
act insane. This goes under the premise that any attention is good attention.

How should a customer respond when a salesperson calls him ''Honey'' or
''Dear''?

Mr. Underhill: I think it's completely inappropriate. I remember exploding when
someone called me ''son'' once when I was in the South. If you're addressed in a
way that you think is inappropriate, I think you should reproach them. I'll
often say, ''My name isn't Dear.'' Or I'll say, ''I'm not the heir to the John
Deere fortune.''

Miss Owett: When someone calls me that, it's O.K. because I'm a kid. It would be
a little weird, though, if you were at the cash register and as you were walking
away, heard ''Bye, dear.'' If the ''Honey'' or ''Dear'' is in the conversation,
it's O.K., but if it's ''Hello, Dear'' or ''Hello, Sweetie,'' that's a little
weird. Mostly salespeople call me Honey. It's all right since I'm small.

Ms. Houtte: It's better than saying, ''When's the baby coming?'' I usually use
Honey or Dear if I'm a little pissed off. Like if the item is $25 and you offer
me $5, I'll say, ''Honey, you got the wrong shop.'' But then, I'm in Brooklyn.
I'm on Flatbush.

Mr. Som: I would try responding with Puddin'.

If you return someone's gift because you didn't like it, should you tell that
person a white lie when she asks about it, or should you be honest so that she
won't buy you that kind of thing again?

Ms. Houtte: My friends tell me, ''We don't buy you clothing anymore because we
know you'll just put it in the store and try to sell it.'' They'll pick
something off the rack and say, ''Didn't I give you this in the '80s?'' I think
honesty is the best policy here. You'll save your friend time and money. It
might hurt a little, but that pain is growth. That's what I'm learning from my
therapist.

Miss Owett: I wouldn't go up to their face and say, ''I didn't like it.'' I'd
say, ''I brought it back and I exchanged it for a gift card.'' It's rude if you
exchange it for money. If they ask, you should tell them what the problem was:
''I couldn't find an occasion I'd wear it to.'' Not lying. Tell them the real
deal but be mellow about it. Not ''I didn't like it,'' but more ''I don't really
look good in this color.'' Tell them why without getting into the larger
problem. Because that could lead to a big fight.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/fashion/shopping-etiquette-retail-advice.html

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY MATT HUYNH)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


