                             883 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Takes Training Role in Africa as Threats Grow and Budgets Shrink

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1433 words


DIFFA, Niger -- Across Africa, affiliates of Al Qaeda and other Islamist
militants are proving resilient and in some cases expanding their influence,
from Nigeria to Libya to Somalia, Western and African counterterrorism officials
say.

So it is not surprising that the authorities in this poor West African desert
nation, which has emerged as a staunch ally of France and the United States in
the fight against Islamist militancy, are nervously watching Boko Haram, a sect
in neighboring Nigeria suspected of killing well over 400 civilians in the last
five weeks alone, including children watching a soccer match over the weekend.

The group's fighters have made a habit of quietly slipping across the border
into Niger to rest, rearm and refit, officials say -- a pipeline the nation is
eager to shut down with the Pentagon's help. But instead of launching American
airstrikes or commando raids on militants, the latest joint mission between the
nations involves something else entirely: American boxes of donated vitamins,
prenatal medicines and mosquito netting to combat malaria.

With more than a decade of land wars in Iraq and Afghanistan drawing to an end,
the American military's involvement in Niger illustrates how the Pentagon is
trying to juggle two competing missions in Africa: contain the spread of
Islamist militancy without having to pour a lot of soldiers or money into the
region.

Threats continue on the continent, but budgets are tightening at home, and the
appetite to send large American armies to foreign conflicts is small. So, the
Obama administration is focusing on training and advising African troops to deal
with their own security threats, or providing help to European allies that have
historical ties and forces in the region.

American officials and their partners call it enabling, a way of shifting from
being a major combatant in war zones to a supporting role to local and other
international forces. In Central African Republic, American transport planes
recently ferried 1,700 peacekeepers from Burundi and Rwanda to the strife-torn
nation, but refrained from putting American boots on the ground. The United
States is flying unarmed reconnaissance drones from a base here in Niger to
support French and African troops in Mali, but conspicuously stayed out of the
war there, even after the conflict helped spur a terrorist attack in Algeria in
which Americans were taken hostage.

Across the continent this year, soldiers from a 3,500-member brigade in the
Army's storied First Infantry Division are conducting more than 100 missions,
ranging from a two-man sniper team in Burundi to humanitarian exercises in South
Africa.

As part of a three-week exercise, Army Green Berets from Fort Carson, Colo., and
instructors from other Western countries have trained African troops in Niger to
conduct combat patrols and to foil terrorist ambushes. But officials say they
can also make headway in relatively simple, nonconfrontational ways, like the
Pentagon's help in organizing a medical clinic during the exercise for nearly
2,000 people in a nearby village, in the hope of encouraging intelligence
sharing between the military of Niger and the local population.

''If you can develop a trusting relationship with people, you can gather any
information you need,'' Fougou Malam Saley, an American-trained sergeant in
Niger's army, said before the medical event and a meeting with 15 community
leaders visiting from areas where Boko Haram uses subtle intimidation.

American officials point out that they will intervene directly when vital
interests are at stake. In South Sudan, American soldiers and Marines positioned
in the region after the attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi, Libya,
in 2012, rushed to help evacuate dozens of Americans from the embassy there last
December. Commando raids last year in Libya (successful) and Somalia (failed)
show the United States will not farm out its top counterterrorism missions,
officials say.

But the weaknesses of the Pentagon's strategy to outsource its security needs in
stretches of Africa are also on display in Niger, where the government of
President Mahamadou Issoufou is struggling to stem a flow of extremists across
the country's lightly defended borders with Mali, Nigeria and Libya. Even with
Western aid, Niger's top officials say the challenge is daunting.

''Niger is suffering the collateral fallout of the Libyan and Malian crises,''
Niger's foreign minister, Mohamed Bazoum, told a security conference in Niger
last month.

In the past two years, the United States has spent $33 million to build Niger's
counterterrorism abilities, providing equipment such as radios, water and fuel
trucks, spare parts, helmets, body armor, uniforms and GPS devices.

Here in this remote southeastern city, Niger's security forces have stepped up
patrols and created a new intelligence unit to ferret out infiltrators.

Just across the border in Nigeria, there has been a recent surge of attacks by
Boko Haram, which the State Department last November branded a terrorist group
with links to Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. ''A new generation of Boko Haram
militants is displaying a greater appetite for violence,'' said a report issued
last month by the United Nations office that monitors sanctions on Al Qaeda and
the Taliban.

American officials are putting the finishing touches on a plan for United States
Army instructors to help train an 850-member battalion of rangers as part of
Nigeria's new special forces command.

Some American lawmakers say the administration's level of involvement makes
sense, but argue that direct American military engagement may have to increase
if threats in the region rise. ''It's a balancing act,'' said Representative
Frank A. LoBiondo, a New Jersey Republican on the Intelligence Committee who
specializes in Africa and visited Niger and Nigeria in January. ''Many of these
countries consider the U.S. a partner and strong ally, but they have serious
concerns about what our footprint looks like.''

The American strategy in Africa also hinges on European partners. In January,
France began to reorganize its 3,000 troops in the Sahel region -- a vast area
on the southern flank of the Sahara that stretches from Senegal to Chad -- to
carry out counterterrorism operations more effectively, officials said. France
will concentrate its air power in Chad, its new reconnaissance drones in Niger,
its special operations troops in Burkina Faso and its logistics hub in Ivory
Coast.

The United States has provided intelligence, as well as refueling and transport
planes, to France, which intends to keep about 1,000 soldiers in Mali to conduct
counterterrorism missions.

''Leveraging and partnering with the French is a way to go,'' James R. Clapper
Jr., the director of national intelligence, told Congress last month. ''They
have insight and understanding and, importantly, a willingness to use the forces
they have there now.''

Against this backdrop, the Pentagon's Africa Command is running an annual
exercise conducted since 2005 called Flintlock. This year, about 600 African
troops and 500 Western trainers and support personnel, including about 300
Americans, participated here and in two cities in central Niger, Agadez and
Tahoua.

In temperatures often soaring above 100 degrees, African troops in groups of up
to 40 teamed up with advisers from the United States or European allies like
Italy, France, Britain and Norway. They practiced marksmanship, patrolling harsh
desert terrain and conducting checkpoints against suspicious vehicles.

African militaries that just a few years ago barely cooperated are now testing
out new teamwork. ''We're getting a lot of experience and most important, we're
getting to know each other and operate together,'' said Capt. Oumar Enock, a
ranking officer of three dozen soldiers from Chad.

The daily training has also revealed barriers that extremists could exploit.

Simple communications are often challenging. A Norwegian trainer's explanation
of patrolling tactics in English had to be translated into French and then again
by another interpreter into Hausa, a language spoken by many of Niger's troops.
Any questions started the time-consuming linguistic chain in reverse.

In his office near the exercise, Col. Mounkaila Sofiani, the regional commander
of Niger's forces here, who has trained in Morocco and Senegal, and at Fort
Benning, Ga., acknowledged the threat from Boko Haram, but insisted his military
did not need a permanent American troop presence.

''If our troops are well trained,'' he said, ''we can handle these situations
ourselves.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/world/africa/us-takes-training-role-in-africa-
as-threats-grow-and-budgets-shrink.html

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Senegalese commandos approach the village of Marke, Niger, as
part of American-supervised training exercises for the forces of several African
nations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER TINTI) MAPS: Niger's government is struggling to
stem a flow of extremists  across the country's long borders with Mali, Nigeria
and Libya.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


