                             898 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 18, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Military Invades Gaza, With Sights Set on Hamas Operations

BYLINE: By JODI RUDOREN and ANNE BARNARD; Jodi Rudoren reported from Jerusalem,
and Anne Barnard from Gaza. Reporting was contributed by Isabel Kershner, Gabby
Sobelman and Irit Pazner Garshowitz from Jerusalem, and Fares Akram from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1668 words


JERUSALEM -- Israeli tanks rolled into the northern Gaza Strip on Thursday night
and naval gunboats pounded targets in the south as Israel began a ground
invasion after 10 days of aerial bombardment failed to stop Palestinian
militants from showering Israeli cities with rockets.

Israeli leaders said the incursion was a limited one focused on tunnels into its
territory like the one used for a predawn attack Thursday that was thwarted.
They said it was not intended to topple Hamas, the militant Islamist movement,
from its longtime rule of Gaza.

As rockets continued to rain down on Israeli cities, a military spokesman said
the mission's expansion was ''not time bound'' and was aimed to ensure Hamas
operatives were ''pursued, paralyzed and threatened'' as it targeted ''terrorist
infrastructure'' in the north, south and east of Gaza ''in parallel.''

As midnight approached Thursday, residents of some sparsely populated farmland
in northern Gaza were cowering in their homes, afraid to answer mobile phones or
peek out windows. Some sent text messages reporting that they could hear tank
shelling, heavy artillery, and F-16s dropping bombs. Moussa al-Ghoul, 63, who
lives northwest of Beit Lahiya, said his neighborhood had turned into ''a war
zone'' with tanks surrounding his home, having destroyed those of two of his
sons. He said shells were landing ''everywhere.''

Gaza news outlets reported that electricity had been cut to 80 percent of the
coastal territory after cables bringing power from Israel were damaged.

After the early-morning tunnel episode, the day settled into an extended calm as
both sides observed a United Nations request for a five-hour humanitarian pause
in the fighting. But by 3 p.m., the violence roared back as the Palestinian
death toll neared 250 and more than 120 rockets rained on cities throughout
southern and central Israel all afternoon and evening.

''We will strike Hamas and we are determined to restore peace to the state of
Israel,'' the military spokesman, Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, told reporters in a
conference call. ''It will progress according to the situation assessment and
according to our crafted and designed plan of action to enable us to carry out
this mission.''

Israel began to call up 18,000 reservists, adding to 50,000 already mobilized in
recent days; Colonel Lerner said the ground forces would include infantry and
artillery units, armored and engineer corps, supported by Israel's ''vast
intelligence capabilities,'' air force and navy.

Fawzi Barhoum, a spokesman for Hamas, called the invasion ''a dangerous step.''

''The occupation will pay its price expensively,'' he said in a statement,
referring to Israel, ''and Hamas is ready for confrontation.''

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel did not make a public statement
Thursday night, but several of his ministers said on television that a unanimous
cabinet had authorized Mr. Netanyahu and the defense minister a few days ago to
send in ground troops when they deemed necessary.

''With a heavy heart we embarked on this operation, in order to destroy the
tunnels, as just this morning we have seen their deadly potential,'' said
Naftali Bennett, the economy minister and leader of the right-wing Jewish Home
party. ''Difficult days are ahead of us,'' he added. ''We are also operating
against the rockets and all of the existing threats, but the No. 1 target is the
tunnels.''

Israel did not send ground troops into Gaza during eight days of cross border
violence in 2012. It was condemned internationally for an intense three-week
air-and-ground campaign in 2008-9, when 1,400 Palestinians were killed along
with 13 Israelis in fierce street fighting. Israel originally seized the
territory in the 1967 war and evacuated its settlers and soldiers in 2005, but
maintained restrictions on imports, exports and travel for the Palestinians left
behind.

The military operation started about 10 p.m., hours after Israel bombed a
rehabilitation hospital and another airstrike killed four children playing on a
Gaza City rooftop -- an echo of the previous day's bombing that left four young
children, all cousins, dead on a beach.

At the Al-Wafa Rehabilitation Hospital in Gaza City, most but not all of the 17
patients and 25 doctors and nurses were evacuated before the electricity was cut
and heavy bombardments nearly destroyed the building, doctors said.

''We evacuated them under fire,'' said Dr. Ali Abu Ryala, a hospital spokesman.
''Nurses and doctors had to carry the patients on their backs, some of them
falling off the stairway. There is an unprecedented state of panic in the
hospital.''

Along the Gaza City seafront, as tanks entered the north, there was a
near-constant staccato of gunboats firing in bursts of five blasts each, sending
flashes above the dark water. They were shelling a target south of Gaza's port,
the red lights of their barrels visible from shore, the impact of their
artillery echoing a second later.

Earlier, warplanes whooshed over the city as they have for more than a week, and
the high-pitched hum of drones could be heard over the call to prayer from
mosques to end the daily fast during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.

''Communications with Gaza have become problematic'' since the ground invasion,
said a statement from Christopher Gunness of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency, which provides health care, education, and other services for more than
half of Gaza's 1.7 million residents who are classified as Palestinian refugees.
The agency is currently sheltering thousands who evacuated their homes. ''We
urgently appeal for restraint so that civilians who have suffered enough in this
appalling conflict do not suffer further,'' Mr. Gunness said.

Brig. Gen. Moti Almoz, chief spokesman of Israel's military, said on television,
''I will now, uncharacteristically, ask the residents of Gaza to move away from
the areas our forces are operating in -- they are operating with extreme
force.''

The United Nations estimates that about three-quarters of those killed so far
were civilians, not militants, and about 50 of those were children. Palestinian
health officials said at least 17 children died in airstrikes on Wednesday and
Thursday, raising sharp new questions about civilian deaths.

Relatives collapsed in grief around sunset at Shifa Hospital, where the four
children who had been killed on the rooftop -- twin brothers Jihad and Wissam
Shuheiber, 8; their cousin Afnan, 10; and a friend, Yassin Al-Himidi, 4 -- were
laid on a single table in the morgue, their bodies deceptively intact. One of
the boys wore only his underpants, decorated with superheroes.

The military declined to offer an explanation for the strike on the rooftop. On
Wednesday, after an earlier Israeli strike killed four children on the beach,
the military said it aimed to kill Hamas militants and called the civilian
deaths a ''tragic outcome,'' but did not provide details of why it hit a simple
shack on the beach and fired again as the children fled. Israeli officials say
that they take precautions to avoid hitting civilians but that Hamas makes it
hard by firing rockets from residential areas and discouraging residents from
evacuating their homes.

''We don't need statements of regret from Israel,'' Peter Bouckaert of Human
Rights Watch said in a Twitter message. ''We need investigation and an end to
illegal targeting.''

It had been a roller-coaster day, starting with Israel's early-morning report
that it had foiled the attack through the tunnel at about 4:30 a.m. by striking
from the air at 13 Palestinians who emerged from it and tried to infiltrate a
kibbutz, the first time that had happened in the current conflagration. Colonel
Lerner said later that the incursion ''illustrates the clear and immediate
threat we have from the Gaza Strip,'' and noted that Israel had uncovered four
similar tunnels into its territory over the last 18 months.

The humanitarian pause urged by the United Nations started at 10 a.m., and Gaza
residents filled the streets, shopping for food and toys and crowding cash
machines open for the first time since the operation began. But the lull was
pierced around noon by a brief flurry of mortars fired from Gaza, with rockets
fired toward Israel precisely at 3 p.m., the designated endpoint of the lull.
The strikes continued through the afternoon and evening.

Israel shot down a drone near Ashkelon, not far from its border with Gaza, the
second unmanned aerial vehicle sent aloft by Gaza this week.

At one point, there was word from Egypt that an agreement had been reached for a
cease-fire starting at 6 a.m. Friday. Instead, the violence only increased.

''We have to look at this as an operation in stages: its first stage was attacks
from the air and sea, and this is the second stage, where we reach contact with
the Hamas,'' Eli Marom, commander of Israel's Navy from 2007 to 2011, said on
Israel's Channel 2 News. ''You have to understand this is a long campaign. This
is only its second stage, and there can be other stages.''

Michael B. Oren, Israel's former ambassador to Washington, said in a late-night
interview that Mr. Netanyahu had ''exercised extraordinary restraint up until
now'' by not engaging ground troops and ''paid a heavy political price for it.''
Thursday's tunnel attack, he said, ''was a game changer,'' adding,
''Essentially, Hamas invaded Israel first.''

In contrast to the Iron Dome missile-defense system that Israel says has stopped
some 300 rockets from hitting populated areas over the last 10 days, Mr. Oren
said, ''We don't have a response to the tunnels.''

He added, ''They are reinforced concrete tunnels, basically impregnable from the
air and their openings are camouflaged.''

Amos Yadlin, director of Israel's Institution for National Security Studies and
former chief of military intelligence, similarly said in a radio interview
earlier Thursday that the tunnel attack ''clarified to those who were still
wondering if it was right to conduct a ground move against certain points.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/18/world/middleeast/israel-gaza-strip.html

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Israel's assault came in answer to an attack by militants
through a tunnel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACK GUEZ/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
(A1)
Israeli tanks moved along the border with Gaza on Thursday. Israel warned
residents of northern Gaza to evacuate to Gaza City. Its navy also shelled areas
near the Gaza City seaport. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LIOR MIZRAHI/GETTY IMAGES)
 Relatives mourned one of four children killed by an Israeli attack Thursday
evening in Gaza City not long after a cease-fire ended. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER
HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


