                             896 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Danger: Robots Working

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF and CLAIRE CAIN MILLER

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; WHAT THE FUTURE HOLDS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 589 words


From driverless cars to delivery drones, a new generation of robots is about to
revolutionize the way people work, drive and shop. But there is one area where
robots are already entrenched and spreading fast: the industrial sector,
especially manufacturing and storage.

Robots have long toiled alongside workers in factories and warehouses, where
they load boxes with items ordered online, drill and weld car parts, or move
food from one conveyor belt to the next.

Now many experts worry about the dangers that robots pose to the humans who work
alongside them.

Robots have caused at least 33 workplace deaths and injuries in the United
States in the last 30 years, according to data from the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration. That may not sound like many, but the number may well
understate the perils ahead.

Unlike today's robots, which generally work in cages, the next generation will
have much more autonomy and freedom to move on their own.

''In order for robots to work more productively, they must escape from their
cages and be able to work alongside people,'' said Kent Massey, the director of
advanced programs at HDT Robotics. ''To achieve this goal safely, robots must
become more like people. They must have eyes and a sense of touch, as well as
the intelligence to use those senses.''

Until now, robots have largely been used in manufacturing, particularly in the
auto industry. They have mostly been ''dumb robots,'' designed for repetitive
tasks that are dirty, dangerous or dull.

Regulations have required that the robots operate separately from humans, in
cages or surrounded by light curtains that stop the machines when people
approach. As a result, most of the injuries and deaths have happened when humans
who are maintaining the robots make an error or violate the safety barriers,
such as by entering a cage.

But the robots whose generation is being born today collaborate with humans and
travel freely in open environments where people live and work. They are products
of the declining cost of sensors and improved artificial intelligence algorithms
in areas such as machine vision. Google's newest driverless car, for instance,
is completely automated, without a steering wheel or a brake pedal.

Along with the new, free-roaming robots come new safety concerns. People worry
about what happens if a robot spins out of control, or the first time a
driverless car kills someone.

''It's the fear of robots,'' said Bryant Walker Smith, a fellow at the Center
for Internet and Society at Stanford Law School who studies driverless cars.
''There's something scarier about a machine malfunctioning and taking away
control from somebody.''

As a result, these robots require extra protective measures. The Google car has
a padded front to soften any blow if the robot or a human causes an accident.
The windshield is plastic, and the front of the car is rounded so it is less
likely to hurt or trap pedestrians or cyclists.

Another robot, Baxter, which does repetitive jobs in workplaces like packaging
small items, is designed to sense humans and stop before coming in contact with
them. It also has a display screen that cues those who are nearby about what the
robot is focusing on and planning to do next.

If robots and humans are going to live and work together, Baxter and its progeny
will need more of these advances. To develop them, the robots' creators will
need to draw on one of the most human of emotions: empathy.

The Upshot presents news, analysis and graphics about politics and policy.
nytimes.com/upshot

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/17/upshot/danger-robots-working.html

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (D1
 D5)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News; Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


