                             897 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

By the Book: Larry McMurtry

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 915 words


The author, most recently, of ''The Last Kind Words Saloon'' says that
meth-heads are the worst part of being a bookseller. ''Anyone can walk into our
bookstore in the age of meth -- it's a constant worry.''

What books are currently on your night stand?

James Lees-Milne's ''The Milk of Paradise'' (Volume 12 of the Diaries); Eric
Newby's ''Slowly Down the Ganges.''

Who is your favorite novelist of all time? And your favorite novelist writing
today?

Count Tolstoy. He authored ''Anna Karenina,'' what I consider the finest novel
ever written. Joyce Carol Oates. She's intelligent, analytical, eccentrically
prolific, a natural-born writer.

Do you have a favorite genre?

No, although I prefer nonfiction to fiction. I reviewed so many novels in the
1970s that I sort of burned out on fiction. I enjoy books on travel and have an
extensive women travelers collection in my personal library.

What are the best books ever written about Texas?

Bill Brammer, ''The Gay Place''; my own ''Walter Benjamin at the Dairy Queen'';
maybe J. Evetts Haley's ''Charles Goodnight: Cowman and Plainsman.''

In 2012, you sold off much of the inventory of your bookstore, Booked Up, in
Archer City, Tex. How did you decide which books should go? Were there books in
particular you wanted to hold onto for yourself?

I sold off half of my inventory, two buildings gone, two buildings stayed. Both
buildings sold needed major repairs, which we could ill afford. So we sacrificed
a lot of literature in translation, a lot of drama, some general travel, odds
and ends. It was a normal downsizing. And we still have 290,000 excellent books.
My personal library contains over 28,000 volumes, so I have plenty of books at
home to keep me company.

What's been the best thing about being in the bookselling business? The worst?

The best: excitement of finding the unexpected treasure. The worst: crazies,
meth-heads. Anyone can walk into our bookstore in the age of meth -- it's a
constant worry.

Of your books, which is your favorite and why?

''Terms of Endearment,''â[#x20ac][0/00]''Walter Benjamin at the Dairy
Queen,''â[#x20ac][0/00]''Duane's Depressed.'' ''Terms'' has one of my favorite
characters, Emma. ''Walter Benjamin'' is a book written during an extended time
spent in Archer City without travel. ''Duane's Depressed'' was written after my
quadruple bypass surgery. I suppose I felt an affinity with Duane, since I
experienced a serious emotional trauma during recovery from heart surgery.

Of the TV and movie adaptations of your books, which is your favorite and why?

I like ''Terms'' best; James Brooks was relentless about getting it made. Debra
Winger captured Emma's character brilliantly, and I feel it's Shirley MacLaine's
finest role. ''The Last Picture Show'' is near perfect, but not as ambitious.

And what's your favorite movie adaptation of a literary work by someone else?

''Brokeback Mountain.'' Its source material was a short story by E. Annie Proulx
before it was a film. My screenwriting partner Diana Ossana produced it as well;
her talent and taste are evident in the final result.

Whom do you consider your literary heroes?

Well, Miss O'Connor. Hemingway and Faulkner. And of course Tolstoy.

What kind of reader were you as a child? And what were your favorite childhood
books?

I had no books as a child, until I was 7. Then I just read boys' books -- the
Poppy Ott series, for example. I grew up in a bookless place. Had there been
access to a library or a bookstore, I suppose I would have spent the better part
of my childhood inside one or the other.

If you had to name one book that made you who you are today, what would it be?

There's no one book that would define me; I'd have to name nearly every book
that I've read over the past 70 years. Reading has sustained me and has been the
one constant throughout my life.

If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be?

To me, the obvious choice is ''The Sabres of Paradise: Conquest and Vengeance in
the Caucasus,'' by Lesley Blanch, who was married to Romain Gary, who was
married to Jean Seberg. It describes the Powers' efforts to do something about
the Chechen Shamil (played by Edmund Purdom in the 1960 film version, ''The
Cossacks''), who raced romantically through places that even our drones avoid
now. Shamil was a lot more interesting than the current crop in Kabul. The book
is very readable; Lesley Blanch could write. Amazon can probably get a copy to
the White House by drone in about 10 minutes.

You're hosting a literary dinner party. Which three writers are invited?

Count Tolstoy, George Eliot, Norman Mailer. If you require living authors, then
Joyce Carol Oates, Thomas Pynchon, Cynthia Ozick. And maybe an extra place for
Philip Roth.

Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel you were
supposed to like, and didn't? Do you remember the last book you put down without
finishing?

''Fifty Shades of Grey.'' On both counts.

Which books do you believe all people should read before they die?

William Butler Yeats's Crazy Jane poems. The classic 19th-century novelists. And
Barbara Tuchman's ''The Guns of August.''

What do you plan to read next?

Some more Lees-Milne. Maybe a little Robert B. Parker and some Janet Evanovich,
just for fun. My daily newspapers, three of which are waiting for me right this
moment: The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Financial Times. And my
periodicals: The New York Review of Books, The London Review of Books, The Times
Literary Supplement, The Atlantic, The Nation and Texas Monthly.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/13/books/review/larry-mcmurtry-by-the-book.html

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JILLIAN TAMAKI)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Question

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


