                             892 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Months of Infighting, a Major Faction Splits From the Pakistani Taliban

BYLINE: By ISMAIL KHAN and DECLAN WALSH; Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and
Declan Walsh from London. Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud contributed reporting from
Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 880 words


PESHAWAR, Pakistan -- Seven years into a bloody campaign to overthrow the
Pakistani state, the Pakistani Taliban split in two on Wednesday when a major
faction publicly rejected the movement's leader, Maulana Fazlullah, and said it
would continue the fight on its own.

The breakaway group, led by the militant commander known as Sajna, said in a
statement that it was leaving because ''the present leadership has lost its
path,'' and it went on to accuse Mr. Fazlullah of falling under the influence of
foreign intelligence agencies.

The split comes after months of infighting within the Pakistani Taliban, which
has killed thousands of Pakistanis in suicide attacks since the group was
founded in December 2007. It is likely to shake the web of operational and
fund-raising alliances that have made North Waziristan, a tribal area along the
Afghan border, such a formidable hub of international Islamist militancy.

And it spells a probable end, at least for now, to efforts by Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif to end the Taliban insurgency through negotiation. A tentative
peace process that started in February had already ground to a halt amid
tensions with the military leadership over how best to proceed. A series of
airstrikes last week against militant targets in North Waziristan, which killed
at least 80 people, suggested the military had lost patience with talks.

Now, with the very public Taliban split, Pakistani intelligence and security
officials who have been quietly trying to sow divisions among the militants have
cause for celebration. ''The split will have a far-reaching impact, in
Waziristan and elsewhere,'' said a senior security official in Peshawar,
speaking on the condition of anonymity.

More broadly, the schism is the most significant sign yet that militants may be
struggling with strategic differences about how to proceed both in the Afghan
war, where American troops are withdrawing, and in the struggle against the
government and military of Pakistan.

It is also a crushing blow to the authority of Mr. Fazlullah, the
Afghanistan-based militant chief who has struggled to keep the group united
since he took control last year. Taliban elders had hoped that Mr. Fazlullah,
who hails from the Swat Valley, could contain a violent feud that erupted inside
the Mehsud tribe after the American drone strike that killed his predecessor,
Hakimullah Mehsud.

But that infighting only intensified in recent months, pitting fighters loyal to
Sajna, whose name is believed to be Khan Sayed, against those of another
commander, Shehryar Mehsud.

The tit-for-tat violence also spilled over into Taliban cells that operate in
the port city of Karachi, where the militants have become increasingly powerful
over the past 18 months.

Mr. Fazlullah's failure to reconcile the warring factions encouraged militant
perceptions that he was a weak leader -- an idea that was further reinforced by
Wednesday's schism, which was announced by Azam Tariq, a former Taliban
spokesman now allied with the breakaway group.

At a news conference in North Waziristan, Mr. Tariq issued a statement outlining
the Sajna group's grievances with Mr. Fazlullah and the opposing Mehsud faction.
The statement accused Mr. Fazlullah of siding with their tribal rivals, who
oppose peace talks with Islamabad, and of allowing the militant movement to fall
under the control of ''invisible hands'' -- a likely reference to Afghan
intelligence, which has been quietly supporting Mr. Fazlullah at his base in the
mountains of Kunar Province in eastern Afghanistan.

The most immediate effect of the split may be more fighting in the Mehsud camp
in South and North Waziristan, which are also the main target districts for
C.I.A. drone strikes inside Pakistan.

A senior aide to Shehryar Mehsud, speaking by telephone from Miram Shah in North
Waziristan on the condition of anonymity, said his group remained loyal to Mr.
Fazlullah. ''We were expecting this from Sajna because his group has long been
violating the central shura's decisions,'' the aide said, referring to the
governing council of the Pakistani Taliban. ''We are still part of the T.T.P.''
he said, speaking of the group's formal name, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, ''and
will continue to work under our emir, Fazlullah.''

The emergence of dueling Pakistani Taliban groups echoes another shadowy
struggle that straddles borders: one between the Afghan intelligence agency, the
National Directorate of Security, and Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence spy
agency.

The Taliban splinter group enjoys the backing of the Afghan Taliban and the
Haqqani network, according to Pakistani officials and militant commanders. Both
of those groups use the tribal belt as a base for attacks on military and
civilian targets in Afghanistan, and both have links to Pakistani intelligence.
On the other side is Mr. Fazlullah and the factions still allied with him.
Earlier this year, Afghan officials in Kabul said that the Afghan National
Directorate of Security had been quietly assisting Mr. Fazlullah.

Mr. Tariq, the Sajna spokesman, blamed that Afghan intelligence support as the
reason the Pakistani Taliban had assassinated innocent religious scholars,
carried out bombings under pseudonyms, and turned against its fellow jihadi
fighters in the Afghan Taliban.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/world/asia/major-faction-splits-from-pakistani
-taliban.html

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


