                             899 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 20, 2014 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Musicians Starting in One Place, Then Heading Elsewhere

BYLINE: By BEN RATLIFF

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; PLAYLIST; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 806 words


Areni Agbabian

KISSY (BAG)

On her first album, ''Kissy (Bag)'' -- self-released and available from
arenismiles.com -- Areni Agbabian sings gradually unfolding original
compositions in a sure voice, accompanying herself sparely on piano. Her songs
go in oblique directions, slowly and with purpose, so that you can hear the
implications of each interval. She's been working a lot as a vocalist with the
pianist Tigran Hamasyan's band, but this record is not singer-for-hire stuff:
It's intensely focused, moving toward some kind of hidden truth in simple
lyrical images and phrases and stories that don't scan naturally into stanzas
and sound halfway to parables. (''It sank,'' she sings repeatedly on ''Boat
Song''; ''the boat, it sank, the boat, it sank/but then, when the waters
resided, it rested on a mountaintop.'') There are similarities between her work
and that of Annette Peacock and Judith Berkson; you can imagine her next album
on ECM, if she's interested in seeing where this kind of art, with an expanded
idea of form and perhaps a preference for process over outcome, can go next.

Johnaye Kendrick

HERE

The Seattle singer Johnaye Kendrick's talent centers in the modern jazz
tradition: On the first several tracks of her first record, ''Here''
(Johnygirl), her light and accurate voice quickly establishes authority in tone,
improvisation, swing feeling. If you're interested in singers like Gretchen
Parlato and Luciana Souza, go directly to her. But jazz these days is sometimes
best defined as a connection to other things, and this record lives at the point
where the strategies and sonic dimensions of jazz plug into much else: R&B and
bossa nova, songs without drums, creeping ballads or laments; new reshufflings
of very old ideas in American music.

Still, everything here comes down to the settled and centered quality of Ms.
Kendrick's voice. She's organically connected to her band, which includes the
pianist Dawn Clement, the bassist Chris Symer and the drummers Byron Vannoy and
D'Vonne Lewis. But on one of the strongest tracks, ''I Am Not Afraid,'' Ms.
Kendrick sings in long tones, with only her harmonium and multitracked vocals
for accompaniment. It's easy to imagine most of these songs done that way, or
with voice alone.

Ninos Du Brasil

NOVOS MISTÉRIOS

Musicians are always absorbing information about musical traditions they're not
born to. They can do it directly, with deference and responsibility, or
indirectly, squinting and approximating and transforming. The Italian musicians
Nicolò Fortuni and Nico Vascellari -- who were in the aggressive Italian punk
band With Love from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s -- play in Ninos Du Brasil,
and the not-quite-Portuguese of the band name should clue you into some of the
creative recklessness going on here. Even so, its second album, ''Novos
Mistérios,'' released in the late spring on Hospital Productions, doesn't need a
lot of explanation: It's loud and bright and it starts, roughly speaking, from
Brazilian carnival drumming, dense and swinging and polyrhythmic, expanding into
electronics and metallophones. Some sounds are tapered and elegant, some
overdriven and wild.

Mr. Fortuni and Mr. Vascellari are drummers themselves, but they're also
samplers and reshufflers, stacking rhythm and sound elements; it's unclear who's
doing what. Some of the elements belong together, according to tradition, and
some of them don't; there's a little thrill in the friction.

Peter Rowan

DHARMA BLUES

Peter Rowan exemplifies a certain kind of open-minded Americanness and perpetual
studenthood: He started in the early 1960s as an apprentice in Bill Monroe's
Blue Grass Boys and thereafter played various noncodified mixtures of country,
rock, folk, blues, reggae, rockabilly and Mexican music. But he's serious. He
sings in a patient and steadying voice, and he is a songwriter of depth -- happy
enough to tie up loose ends on a given song within a given tradition, but
possibly more interested in ritual and sound vibrations and drones and mysteries
and the reasons we make music in the first place. His new record, ''Dharma
Blues'' (Omnivore), ropes in a few guests who don't steal the show (Gillian
Welch and Jack Casady) and rests on a warm, discipline-mixing core band,
including Dave Easley on steel guitar, Jody Stecher on banjo and Casey Waits on
drums, often with another percussionist to help make the beat broad and blurry.

All these songs are mixed metaphors: They're conjunctions of fingerpicking and
drones and steel-guitar swells, and make plain without preaching his interest in
Eastern music and philosophy. He does it through his band and arrangements, with
flute and tamboura and oud, and through his lyrics on ''Vulture Peak,'' with
interpolations from the Buddhist Heart Sutra: ''Form is emptiness, emptiness is
form/in truth there is no deception.''

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/arts/music/debut-albums-from-areni-agbabian-an
d-johnaye-kendrick.html

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The vocalist Areni Agbabian has released her first album,
''Kissy (Bag).'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIELLE EZZO)
Johnaye Kendrick connects jazz to R&B, bossa nova and other traditions in
''Here.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY SCOTT MYERS)
Ninos Du Brasil, featuring Nicolò Fortuni and Nico Vascellari, starts with
Brazilian carnival drumming then adds electronics on its second album, ''Novos
Mistérios.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNEX AGENCY)
Peter Rowan mixes in arrangements of  Eastern music in ''Dharma Blues.''
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MARTHA MCCORD)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


