                             902 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 10, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amid Intensifying Requests, American Military Aid to Ukraine Stalls

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MILITARY MEMO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1036 words


WASHINGTON -- Despite appeals from the Ukrainian armed forces, the United States
has so far provided only a modest package of nonlethal assistance to the Kiev
government, and much of it has yet to arrive.

The White House, which has relied on economic sanctions and the threat of
international isolation to deter Russia from escalating its involvement in
Ukraine, has been reluctant to step up military assistance for fear that it will
lead to an escalation in the fighting and provoke Moscow.

The $70 million in aid the United States has pledged includes rations, radios,
concertina wire, first-aid kits and limited supplies of body armor, but no arms.
But much of the assistance is still in the pipeline, including such important
items as night-vision goggles. The United States has also promised to train 700
members of Ukraine's National Guard, but that program is not scheduled to get
underway until 2015.

In contrast, Ukrainian separatists have been battling the government's troops
with the help of Russian tanks, artillery, antiaircraft weapons and, NATO says,
thousands of Russian troops.

President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine is expected to press the case for
expanded military support when he visits Washington next week, and he has the
backing of some former NATO officials.

''I am 100 percent behind the idea of increasing the sanctions dramatically,''
said James G. Stavridis, a retired admiral who was NATO's military commander
from 2009 to 2013. ''But Putin needs to see there is a military cost that will
be exacted.''

Admiral Stavridis added that the United States should provide the Ukrainian
forces with antitank weapons, ammunition, fuel, cyberdefense help and military
advisers.

Administration officials say they are considering a number of options, such as
providing the Ukrainians with reconnaissance drones, counterbattery radar to
pinpoint the source of enemy artillery fire, and Javelin antitank weapons. The
State Department has been careful not to rule out expanding at least some types
of assistance.

''Ukraine has also made a variety of requests for different types of aid, and
we're reviewing all of them to see how we can further support Ukraine in that
regard as well,'' Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman, said last week.

The Ukrainians' requests include reconnaissance drones, antiaircraft systems,
antitank weapons, encrypted radios, and special operations and battlefield
medicine training, according to Phillip A. Karber, who was a special adviser to
the Reagan-era defense secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and is with Ukrainian
forces at Mariupol, a port city in southeastern Ukraine.

The fighting in recent weeks has exposed glaring deficiencies among Ukrainian
forces that enabled the Russian-backed separatists to break the military's siege
of Luhansk, cement their control of Donetsk and advance toward Mariupol before a
shaky cease-fire was put in place.

Lacking secure military communications technology, Ukrainian troops have relied
on cellphones, which the Russian military can easily pinpoint. They have used
trash bags to collect their dead, and their logistics are so poor that they have
only distributed a portion of the field rations the United States has provided.

Even if the Obama administration is not prepared to send lethal aid, experts
say, it could send military officers to help Ukraine plan operations, provide
training in battlefield medicine and share intelligence on the movements of
Russian and separatist troops.

A senior Defense Department official, who declined to be named because he was
discussing internal planning, said that the assistance the United States was
providing this year was equal to the total given during the eight previous
years, and that the Pentagon had worked hard to deliver it as quickly as
possible.

But critics say the American assistance is focused not on helping the Ukrainian
military regain lost ground, but on general logistics and equipping Ukraine's
outmatched border guards.

''There is no overarching strategy on what they are providing the Ukrainians
this year or over three years,'' said a staff member on the Republican-led House
Armed Services Committee.

The United States European Command has sent teams to Ukraine to assess its
needs, but an American official said the effort was aimed principally at
improving Ukraine's military capability three to five years from now.

An added complication is that the foreign military financing system, in which
State Department funds are used to pay for equipment that is distributed by the
Pentagon, is designed more for sending aid in peacetime than for rushing it to
the battlefield.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel is said to have expressed frustration at the
delays in providing some of the aid when he was briefed on the program this
month.

The American aid program has three main components. One portion is intended to
help Ukraine's armed forces and is funded by $22 million from the State
Department. Only $5.7 million of that has been spent on items already delivered.

That includes 2,000 sets of body armor, 1,000 helmets, 1,929 first-aid kits,
9,000 uniforms, 1,000 neck warmers, 80 radios and seven robots to handle enemy
explosives. The Pentagon has also provided 300,000 meals ready to eat, funded by
a separate, $3 million emergency account.

Yet to be delivered are 150 night-vision goggles and 150 infrared vision
devices, along with 96 more radios, 1,000 more helmets and 18 water purification
systems.

A second portion of the assistance, intended to help Ukraine's border guards, is
supported by $11 million in State Department funds and $15 million from the
Pentagon's Defense Threat Reduction Agency. But most of this aid, too, has yet
to be delivered.

The final portion of the aid consists of a $19 million program to train and
equip a battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard. The program is being financed
by the Global Security Contingency Fund, which is funded by the Defense and
State Departments.

As part of the effort, the United States Army plans to train four companies of
Ukrainian troops and a headquarters staff, some 700 soldiers in all, most likely
at a military base in western Ukraine. Two companies are to be trained at a
time, beginning in 2015.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/10/world/europe/amid-intensifying-requests-americ
an-military-aid-to-ukraine-stalls.html

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


