                             904 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 25, 2014 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Terror Cell That Avoided the Spotlight

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI; Michael S. Schmidt and Eric Schmitt contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1153 words


WASHINGTON -- Some time last year, a Kuwaiti man in his early 30s who had spent
more than a decade hiding from the American government arrived in northwest
Syria, where he met up with other members of Al Qaeda who had begun putting down
roots in a country torn by two years of death and chaos.

American intelligence officials believe that the Kuwaiti, known sometimes as
Muhsin al-Fadhli, had been sent from Pakistan by Ayman al-Zawahri, Al Qaeda's
leader, to take over a cell that could one day use Syria as a base for attacks
in Europe and possibly the United States.

Unlike other jihadist groups that have come to prominence in recent years, the
cell that Mr. Fadhli came to lead -- known within intelligence and law
enforcement agencies as the Khorasan Group -- avoided the spotlight. It put out
no slick Internet magazines and did not boast of its plans on Twitter.

The group's evolution from obscurity to infamy has been sudden: The first time
President Obama publicly mentioned the group was on Tuesday, when he announced
he had ordered an airstrike against it to disrupt what American officials said
was a terror plot aimed at the West.

The United States government has yet to confirm whether Mr. Fadhli died in the
strike, and American officials have given differing accounts about just how
close the group was to mounting an attack, and about what chance any plot had of
success. One senior American official on Wednesday described the Khorasan
plotting as ''aspirational'' and said that there did not yet seem to be a
concrete plan in the works.

The focus on the Khorasan Group in recent days has, at least for the moment,
diverted attention from the Islamic State, the militant group whose recent
battlefield successes were Mr. Obama's original reason for launching airstrikes.
It has also underscored the enduring relevance of Al Qaeda's leadership
apparatus in Pakistan, a group that Mr. Obama told the United Nations on
Wednesday had been badly battered.

''There's a contradiction here,'' said Bruce O. Riedel, a former C.I.A. analyst
now at the Brookings Institution. ''If they are that decimated, why are we so
alarmed when we detect new evidence of their activities?''

The paucity of public information about the Khorasan Group makes it hard to draw
firm conclusions about its ultimate goals. Intelligence officials and terrorism
experts believe that the group, although based in Syria, answers ultimately to
Mr. Zawahri and Al Qaeda's core leadership in Pakistan. They said that its size
seemed to fluctuate, but that it consisted of approximately two dozen
operatives, most of whom came to Syria from Pakistan and Afghanistan beginning
in 2012.

Once they arrived in Syria, members of the group established contacts with
fighters from the Nusra Front, a Syrian rebel organization that is Al Qaeda's
official affiliate in Syria and one of myriad groups that formed in recent years
to fight the government of Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad. While the Nusra
Front remains primarily committed to fighting government troops for territory in
Syria's vicious civil war, analysts said, the Khorasan Group's focus is on
external attacks.

''What core Al Qaeda wanted was some forward-deployed people in Syria, which is
an important battlefield for them because it is so close to Europe,'' said Seth
G. Jones, a terrorism expert at the RAND Corporation.

Several of Mr. Obama's aides said Tuesday that the airstrikes against the
Khorasan operatives were launched to thwart an ''imminent'' terrorist attack,
possibly using concealed explosives to blow up airplanes. But other American
officials said that the plot was far from mature, and that there was no
indication that Khorasan had settled on a time or location for the attack -- or
even on the exact method of carrying out the plot.

Some experts said it was more likely that American spy agencies had developed
specific intelligence about the location of Mr. Fadhli and others, and that Mr.
Obama had ordered the strike to kill the Khorasan operatives before they could
scatter.

''Actionable intelligence is really hard to get your hands on, and I suspect
that's what really drove the timing of the strike,'' Mr. Riedel said.

Fearing possible reprisal attacks, the Department of Homeland Security issued a
warning this week to law enforcement agencies to be on heightened alert for
so-called lone-wolf terrorist attacks inside the United States. Speaking to
reporters on Wednesday after visiting an Islamic cultural center near Columbus,
Ohio, the secretary of homeland security, Jeh C. Johnson, gave no details when
asked about his agency's warning or the possibility that a terrorist plot was
being hatched.

''We're vigilant about the potential for domestic-based violent extremism on an
ongoing basis,'' Mr. Johnson said.

Osama bin Laden's death in 2011, together with the rise of Qaeda affiliates in
Yemen, Syria and elsewhere, led some analysts to conclude that Mr. Zawahri, Bin
Laden's successor, no longer had clout in the militant world.

In an age when savvy militants spread their messages using social media, Mr.
Zawahri rarely produces audio or video recordings of his pronouncements. Obama
administration officials for years have boasted that the C.I.A.'s campaign of
drone strikes in Pakistan has devastated Al Qaeda's apparatus there, but the
emergence of the Khorasan Group in Syria appears to indicate that Mr. Zawahri's
authority and influence, however symbolic, endure in some corners of the
universe of militant organizations.

Besides Mr. Fadhli, who was once one of Bin Laden's close advisers and who
according to the United Nations once fought against the Russian government in
Chechnya, another top member of the Khorasan Group is believed to be Abdul
Mohsen Abdullah Ibrahim al-Sharikh, a Saudi who also arrived in Syria in 2013.
In August, the Treasury Department imposed sanctions on Mr. Sharikh, describing
him as one of the Nusra Front's ''top strategists.''

Mr. Sharikh and Mr. Fadhli were once part of a cadre of Qaeda operatives living
in Iran, facilitating the flow of money, weapons and fighters that moved from
Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan to Iraq. Many senior Qaeda operatives fled
Afghanistan to Iran after the American war in Afghanistan began in 2001, and the
exact circumstances of the Qaeda group in Iran have been one of the mysteries of
the post-Sept. 11 period.

Iran's government said the militants were living under house arrest, and
American intelligence agencies do not believe that Iran -- a Shiite-majority
country -- ever considered an alliance with a Sunni terrorist network. Starting
at the end of the last decade, the Qaeda operatives began leaving Iran for
Pakistan, Afghanistan and elsewhere. One of them, Bin Laden's son Saad, was
killed in a C.I.A. drone strike in Pakistan in 2009.

Others went farther afield -- to the war in Syria that erupted in 2011 and that
has since become the epicenter of the jihadist world.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/25/world/middleeast/khorasan-a-terror-cell-that-a
voided-the-spotlight.html

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: CHART: How the Khorasan Group  Fits Into Al Qaeda: Several affiliates
have grown out of Al  Qaeda's original leadership. Each has  its own goals,
strategies and ambitions,  and not all have actively plotted  against the West.
(Sources: IHS Jane's Terrorism and Insurgency Center, State Department,
Washington Institute for Near East Policy) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


