                             906 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2014 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Crop-Dusters, Towers Pose a Hidden and Growing Danger

BYLINE: By BRENT McDONALD; KC McGinnis contributed reporting from Indianola,
Iowa.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1098 words


CRESTON, Iowa -- Van Lucas flew F-16 fighter jets over Iraq and Afghanistan for
the Air National Guard, but the idea of returning to Iowa to fly low-powered
crop-dusters several feet off the ground felt like a new level of danger.

''I said, 'Show me every place that you can think of that a crop-duster has been
killed or wrecked,' '' recalled Mr. Lucas, 35, who has been flying crop-dusters
for seven years. ''And that's what we did. I learned how to fly under wires. I
learned about wires being in the tree lines.''

But in recent years, pilots like Mr. Lucas have encountered a new, rapidly
proliferating threat camouflaged among the fields, one that has led to several
deaths and, safety officials fear, could cause more.

They are thin metal towers, almost 200 feet high, that wind energy companies use
to help gather data on the best places to put wind turbines.

Mr. Lucas first encountered one of the towers in 2009, as he was spraying
fungicide at sundown near a mammoth wind project in Adair, Iowa. Suddenly one of
the towers, anchored by a web of guy wires, appeared ahead of him.

''I just prayed and pulled. Pulled back on the stick and got out of there quick
as I could, hoping I didn't hit it,'' Mr. Lucas said. ''By the time I pulled up,
the guy wires were right underneath the airplane.''

Towers like these -- temporary meteorological evaluation towers, or METs -- can
be erected in a matter of hours, and at 198 feet high, most barely skirt the
200-foot limit set by the Federal Aviation Administration requiring markings and
lighting for safety.

At least five people, including three crop-duster pilots, have died after
hitting the towers since 2003. Among them was Stephen Allen, a 58-year-old pilot
from Walnut Grove, Calif., with 26,000 hours of flying time. In 2011, he was
surveying a field for seeding at 150 feet near the town of Oakley when his plane
struck a tower, shearing off part of the left wing of the plane and sending it
into a nose dive.

The National Transportation Safety Board investigated the accident and concluded
that Mr. Allen had failed to see the tower, which had no markings for
visibility. Mr. Allen's wife later sued the farmer who leased the land, the
company that owned the tower and the tower's manufacturer. Last month, she
received $6.7 million in damages in a settlement.

In May, a special investigation by the board identified unmarked evaluation
towers as a critical hazard to agricultural planes and other low-flying
aircraft, and for the second time urged the F.A.A. to require markings and
lighting to improve safety. The board also recommended that a public database be
created, containing the GPS coordinates for all such towers -- something pilots
might refer to before working a field, as they do with beehives and organic
farms.

While some companies have responded to safety concerns and now paint the towers
aviation orange or attach colored balls to the guy wires, the industry in
general has resisted recommendations for a public database.

''The MET tower is one of the first things you do when pursuing a project, so
there are competitive reasons why you wouldn't want someone to know where you're
putting that project,'' said Tom Vinson, vice president for federal regulatory
affairs at the American Wind Energy Association, which represents the industry.

Scott Schertz, whose crop-dusting business spans multiple wind farms in central
Illinois, said, ''The locations of these towers are nearly a trade secret, and
at times are very difficult to get any confirmation as to where they're at.''

Mr. Schertz was president of the National Agricultural Aviation Association in
2005, the year a seasoned agricultural pilot based in Texas died after crashing
into a MET. Over the years, Mr. Schertz has compiled his own database of over
400 such towers, partly by calling around to wind energy companies and agencies
that issue permits.

The F.A.A. is still evaluating the safety board's recommendations, having issued
voluntary guidelines to help make the towers more visible a few years ago. In
the absence of a federal mandate, nearly a dozen states have passed laws
requiring better markings. Even so, adding orange paint has not prevented planes
from hitting the towers.

On a clear day in 2013, near Balko, Okla., a crop-dusting pilot named Jason
Martin, 34, was en route to spray herbicide on a field and flew straight into an
orange MET. The impact tore off part of the right wing, and the plane
disintegrated upon hitting the ground. A safety board investigation into Mr.
Martin's death concluded that he had not seen the tower because of sun glare.

In an email, Dahvi Wilson, a spokeswoman for Apex Wind Energy, which owned the
tower involved in the accident, wrote that Apex applied stringent safety
standards to more than 100 towers nationwide, regardless of local regulations.
But the company does not register their whereabouts, she said, because most
''are not tall enough to fall within the F.A.A.'s regulated airspace.''

''It's very, very easy to overlook something, and that's one of the big reasons
that make this business so dangerous,'' said Tim Crowell, a pilot working for
Schertz Aerial in Illinois. He too had a close brush with a tower, in Nebraska
last year.

''Flying is only about 10 percent of what we do,'' Mr. Crowell said. ''Flying is
what you're doing to get the job done, but there's so much other stuff going
on.''

So far this year, no crop-duster pilots have crashed into the towers. Meanwhile,
at least seven have died after hitting more familiar obstacles, like power lines
and trees.

''It almost sounds like we're crying wolf when the problem isn't that serious,''
said Ken Degg of the National Agricultural Aviation Research and Education
Foundation. ''But if wind energy continues to grow at expected rates, there will
be a lot more towers coming into play that aren't required to be marked.''

In mid-August, Mr. Lucas flew to southern Minnesota to rescue a soybean farmer
from an aphid outbreak. On his second day, while spraying insecticide near a
wind farm, he was surprised to find three unmarked METs. The farmer, he said,
had given him no warning they were there.

''The first one, I didn't see it until I dove into the field,'' Mr. Lucas said.
''And I had just sprayed a field just to the north of it maybe 24 hours prior.''

With the crop-dusting season wrapping up, Mr. Lucas is starting another project:
finding a way to safely use unmanned aerial systems, or drones, to scout for
wind turbines and METs. If permitted by the F.A.A. for commercial use, drones
could also create further hazards for crop-dusters.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/03/us/for-crop-dusters-a-hidden-danger-in-the-fie
lds.html

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Van Lucas flying over a field in Iowa in July. Below, the
remains of a crop-duster and the tower it hit near Oakley, Calif., in 2011.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY KC MCGINNIS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


