                              90 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                       June 12, 2014 Thursday 1:03 AM EST

Drones to give firefighters a better view of their jobs

BYLINE: Tiffany Arnold

SECTION: Metro; Pg. T23

LENGTH: 510 words


Firefighters in Montgomery County soon could be getting help from above - three
unmanned aircraft known as "drones."

About two months ago, Montgomery County Fire and Rescue Service bought the
drones, each costing $999. Staff members are learning how to use them.

The images drones capture will give first responders on the ground a more
complete look at how a fire is behaving and what a building's structural
conditions are like. "Roof conditions, walls that might push out and kill
firefighters," said R. Michael Clemens, who retired May 29 as the assistant
chief of the MCFRS training academy in Rockville.

On April 1, a fire caused $21 million in damage to a Rockville apartment complex
under construction. "We needed to see where that fire was going," Clemens said.
Without drones, "you can't see it when you're standing on the ground."

The county's WiFi-enabled drones can soar at least 600 feet and transmit images
to iPads and iPhones, MCFRS spokesman Pete Piringer said.

Local fire officials said they have been using the unmanned aerial vehicles only
in practice exercises, including a disaster preparedness drill at South
Germantown Recreational Park in Boyds last month.

They could not say when the drones will be ready for real-world use.

For the Rockville fire, responders got an aerial view from a nearby high-rise
office building. But drones, Clemens said, would have been better.

"Fires change so much on their own and so does building construction," said
Clemens, who was responsible for making the purchase. "We have to depend on
technology to save our guys and women from being killed [during] a fire."

The drones could help in situations involving hazardous materials, as well.

"We can fly that thing out with a test strip, bring it back and analyze it, tell
us what it is," Clemens said.

The drones also could be used for search and rescue,  Piringer said.

In 2012, Congress told the Federal Aviation Administration to come up with a
plan for the safe integration of unmanned aircraft by Sept. 30, 2015. For now,
public safety agencies must get FAA approval.

"The obvious thing is public safety," said Les Dorr, an FAA spokesman. "Any
object - manned or unmanned - can pose a hazard to people in the air or on the
ground."

According to FAA data, drone use was approved 545 times as of Dec. 4.

Dorr said drones are most often used domestically for law enforcement,
firefighting, border patrol and disaster relief.

The renewal period for drones is two years, said Alison Duquette, an FAA
spokesman.

Agencies are initially granted a certificate that allows them to do extensive
training with the drones. "Which gives them time to get proficient with using
the unmanned aircraft," Dorr said.

Once MCFRS can demonstrate its proficiency to the FAA, it will get an
operational certificate approval. "Which means they can use the drone in the way
they intended to," Dorr said.

For county firefighters to get more intensive training with the drones, they
will need a training certificate, which the department is in the process of
obtaining.

tarnold@gazette.net

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


