                             914 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             April 22, 2014 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 348 words


Stowaway teen  A California high school student survived sub-zero temperatures
on a five-hour flight to Hawaii in a wheel well.  A2

Taxpayer troubles  Some said the government is still seizing refunds after
Social Security said it would stop collecting on old debts.  B1

the nation

 President Obama named W. Neil Eggleston, a veteran Washington lawyer, as White
House counsel. A3

The United States must release  "targeted-killing" memos on drone strikes, an
appeals court ruled. A7

Secretary of State John F. Kerry  said he will host a global conference
addressing major threats to the sea. A3

the world

 South Korea's leader condemned  the actions of the captain and some crew
members of a sunken ferry as "tantamount to murder." A9

U.S. drones were said to be used  in airstrikes that killed 55 militants at a
major al-Qaeda base in Yemen. A7

The Syrian opposition dismissed  the government's announcement of a June 3
presidential election as a "farce." A9

the economy

 Netflix took a swing at Comcast's $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable,
arguing that the resulting company would have too much power over high-speed
Internet service. A10

People who pay their student loans on time are being placed in default when the
co-signer of their loan dies or declares bankruptcy, a report said. A10

A look at Twitter numbers  suggests that Republicans are more tweet-centric than
Democrats, at least in Congress. A12

the region

 Two people were shot  and wounded during a confrontation near the National Zoo.
B3

Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D) trumpeted his accomplishments since taking office in
Virginia 100 days ago. Republicans replied that, in some cases, the credit
should go to them. B1

Air bags have been stolen  from more than 50 vehicles this year, Fairfax County
police reported, noting an active black market for the safety devices. B1

style

 No one dominated the 30th annual Helen Hayes Awards, but "The Book of Mormon,"
"Hello, Dolly!" and "Glengarry Glen Ross" each won three. C1

sports

 The Wizards, exhilarated by their 102-93 playoff victory over the Chicago
Bulls, prepared for Game 2. D1

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


