                              91 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 30, 2013 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Recent Drone Strikes Strain U.S. Ties With Afghanistan and Pakistan

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND and SALMAN MASOOD; Rod Nordland reported from Kabul, and
Salman Masood from Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 821 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Two separate but similarly bitter disagreements over drone
strikes in Pakistan and Afghanistan have complicated relations between the
United States and those two countries at a delicate moment, again highlighting
the political complications from America's persistent reliance on the lethal
remote-controlled weapons.

In Afghanistan, the American military commander called President Hamid Karzai
late Thursday to apologize for a drone strike that resulted in civilian
casualties and that gave Mr. Karzai renewed reason to refuse to sign a long-term
security agreement with the United States.

In Pakistan's tribal belt, meanwhile, what was thought to be C.I.A. drone strike
on Friday killed a Pakistani militant days after a major political party, as
part of its campaign to end the drone strikes, publicly named a man it said was
America's top spy in the country.

The use of these weapons, which is deeply resented, highlights the political
costs to the United States of the drone campaigns, even as its range of military
options in the region has started to narrow with American combat troops leaving
Afghanistan.

The American military already has greatly restricted raids on Afghan homes, amid
demands from Mr. Karzai for a complete ban on such operations. The raids,
normally carried out by Special Operations forces to apprehend insurgent
leaders, are the last routine combat missions of the United States in
Afghanistan.

Afghan anger over one such raid last week led Mr. Karzai to insist on a ban, and
he has said he will not sign the long-term security agreement with the United
States until such operations are definitively over.

That leaves airstrikes, particularly by drones, as one of the last practical
military options left to the American-led military coalition in Afghanistan. In
Pakistan, where there are no American military ground operations and the C.I.A.
controls the drones, that has long been the case.

There, nationalist politicians have long denounced the C.I.A.-led campaign in
the tribal belt as a flagrant breach of sovereignty, and are now employing new
means to frustrate it.

As part of that effort, the political party of the former cricket star Imran
Khan on Wednesday accused the director of the C.I.A. and the man it identified
as the agency's Islamabad station chief of murder.

Mr. Khan says the strikes have jeopardized efforts to start peace talks with
Taliban insurgents. Last Saturday, Mr. Khan led a large protest rally in
Peshawar, the capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, which his party governs.
Since then, Mr. Khan's supporters have tried to block NATO supplies in the
province.

After the latest strike, officials of Mr. Khan's party renewed their criticism.

The ''U.S. has nothing but contempt for Pakistan's leadership,'' said Shireen
Mazari, the party's central information secretary, calling the attack a ''direct
test of the will of the federal government'' led by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.

Friday's drone strike in Pakistan occurred at a delicate moment for the army, as
leadership was passing from the previous army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani,
to his successor, Lt. Gen. Raheel Sharif.

At a ceremony in the garrison city of Rawalpindi, General Kayani expressed
confidence in his successor and paid tribute to soldiers who had died in
operations against the Taliban in the troubled northwest of the country.

''I kept the interest of the country and armed forces above everything in the
decisions that I took in the last six years,'' General Kayani said, referring to
his tenure as army chief.

In Afghanistan, even an apology by the American commander appeared to do little
to assuage official anger.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the American and NATO commander in Afghanistan,
called Mr. Karzai late Thursday to express ''deep regrets'' about the drone
strike in Helmand earlier that day, and promised a joint investigation, a
coalition official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity.

The coalition official confirmed that two drone attacks had taken place in
Helmand Province on Thursday. The first, in Garmsir district, targeted an
insurgent commander traveling on a motorcycle, but the missile missed him and
apparently hit civilians; one child was reported killed, and two women were
severely wounded. The targeted man fled on foot and was killed by a later drone
strike.

In the second attack, in Nawa Barak Sai district nearby, a drone strike killed a
single insurgent who had been targeted, causing no civilian casualties, the
official said.

But Mr. Karzai's spokesman, Aimal Faizi, disputed the NATO account. He said that
in the first instance, American drones fired missiles at the man while he was
riding a motorbike but also while he was hiding in a house.

Omar Zwak, the spokesman for the Helmand governor, identified the target of the
strike as Mullah Nazar Gul, who he said was a bomb maker. Mr. Zwak said the man
had been killed inside a house.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/30/world/asia/drone-strike-pakistan.html

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company


