                             938 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Latitude)

                           October 31, 2013 Thursday

Intimidating Pakistan's Press

BYLINE: HUMA YUSUF

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 694 words



HIGHLIGHT: A fatwa issued by a group affiliated with the Pakistani Taliban
raises concerns about journalists&#8217; safety in a country that is already
already among the deadliest in the world for reporters.


LONDON - The Shura-e-Mujahedeen, a group affiliated with the Pakistani Taliban,
recently reissued a year-old fatwa describing Pakistani journalists and media
outlets as "enemies of the mujahedeen." The decree threatened several radio
stations and included photographs of the popular political talk show hosts Hamid
Mir and Hasan Nisar, accusing them of promoting secular and Western values and
spreading anti-Muslim propaganda. The fatwa was first issued following
widespread condemnation by Pakistani journalists of the Taliban's attempt to
kill the teenage education activist Malala Yousafzai in October 2012. The
announcement raises concerns about journalists' safety in a country that is
already among the deadliest in the world for reporters.

The Taliban has a history of directly threatening Pakistani journalists. The
Taliban claimed responsibility for killing Mukarram Khan Aatif, a radio
journalist who was shot in a mosque in Peshawar in January 2012 after they
accused him of failing to convey their views. In June 2012, Taliban gunmen
opened fire on the Karachi offices of Aaj TV as a warning against broadcasting
criticism of their group.  And later last year, a bomb was found planted under
Hamid Mir's car after he took to the airwaves to denounce the Taliban attack
against Yousafzai.

Journalists based in Pakistan's tribal belt along the border with Afghanistan
and the northwest Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province work in constant fear of the
Taliban. According to a recent report, all the journalists in the tribal areas
and 87 percent of those in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa admit to feeling threatened by
militants. (The Taliban are not the only ones who intimidate and attack
Pakistani journalists: Up to 79 percent of reporters in the tribal region also
say they feel threatened by state security forces, according to the same study.)

The Taliban campaign against Pakistani journalists is worrying but also ironic,
given that the mainstream media is regularly criticized by liberals for being
too sympathetic toward militant groups. The fact that the media is under attack
from both the right and the left shows how challenging public discourse in
Pakistan has become.

The mainstream, Urdu-language media frequently side with the Taliban. For
example, last week, one of Pakistan's most respected academics, the physicist
Pervez Hoodbhoy, was harangued on air for defending Yousafzai by two prominent
columnists, who, like the Taliban, asserted that theteenager's memoir contains
anti-Islam content. The talk show host giggled as a shouting match ensued. One
of the columnists repeatedly accused the professor of ignorance.  Hoodbhoy
fought back, calling his critics "media Taliban."

Prominent journalists and talk show hosts repeatedly call for the United States
to halt drone strikes in Pakistan's tribal belt, echoing the Taliban's main
demand as a condition for peace talks with the government. The media has also
tried to whip up anger over  the 2007 military operation against armed militants
and radicalized seminary students seeking sanctuary in Islamabad's Red Mosque.

High-prolife media personalities have also espoused extremist and intolerant
views that mirror the Taliban's stance  on social issues: The talk show host
Mubasher Lucman recently led a campaign against the teaching of comparative
religion in a private school; the morning show host Maria Khan  chased down and
castigated unmarried couples out on dates in Karachi's parks; and the
televangelist Aamir Liaquat Hussain hosted a show in 2008 on which Muslim
clerics declared that members of the minority Ahmadi community were deserving of
death.

For Pakistani journalists working in Taliban-controlled areas, parroting
militant views might be a survival tactic. But for those based in the country's
urban centers, far from direct Taliban pressure, their stance is likely a
reflection of their own beliefs. Finding a way to distinguish between
appeasement and agreement with Taliban views could make all the difference in
Pakistan's fight against violent extremism.


     ·    More Malala Malaise
     ·    A Predicament of the Mainstream
     ·    About the Malala Backlash
     ·    Many Happy Returns
     ·    The Ballot Against the Bullet


LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


