                             936 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                            October 9, 2014 Thursday
                              THU REGIONAL Edition

Report: Breakdown in police and fire contributed to Aurora Theater chaos

BYLINE: Christopher N. Osher, Carlos Illescas and Jennifer Brown

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 2049 words


A breakdown in police and fire communication resulted in a chaotic response to
treating victims of the Aurora theater shooting, a review of the largest mass
shooting in U.S. history found. Police officers didn't know how to communicate
directly with fire officials as they confronted hordes of blood soaked victims
streaming toward them, the report states.

A maze of parked police cars, curbs and panicked moviegoers blocked ambulance
drivers from reaching the critically injured. Fire officials didn't know whether
the threat had been defused, leaving them unsure of their own safety as they
navigated a crime scene that looked like a battlefield.

The report found that 28 minutes lapsed between the arrival at the scene of the
fire battalion chief in control of emergency medical services and contact with
the police lieutenant in charge of law enforcement issues.

Coordination was so poor that a fire battalion chief reported at one point to a
colleague, "So far, it's running pretty smooth." In reality, at that time,
"police were facing a chaotic situation and ambulances were not getting through
to many of the wounded," the report states.

"The glaring omissions of a lack of communication between police and fire
commanders, and the lack of a victim transportation coordinator, could have
jeopardized having as favorable an outcome as was obtained," according to the
report.

In the end, Aurora police officers, most of whom had not been trained beyond
basic first aid, took matters into their own hands and transported victims to
the hospital in police cars, says the report from the Arlington, Va., based
TriData division of System Planning Corporation.

"This level of police transport was unplanned and unprecedented," states the
consultant's report, commissioned by the city of Aurora to review the emergency
response. "If the police cars had not been used for rapid transport of seriously
wounded victims, more likely would have died."

The report into the July 20, 2012, shooting spree which left 12 dead and 70
others injured listed more than 80 recommendations but also lauded officials as
acting admirably given the circumstances.

In a statement released Wednesday, Aurora Mayor Steve Hogan said the city began
implementing changes in the weeks after the shooting. Some of those include
establishing procedures to unify command between police and fire.

That has already happened with some recent exercises that have been conducted,
he said.

"Every organization that has had to respond to an unprecedented tragedy of this
magnitude knows there will be lessons to be learned, and we began making changes
in programs and tactics two years ago, rather than waiting for this report to be
issued," Hogan said.

The report's recommendations range from significant overhauls in how police and
fire officials coordinate their response when mass casualties occur to the most
basic of suggestions, such as keeping a joint list of police and fire cellphones
for use in emergencies.

"Members of the theater audience had better cellphone communications with each
other than did police and fire personnel," the report notes.

Despite all the problems and hurdles emergency responders encountered, none of
those who died would have been saved by a different emergency medical service
response, the report states.

"While there are things to improve, as is always found in hindsight, the city of
Aurora should be proud of its response to the largest civilian shooting in U.S.
history, and the largest mass casualty incident in Aurora's history," the report
says. "To repeat the key point, the outcome could not have been better in terms
of lives saved and a rapid arrest."

Still, the report said that relations between police and fire personnel suffered
for months after the theater massacre, with some police officers openly
criticizing the fire department for what they perceived as an inadequate
response.

While the report said "major system problems" existed, it praised firefighters
and police officers for making "excellent, sometimes unconventional emergency
medical decisions that saved lives."

Law enforcement arrived at the theater to find injured and uninjured
theatergoers fleeing on foot, some covered in other people's blood, making it
difficult to immediately tell who was injured.

Ambulance access was limited by parked police cars and moviegoers trying to flee
in their vehicles. There was mass confusion about whether ambulances were
supposed to "stage," meaning set up in a particular area, or drive into the
scene. That's not surprising,considering the scene including the possibility of
explosive devices, chemicals or a second shooter "appeared to resemble a
battlefield instead of a civilian mass casualty incident," the report says.

It says that police command did not help fire officials navigate a route through
the nearly 1,200 panicked people at the scene. Fire command did not take the
initiative and take steps to solve that access problem either, the reports adds.
In one instance, a police officer attempted to lead an ambulance crew to the
wounded on foot, but the ambulance crew refused to follow.

Luckily, a police paramedic provided timely initial care to those in the
theater, determining which victims already had died and which could be saved,
which meant emergency medical services personnel didn't have to perform that
task, the report states.

"However, it is still important to discuss when it is safe for EMS personnel to
enter a warm zone, and how much risk fire should be taking in an unclear
shooting situation," the report says. " 'Next time' there may not be the luck to
have a police paramedic in the right place at the right time."

TriData, which has conducted so called "after action reports" in the wake of
mass shootings at Columbine High School and Virginia Tech, reviewed thousands of
radio and dispatch transmissions and interviewed hundreds of first responders,
which include police officers, firefighters and ambulance drivers.

Prosecutors in Arapahoe County District Court and defense attorneys for shooter
James Holmes sought to keep the report under wraps as part of the continuing gag
order in the case against him. Holmes is scheduled to go on trial by the end of
the year.

But District Court Judge Stephen Collins in August ruled the report, which cost
Aurora more than $250,000, could be made public after names were redacted.

The city of Aurora took the issue to court, seeking guidance on whether the
report should be available for review and did not take a position either way on
the matter. It had until Tuesday to appeal the judge's decision, which it did
not.

The report was released Wednesday by the Colorado Judicial Branch. The release
surprised Aurora city officials, who had planned to release it Friday after
talking to employees.

The report's recommendations are likely to guide not only local area emergency
response in the future but also the training, tactics and personnel of police
departments and emergency responders throughout the nation. Another similar
report done after the Columbine shootings prompted dramatic changes in how
police respond to perpetrators causing mass casualties. Police now are
instructed to aggressively attack in such instances rather than wait for calm.

The Aurora theater report states that exhausted first responders should not have
been used as security during a prayer vigil and visit by President Barack Obama.

"They could have been rotated out, using more officers from surrounding
jurisdictions," the report says.

The report praised police transport of the wounded to hospitals, noting that
although that was an unplanned response, it probably saved lives. Of 60 patients
taken to hospitals, 27 went in police cars and 20 in ambulances, the report
found. Others went in private vehicles, and one walked.

"While considered out of the box thinking for this incident, the use of police
cars for transport of gunshot wounds is becoming more accepted," the report
states. "The latest emergency medicine research suggests that speed of getting a
gunshot wound victim to a close by hospital is more important in many cases than
the mode of transport or care in route."

The police transports worked well for critical patients, but police units should
have started helping ambulances get through the scene to the wounded or begun
transporting victims to ambulances, according to the report.

The report's recommendations include early creation of a unified joint command
between police and fire to coordinate response, establishment of a victim
transport coordinator, increased training on public emergency communications
systems and upgrades to those systems.

"Several officers reported that they encountered wounded people, called for
rescue, but no one came," the report states.

A computer aided dispatch system already has been replaced and the radio system
is slated for replacement in the next 18 months.

The report says police and fire need to work out ways to ensure access to
victims at such complicated crime scenes and also need to find ways to
communicate the level of risk at such scenes and whether the perpetrators have
been apprehended.

The report suggests law enforcement consider buying a drone for surveillance of
high intensity crime scenes. A "low cost remotely piloted vehicle" can improve
safety of police pursuits, as well assist officers in setting up perimeters to
contain suspects, the report says.

Aurora police, who do not have their own air support, use aircraft that belongs
to the Denver Police Department. At the time of the theater shooting, the Denver
helicopter was not "immediately available." Some small helicopter drones cost
less than $5,000 each, the report says.

The report also says officers should carry active shooter armor kits and
"tactical medical kits," which might have saved lives during the shooting
incident in Tucson involving Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Since the theater
shooting, a medical kit has been designed for Aurora police, and the department
is training officers to use it.

According to the report, "communication logs do not show any announcement ever
made by police command, fire command or dispatch to the effect that the scene
was safe for fire and EMS (entry)."

"The confusion over ambulance access and the reasons for it led to significant
post incident tensions between police and fire personnel," the report says.

Hogan on Wednesday said tensions between police and fire were not a surprise
given the size of the two departments, as well as the natural tendency to engage
in gossip and half truths.

"When it's city employees in one area talking to city employees in another area,
some believe the other side is trying to cover this or cover that up," Hogan
said during a phone interview.

Key city officials knew for months what was in the report but could not share
that information with employees. Now that the report is public, Hogan believes
those tensions will ease.

Aurora City Councilwoman Barb Cleland, chairwoman of the city's Public Safety
Committee, called the TriData report "fair" and acknowledged that communications
among dispatch, police and fire weren't ideal but that steps are being made to
improve that.

"We had some issues with communications, we did," Cleland said. "We didn't get
(Office of Emergency Management) up as soon as we should have. I think those
were fair criticisms."

She said using police cars to transport the wounded to hospitals saved lives.
Firefighters and paramedics could not enter the theater, she said, until the
facility was cleared by police in case there were booby traps or other shooters.

Aurora police are not commenting on the report, citing the ongoing gag order in
the case.

"Even though it's favorable to the department, we're keeping the families of the
victims in mind," Interim Police Chief Terry Jones said. "We are not talking
about it."

Aurora City Councilman Bob LeGare, who is vice chairman of the city's Public
Safety Committee, said he had not seen the report. But he hopes its findings
will be a valuable tool for other entities who have to deal with tragedies.

"We learned a lot from 9/11, and we learned a lot from 7/20," LeGare said. "Our
misfortune here will be to the benefit of cities across the nation and the
world."

Christopher N. Osher: 303 954 1747, cosher@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/chrisosher

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


