                             939 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            November 5, 2013 Tuesday

Today in Small Business: The Making of a Food Truck King

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 485 words



HIGHLIGHT: Wasting four billion hours a year. Gasoline prices fall. What small
businesses in Virginia want from the next governor.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

Economy


     ·    Gasoline may soon be selling for less than $3 a gallon.
     ·    Manufacturing improved in September, but there was growth in only one
          sector.


Entrepreneurs


     ·    Jon Wheatley bought an apartment to rent on Airbnb and writes about
          how it worked out.
     ·     A Los Angeles food truck king tells his story: "The worst thing that
          happened in my life actually was the gateway to what I was supposed to
          do in life."


Employees


     ·    Google employees talk about the worst things about working for Google.


Finance


     ·    Domestic banks are easing lending policies to businesses, according to
          a Federal Reserve survey.
     ·    But business is still booming for alternative lenders.


Management


     ·    A survey finds small-business owners waste four billion hours a year.
     ·    A high-profile board of advisers can bring credibility but also has
          its drawbacks.
     ·    What do you do when a client ruins your work?


Retail


     ·    Dollar stores are doing well as pinched consumers keep hunting for
          bargains.
     ·    Heather Somerville reports that some brick-and-mortar retailers are
          embracing showrooming and encouraging customers to come to their
          stores with smartphone in hand, ready to shop.


Marketing


     ·    Amazon has a Kindle sale to hail new in-flight device rules.
     ·    A cafe owner comes up with a culinary challenge to bring in customers.


Around the Country


     ·    Chris Farrell says that innovative states aren't necessarily low-tax
          states: "In general, low-tax states have historically been dependent
          on natural resources or on mass-production industries, relying on low
          costs rather than innovative capacity to gain a competitive
          advantage."
     ·    Milwaukee, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Washington and even Leipzig,
          Germany, show that bankrupt Detroit isn't hopeless.
     ·    Virginia small-business owners want their gubernatorial candidates to
          promise to maintain the status quo.
     ·    Costco is growing as a supplier for small-businesses.


Around the World


     ·    Construction growth accelerates in Britain.
     ·    China's service sector hits a high.
     ·    In Cuba, Communist authorities are pressing for "order, discipline and
          obedience" in the growing small-business sector.


Health Care


     ·    Millions of people could qualify for federal subsidies that will pay
          the entire monthly cost of some health care plans being offered in the
          online marketplaces set up under President Obama's health care law.
     ·    Ezra Klein says that a memo written by a Harvard health economist and
          adviser to the president could have saved the Affordable Care Act from
          its current website debacle.


Technology


     ·    BlackBerry reveals a new direction.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Thank You for Sharing
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drones That Deliver Pizza
     ·    Today in Small Business: Crowdfunding Rules Released
     ·    Today in Small Business: Drywall Contractors
     ·    Today in Small Business: An E-Mail Curfew


LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


