                              93 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2014 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Limits of Armchair Warfare

BYLINE: By JACOB WOOD and KEN HARBAUGH.

Jacob Wood, a former Marine Corps sniper team leader, and Ken Harbaugh, a former
Navy pilot and mission commander, served in Afghanistan and now work for a
disaster-relief organization.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 824 words


BOTH of us have a deep appreciation for the work of drone pilots. Whether
patrolling the Helmand Valley with a sniper team or relying on drone-driven
intelligence to plan manned aerial missions, we often prayed that the drone
operators supporting us were cool, calm and collected.

But neither of us ever imagined that drones would do anything more than augment
the manned systems that provide aerial reconnaissance and close air support for
troops on the ground. We took for granted that humans on the front lines would
always play the lead role.

That is why a series of proposed measures over the last year and a half by the
Pentagon have us concerned. It is increasingly clear that our military
leadership has become so enamored of the technological mystique of drones that
they have lost touch with the realities of the modern battlefield.

Perhaps the most glaring example, especially for former snipers and pilots like
us, is the Pentagon's recent decision to scrap the A-10, a heavily armed
close-air support plane officially nicknamed the Warthog but known to troops as
the Flying Gun. This battlefield workhorse flies slow and low, giving pilots a
close-up of what troops on the ground need. Those pilots are an aerial extension
of the units below them, working in a closer relationship than a drone and its
operator ever could. But the A-10 is not sleek and sexy, and it doesn't feed the
brass's appetite for battlefield footage delivered to screens thousands of miles
away, the way a swarm of drones can.

True, the A-10 fleet is more expensive than a drone program, and in this era of
budget consciousness, it's reasonable to argue for cutting it as a cost-saving
measure. The problem is, the decision also fits a disturbing pattern.

In February 2013, the Pentagon announced plans to create a new award -- the
Distinguished Warfare Medal -- for drone pilots and ''cyberwarriors,'' which
would rank above the Purple Heart and Bronze Star. In other words, a drone pilot
flying a mission from an armchair in Nevada might be afforded greater
recognition than a rifleman wounded in a combat zone.

That is ridiculous. As much as we both came to appreciate the work of drone
teams, we never once prayed that they be brave. Those on the front lines require
real courage because they face real danger. But if a drone overhead gets hit, a
monitor somewhere might go fuzzy, and its operator might curse his poor luck for
losing an expensive piece of equipment.

After a public outcry, and under criticism from Congress, the Pentagon relented,
and the award was canceled.

Still, these two episodes raise troubling questions about how policy makers view
the longest wars in American history. Our most senior leaders in the Pentagon,
civilian and military alike, increasingly understand warfare through the literal
lens of a drone camera. And this tendency affects decisions much closer to the
front lines than awards ceremonies.

If the secretaries and flag officers responsible for the Distinguished Warfare
Medal spent as much time (or any time) in a sniper hide or an A-10 cockpit as
they did monitoring drone feeds, they would not consider elevating a
''Nintendo'' medal above those awarded for true heroism and sacrifice.

These leaders deserve some of the criticism, but they are not the only ones to
blame. The American public, which has largely absolved itself of responsibility
for sending nearly three million of its citizens to fight, neither knows nor
cares to know the real price of war.

The controversy surrounding the A-10 retirement and the Distinguished Warfare
Medal should be a wake-up call, a reminder that after over 10 years of fighting,
we still need to educate the broader American public about the true cost of the
wars fought in its name. Lost in all the allure of high-tech gadgets is the fact
that, on the ground and in the air, thousands of men and women continue to risk
their lives to promote America's security and interests.

When Americans venture into harm's way, the last thing we should want is a fair
fight. We both owe a great deal to the drones and operators that cleared routes
ahead of us or provided intelligence for a manned flight. But while we
appreciate their role, we know that they can never provide the kind of truly
connected battlefield support that a well-trained pilot can. And when we
recognize them, we do so for their skill, not their courage.

The moment we conflate proficiency and valor, we cheapen the meaning of bravery
itself. Without a true appreciation of the cost of war, more sons and daughters
will be sent to fight without the consideration such a decision deserves.

As events in Eastern Europe force us to rethink military assumptions and
post-Cold War diplomacy, we will soon face the reality that future conflicts
cannot be won by joystick alone. War is ugly, and attempts to lessen its horrors
will put yet more distance between the American public and the men and women
fighting on its behalf.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/21/opinion/the-limits-of-armchair-warfare.html

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY HIERONYMUS)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


