                             934 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 15, 2014 Sunday
                               SUN FINAL Edition

World Briefs

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 626 words


BRAZILIAN POLICE LOOK INTO ASSAULT

SAO PAULO Police are investigating the alleged assault of an American woman
visiting the Brazilian World Cup host city of Cuiaba, but a medical examiner's
report said Saturday there were no indications that she was raped. A Cuiaba
Police Department statement said a 24 year old woman told them she was attacked
Friday night after the Chile Australia match. She told police she was sleeping
in the house of someone she met in a party held to celebrate Chile's victory
when she awoke with a man on top of her. Her screams woke up her boyfriend, who
was sleeping nearby, and scared away the alleged assailant. Police said the
woman was treated at a local hospital and was in the care of representatives of
the U.S. Embassy.

Hundreds of migrants rescued ROME The Italian coast guard and navy have rescued
more than 300 migrants whose boats ran into trouble in the Mediterranean Sea and
recovered the bodies of 10 migrants whose dinghy had overturned. Naval official
Salvatore Scimone said 39 survivors on Saturday had grabbed onto the dinghy
until rescuers plucked them to safety aboard another boat. He said he feared
that an undetermined number of others were missing in the sea north of Libya.

Airstrikes kill about 100 in Pakistan ISLAMABAD Pakistani intelligence officials
say that airstrikes overnight in the northwestern tribal regions bordering
Afghanistan have killed as many as 100 militants.

Two intelligence officials said Sunday that the airstrikes by the Pakistani
military targeted eight militant hideouts in the North Waziristan tribal area.

The officials did not want to be identified because they were not authorized to
speak to the media.

The information could not be independently verified.

Drone attack kills five SANAA, Yemen A suspected U.S. drone in Yemen's south
targeted a car carrying al Qaeda militants Saturday, killing all five
passengers, Yemeni security officials said. The officials said the attack took
place in a mountainous area in al Saied in the southern Shabwa province. One of
those killed in the attack was a suspected al Qaeda leader named Musaad al
Habashi, the officials said, speaking on condition of anonymity because they
were not authorized to speak to the press.

Chinese politician investigated for corruption BEIJING Chinese authorities said
Saturday that they are investigating a senior national politician for alleged
violations of Communist Party rules and the country's laws, as Beijing shows no
easing in its efforts to find and punish corrupt officials.

Su Rong, vice chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative
Conference, is the highest ranking official to come under investigation under
President Xi Jinping, who has vowed to fight corruption.

France expels Tunisian PARIS France has expelled a 28 year old Tunisian it
accuses of running a jihadi recruitment ring which is sending fighters to Syria.
An Interior Ministry statement Saturday says the unidentified Tunisian was sent
back to Tunisia on Thursday "in view of the threat his presence constituted for
public security and the safety of the state."

The ministry says the man had "played a central role" in the jihadi recruitment
ring in the Grenoble area.

Bomb rocks Syrian town BEIRUT A strong explosion struck a weapons market in an
eastern Syrian town near the border with Iraq on Saturday, killing at least
eight people and wounding many others, state media and activists said. The
explosion in the eastern town of Mayadeen came amid heavy fighting in the
coastal province of Latakia and the southern region of Daraa, where opposition
fighters captured an army post on a hill overlooking wide areas in the province
where the anti government uprising started more than three years ago.Denver Post
wire reports

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


