                             935 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                           September 4, 2014 Thursday
                                  UNK Edition

Aurora theater shooting report urges better, faster communication

BYLINE: Carlos Illescas and Jordan Steffen

SECTION: Z; Pg. 0Z

LENGTH: 2595 words


AURORA Emergency responders faced a "chaotic situation" that jammed
communication between cops and firefighters and slowed ambulances trying to
reach people wounded in the Aurora movie theater shooting, a report commissioned
by the city has found.

A 188 page report reviewing the emergency response praised the city of Aurora
for its response to the July 2012 shooting at the Century Aurora 16 Theater that
left 12 dead and injured 70 others. But the bulk of the after action report
outlined more than 80 recommendations for improvements to the way police
officers and fire officials respond to future events.

Specifically, the report urged better and faster communication and coordination.

"While there are things to improve, as is always found in hindsight, the City of
Aurora should be proud of its response to the largest civilian shooting in U.S.
history, and the largest mass casualty incident in Aurora's history," the report
read. "To repeat the key point, the outcome could not have been better in terms
of lives saved and a rapid arrest."

Aurora police are not commenting on the report, citing the ongoing gag order in
the case.

"Even though it's favorable to the department, we're keeping the families of the
victims in mind," said Interim Police Chief Terry Jones, who was not chief when
the shooting occurred. "We are not talking about it."

Defense attorneys and prosecutors in the James Holmes murder case have tried for
months to block the police report. The city of Aurora asked the court for
guidance if it could release the report, and several city council members have
said for weeks that the city should do just that.

On Wednesday, court officials released the report two days earlier than city
officials intended.

Aurora City Councilman Bob LeGare, who is vice chairman of the city's Public
Safety Committee, said he had not yet seen the report. But he hopes its findings
will be a valuable tool for other entities that must deal with future tragedies.

"We learned a lot from 9/11 and we learned a lot from 7/20," LeGare said. "Our
misfortune here will be to the benefit of cities across the nation and the
world."

The report assessed the response by the city and emergency services in the first
three days and family assistance and community assistance in the first week.
Investigators wrote that the crime itself, which included the shooter's
background and motivation, was out of the scope of its work.

The names of the gunman, victims and individual responders are not used in the
report.

The city posted a statement about the report on its Facebook page.

"The report concludes all those with survivable injuries survived, and makes
suggestions for improvement," the statement read. "We're proud of our emergency
responders, who carried out many remarkable actions that night."

TriData, which completed the report, conducted more than 180 interviews in
reviewing the response.

"The situation was complex, and there were many challenges for first
responders," the report said.

Communication the night of the shooting and in the days that followed was a key
area for improvement, according to the report.

During the first hours after the shooting, police and fire commanders did not
establish a unified command. Responders did not effectively use available radio
systems in the initial, critical minutes of response, triage and transport.

The breakdown in communication was clear when 33 minutes after the shooting as
ambulances and paramedics struggled to reach critical victims a fire official
advised their chief that, "So far, it's running pretty smooth."

No procedures were in place to ensure face to face contact or direct
communications between police and fire incident commanders.

The report says that more quickly establishing a unified command could have
helped get ambulances closer to victims. Emergency responders struggled to reach
critically injured victims because they were overwhelmed by the wounded people
streaming out of the theater, police didn't tell the fire department how to
reach some patients and fire crews did not ask police how their cars were
getting through to victims.

Access routes for ambulances were not adequately identified and kept clear.
Police officers generally could not move police vehicles not assigned to them
because the cars are not keyed alike.

Responders did not assess the level of risk inside the theater. Fire commanders
did not know that Holmes had been arrested.

Triage ribbons were not attached to victims to show the severity of conditions.

About 60 victims, most with gunshot wounds, were taken to five area hospitals.
No hospital turned the influx of patients away.

Of those patients, 20 arrived in ambulances, 27 were taken to hospitals in
police cars, others went in private cars and one walked.

The lack of communication between police and fire department during the response
led to strained relationships in the months following the shooting.

Aurora Mayor Steve Hogan acknowledged that there were tensions between the
police and fire department over what was revealed in the report to be a lack of
communication between police and fire.

He said that's natural given the size of the two departments, and like any
business, there's always gossip and half truths going back and forth about
certain issues.

"When it's city employees in one area talking to city employees in another area,
some believe the other side is trying to cover this or cover that up," Hogan
said.

Key city officials knew for months what was in the report but could not share
that information with employees. Now that the report is public, Hogan believes
those tensions will ease.

"Those are typical human defense mechanisms," Hogan said. "But that doesn't
apply anymore because the report states what it was."

The report praised officers who transported victims in their patrol cars and
said the use of squad cars in transporting victims, "may become a more accepted
practice nationally." But the report also found that officers did not tell fire
officials or EMS crews how to get through the "parking lot maze" to reach
victims.

"The police thought fire could figure this out on their own," the report read.
"Conversely, the fire department did not ask for instructions."

One officer who was interviewed said he asked an ambulance crew to follow him
into the theater with a backboard to help remove a victim who had been
"eviscerated." The officer grabbed the backboard, shouted "Just come with me!"
and ran back into the theater.

"When he looked back to see if they were following him, he saw the crew getting
back in their ambulance. They did not follow him inside," the report said.

Decisions by officers to both assess and transport victims to hospitals was,
"critically important."

One of the first SWAT officers to arrive at the theater quickly realized there
were "enough officers and triage was urgently needed" and there were "several
obvious deaths" inside the theater. The officer who is also a paramedic
immediately switched his roles and began assessing patients.

The report emphasizes that no one died because they were not taken to the
hospital in an ambulance. All of victims who needed to be taken to the hospital
were transported within 52 minutes of the first 911 call from the theater.

Within the first 15 minutes, five ambulances had arrived on scene. By that time
police officers had already taken at least three patients to hospitals.

After 24 minutes police officers had taken 12 victims to hospitals and six
ambulances had arrived at the scene. None of the EMS crews were able to reach
victims or transport them to hospitals at this time.

Even if the ambulances had not been delayed, there were not enough ambulances at
the scene early enough to carry all of the victims who needed to be transported,
the report said. Still, the report could not say definitively whether officers
should have waited for some victims to be transported by ambulance.

"The initial use of police vehicles to transport critical patients was not only
acceptable but likely represented the best care for critical patients," the
report said.

But instead of making multiple trips to hospitals, police officers could have
helped lead officers into the scene, the report found.

The report praised the department's handling of the evacuations and removal of
explosives at the gunman's Paris Street apartment, where officers awoke
residents at about 2 a.m. Several of the residents did not speak English some
spoke Spanish and a few spoke "an Asian language that was not immediately
identified."

Officers were able to make it clear residents "did not have the option of
staying," but the report suggested that in the future, officers use apps for
smart phones and iPads that translate language.

The conclusion of the report's areas for improvement section also states: "The
neighboring jurisdictions and federal agencies, especially the FBI, provided
excellent, timely assistance in force. The City is aware of the lessons learned,
and has already taken measures to implement changes. It is hoped that the
findings and recommendations will be useful to other jurisdictions as well."

Theaters were not spared in the report. Movie theaters should consider
installing alarms on emergency or secondary exits, use video surveillance and
have an intercom system to warn people in case of emergencies.

The report also says movie theaters should have the ability to turn off movies
and turn on the lights.

During the days following the shooting, families did not get adequate
information about their loved ones in a timely manner and access to victims was
complicated by a lack of communication between police and fire departments.
First responders could have been rotated out to avoid exhaustion, but were
instead also used to serve as security for the prayer vigil and presidential
visit that followed the shooting.

Former Aurora Police Chief Dan Oates, who was the top cop at the time of the
theater shooting, said he could not comment on specifics of the report because
of the ongoing gag order.

Oates, who is now police chief for the Miami Beach, Fla. police department, will
be coming back to testify against Holmes when his trial gets under way.

"The report speaks for itself," Oates said.

Since the shooting, Aurora police and the Aurora Fire Department have developed
a joint active shooter protocol, according to the report. The protocol includes
incident command guidelines, safety guidelines, instructions for rapid
assessment and protocols for removing victims from a scene and transporting them
to hospitals.

That plan is being finalized.

Law enforcement should consider buying a drone for surveillance of high
intensity crime scenes, the report suggested. A "low cost remotely piloted
vehicle" can improve safety of police pursuits, as well as assist officers in
setting up perimeters to contain suspects.

Aurora police do not have their own air support, but use aircraft that belongs
to the Denver Police Department. At the time of the theater shooting, the Denver
helicopter was not "immediately available."

Some small helicopter drones cost less than $5,000, the report said. The report
also says officers should carry active shooter armor kits and "tactical medical
kits," Which might have saved lives during the shooting incident in Tucson,
Ariz., involving Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

Since the theater shooting, a medical kit has been designed for Aurora police
and the department is now training officers to use it.

The report criticized the Arapahoe County District Attorney's Office for saying
it needed to control victim communication to protect their case and that was
standard practice in homicide cases.

"However, if this were true, it is perplexing why this was the first time such a
policy had been mandated for homicide victims' families in Aurora in recent
memory, according to APD staff," the report said.

Much of the information already has been out there whether through court
testimony or the 2013 Aurora Fire Department timeline analysis of events.

The TriData report states many of the recommendations "have already been
implemented by Aurora."

The report is expected to be invaluable not only to Aurora, but to law
enforcement and emergency agencies throughout the country who may have to
respond to similar incidents in the future, observers say.

"I think we are going to see some answers," said local attorney Dan Recht, who
is not a party to the case, before the report was released. "Whether it will
have an impact on future emergency work, and propel law enforcement to move more
quickly and efficiently, I think it will do that in spades."

According to an Aurora fire department report last year, ambulances trying to
reach the inside of the theater were blocked by parked cars, the 1,400 people
fleeing the theater and by police who arrived quickly on the scene and were able
to make it inside the chaotic Century Aurora 16 theater.

DOCUMENT: Read the Aurora theater shooting report.

The Aurora City Council received a brief summary when the city received the
report earlier this year.

However, City Councilwoman Barb Cleland said there will be areas for improvement
outlined in the TriData review.

"Any time you do a report, we may find mistakes, things we could have done
better and that's what it's all about," Cleland said. "The TriData report will
tell us: 'Did we do anything wrong?'

"Personally, I don't think we did, but that's not to say we couldn't have done
things differently."

The Virginia based TriData, which has conducted so called "after action reports"
in the wake of mass shootings at Columbine High School and Virginia Tech
University, reviewed thousands of radio and dispatch transmissions and
interviewed hundreds of first responders, which include police officers,
firefighters and ambulance drivers.

Prosecutors in Arapahoe County District Court and defense attorneys for Holmes
sought to keep the report under wraps as part of the continuing gag order in the
case against Holmes, who is scheduled to go to on trial by the end of the year.

But District Court Judge Stephen Collins in August ruled the report, which cost
Aurora more than $250,000, could be made public after the names were redacted.

The city of Aurora took the issue to court, seeking guidance on whether the
report should be available for review and did not take a position either way on
the matter. It had until Sept. 11 to appeal the judge's decision, which it did
not.

Aurora Fire Chief Mike Garcia said after the department's initial review was
released to The Denver Post after an open records request that he welcomed a
comprehensive outside probe of how his department handled the situation.

"There's always lessons to be learned and lessons to be shared," he said. "I'm
so proud of the response of our firefighters."

That analysis, along with other incident reports, found, among other things,
that notification from fire dispatchers to emergency medical workers happened 17
minutes after the shooting was reported at 12:38 a.m. on the morning of July 20,
2012.

Police dispatchers were in the same area as fire dispatchers, but they
communicate on separate channels, according to a Harvard Kennedy School report
on the response.

An ambulance from Rural/Metro, which contracts services with Aurora, arrived
five minutes after the first call but went to a staging area instead.

"I think we're going to find out why the various government entities weren't
communicating with each other more efficiently."

Carlos Illescas: 303 954 1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or
twitter.com/cillescasdp

Reporters Zahira Torres, Jennifer Brown and John Ingold contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


