                             948 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (T Magazine)

                            February 21, 2014 Friday

Chic in Review | Prince William's Ivory Intolerance, The Newest Kardashian Kids
and Cara Delevingne's Designs for Mulberry

SECTION: T-MAGAZINE; womens-fashion

LENGTH: 422 words



HIGHLIGHT: Plus, Banana Republic&#8217;s real-life-couples-cum-models,
Fendi&#8217;s futuristic drones on the runway and more, as we run the numbers
from the last week in style and culture.


 All the fashion news of the week that's fit to reprint.

Magisterial remorse
After attending the the world's largest ever conference on the illegal wildlife
trade, Prince William has announced that he wants all 1,200 ivory-containing
items in Buckingham Palace removed and destroyed. It is reported that Jane
Goodall agrees. Big ups to the Duke for his conservationist stance, though
wouldn't preventing future elephant poaching be a more relevant move than
destroying relics of the past?

A bold correction to retrograde standards of cute!
In keeping with their ambitions to leave their K-branded mark on all sectors of
the "lifestyle" industry, the Kardashians are now moving into children's wear.
Starting March 15, Kardashian Kids (what else?) will be available exclusively at
Babies "R" Us. The tiny outfits will be finished with "on-trend" details such as
leopard print and leatherette. Sexy babies, nice.

Unmanned aerial vehicles take Milan
Fendi deployed multiple branded drones to capture its runway show and livestream
the footage to plugged-in viewers at home. Models were reportedly unfazed by the
futuristic technology.

Same-sex sweater-wearers
Banana Republic's new spring ad campaign features coupled models who just so
happen to be together in real life. Among the well-heeled love birds are two
male interior designers - Nate Berkus and Jeremiah Brent - who appear in
multiple ads canoodling in marled knits and desert boots. Two is indeed better
than one.

Gucci gains gold
And the winner of the brand with the most glossy magazine cover appearances per
season is ... Gucci (with 108). This is the third consecutive win for the Frida
Giannini-led house, which surely has some advantages that helped get it there,
including tons of evening wear. The people do love shiny things.

Start saving
Mulberry has tapped Cara Delevingne, the face of its own spring 2014 campaign,
to design an eponymous line of handbags. The jewel in the crown? A camo-print
convertible backpack. But of course ...

Mind the Gap
Gap Inc. announced Wednesday that it will be increasing its minimum hourly wage,
setting it at $9 and upping it to $10 next year. This will raise the pay of
65,000 workers (an overwhelming majority of its employee base) and pre-empt the
Obama-endorsed bill that proposes a $10.10 national minimum-wage by 2016.

Instagram of the Week
 Make-up systems are go. #aw1415 #lfw @MACcosmetic


     ·    Photos of The Moment | Gucci
     ·    Milan Top 5 | It's a Wrap
     ·    Photos of The Moment | Gucci
     ·    Runway in Review
     ·    Model-Morphosis | Maud Welzen at Gucci


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


