                             942 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            December 2, 2013 Monday

Today in Small Business: Gloomy Numbers

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 334 words



HIGHLIGHT: Retail sales for the big weekend disappoint. But manufacturing
accelerated in November. And, surprise, there is still work to be done on
HealthCare.gov.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy


     ·    An American who won this year's Nobel Prize for economics says he is
          worried about the boom in the stock market.
     ·    Manufacturing accelerated unexpectedly in November.


Retail


     ·    Thanksgiving and Black Friday saw a record $1.06 billion and $1.93
          billion, respectively, in online sales - 15.6 percent via tablets and
          8.6 percent via smartphones. Otherwise, however, the numbers were
          gloomy.
     ·    New technologies are helping stores track their customers' moves this
          season. And Amazon is testing drone delivery.
     ·    Here are 12 Vine videos that sum up Black Friday.
     ·    The president went shopping on Small Business Saturday, but Dan Haar
          thinks the nationwide effort is facing headwinds. Cheryl Isaac shares
          her Small Business Saturday experience, and Ron Burgundy talks it up
          from Bismarck, N.D.
     ·    Cyber Monday may finally live up to its hype.


Employees


     ·    A German company shows how it creates skilled workers in North
          Carolina.
     ·    A new survey finds that employees don't like working for creative
          managers.


Marketing


     ·    Please enjoy these offensive vintage advertisements that would never
          get published today.


Around the Country


     ·    Large oil companies are pulling up stakes in Kansas.
     ·    An Indian tribe hopes to build a bottled water plant in Maine.
     ·    Some business owners in Gainesville, Fla., are getting frustrated with
          homeless people.


Around the World


     ·    A credit agency downgrades the Netherlands because of its weak
          economy.


Health Care


     ·    The White House says it met its Nov. 30 deadline for HealthCare.gov,
          but there is still work to be done.


Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Can You Attract Top Sales Representatives if You Don't Pay Sales
          Commissions?
     ·    A Website Concludes Its Users Need More Hand-Holding
     ·    Trying to Explain Complicated Ideas Online
     ·    A Web Site That Helps Shoppers Find Brick-and-Mortar Stores
     ·    A Start-Up Tries to Tap the Joy of Indie Food


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


