                              94 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2014 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Drones on a Different Mission

BYLINE: By JAMES GORMAN

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 530 words


Belize has made a great effort to protect its coral reef system -- the largest
in the Western Hemisphere -- by establishing more than a dozen protected areas.
But patrolling large stretches of ocean and coastline and enforcing fishing
regulations takes time, people and boats.

Or drones.

In June, the Wildlife Conservation Society began training operators from the
Belize Fisheries Department to use two drones to help track illegal fishing
activities. The drones went into use just at the start of lobster season.

This is only the beginning, said Julio R. Maaz, community fisheries coordinator
for the conservation society in Belize, who hopes the drones will prove a
cost-effective way to ''monitor our national waters.''

And it is just one example of the growing use of drones, or unmanned aerial
vehicles, in conservation.

The military use of armed drones is well known and contentious. But the use of
much smaller unmanned planes, closer in size to the remote-controlled planes
hobbyists fly, is spreading into all sorts of areas, particularly when they are
equipped with cameras.

Drones have been used to monitor seabird populations off Australia and rain
forests in Indonesia, to study caribou and their effects on vegetation in
Greenland, to combat poaching in Nepal and to conduct other conservation work in
Madagascar, Gabon and other countries.

Their use in Belize was made possible by the conservation society and
ConservationDrones.org, a small two-year-old nonprofit run by a researcher in
Australia that has been a force in promoting their use in places like Belize.

So far, said Lian Pin Koh, a founder of the group, it has built about 100 drones
for use in a dozen or so countries. They can detect habitat damage over wide
areas, spot signs of illegal activity and help count populations of animals in
remote areas.

Dr. Koh -- who was born in Singapore, studied in Europe, and received his Ph.D.
in ecology and evolutionary biology at Princeton -- said he started the group
because of the plight of orangutans and because of his hobby. ''I fly
remote-controlled aircraft,'' he said.

''About two years ago,'' he said, ''a colleague and myself started talking about
problems facing orangutans.'' The expansion of oil palm plantations was
destroying the habitat of the apes in Sumatra. He thought, why not attach a
camera to ''a toy plane.'' He suggested it to Serge Wich, a founder of
ConservationDrones.org. They outfitted their first conservation drone and
reported on the surveys of the rain forest they conducted with it.

''That led many of our colleagues to contact us,'' Dr. Koh said. ''They wanted
to build their own drones, so we started traveling around the world and building
them and starting up programs.

''Now we have a whole fleet of conservation drones built for different
purposes,'' he said. ''The ones we built for Belize were specifically designed
to withstand the harsh saltwater environment.''

Dr. Maaz said the drones would be used for about six months to monitor various
locations daily. Then the Fisheries Department will step back and assess the
results.

''Expectations are very high in Belize,'' Dr. Maaz said. ''There's so much we
can do and need to do.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/22/science/drones
-on-a-different-mission.html

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Michael Sabal of the Belize Fisheries Department, launching a
conservation drone to monitor illegal fishing. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JULIO R.
MAAZ/WILDLIFE CONSERVATION SOCIETY)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company


