                             945 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                          December 11, 2013 Wednesday

Amazon's Prophet and Losses

BYLINE: DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 670 words



HIGHLIGHT: One of the oldest clich&#233;s about Wall Street is that the market
can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent. That is one way to sum up
Paulo Santos&#8217;s experience with shorting Amazon&#8217;s stock.


Three months ago, you could buy a share of Amazon for $300. Today, it would cost
you nearly $400. Surely such a run-up was driven by expectations that the
company's all-important fourth quarter would be even better than forecast.

Except analysts have been cutting their profit estimates, not raising them.
Three months ago,according to Yahoo Finance, analysts calculated that the
retailer would earn 77 cents this quarter. Now they foresee only 66 cents.
This is the kind of thing that drives Amazon detractors crazy. Lowered
expectations mean Amazon has a greater chance of meeting or exceeding them,
which would in turn be interpreted as bullish by investors, driving the stock up
again.

Paulo Santos, a Portuguese trader who writes for Seeking Alpha, has been one of
the most consistent and impassioned Amazon critics during the last few years. He
has argued that the company is losing money not because it is investing for the
future, which is what Amazon says, but because it is a less-than-great business.
He has put his money where his arguments are, betting the stock will go down.

In retrospect, that was not a good idea.

"I lost and lost big," Mr. Paulos told me in an email.

"Amazon is more unprofitable now than when I started writing about it, will
remain more unprofitable than when I started writing about it, but the stock
went up a lot in spite of that."

Mr. Santos declined to be more specific about his losses, but he said the final
straw came when the company released its third-quarter resultsseven weeks ago.
Amazon's revenue was about $400 million more than anticipated, and the stock
rose nearly 10 percent.

The unexpected increase in revenue, Mr. Santos argued, could be attributed to a
change in accounting in which e-books are accounted for at 100 percent of
revenue instead of 30 percent of revenue.

Others wondered this as well. During the Oct. 24 earnings call, Tom Szkutak,
Amazon's chief financial officer, was asked whether an accounting change was
driving revenue growth.

"It's not a significant or meaningful impact to the overall growth rates, and
certainly this transition has been going on for, you know,  some number of
quarters now, so it's not a lot I can help you with there," Mr. Szkutak
said,according to the transcript.

This is a typical Amazon response. The company was eager to talk about
delivering packages by drones, something that will not happen for years if it
ever does. But in general, it says as little as it can about how it makes - or
does not make - money.

Most investors and analysts believe there are good things happening that they
cannot quite see. Only a very few, including Mr. Santos, argue that it is the
opposite.

Yet even the analysts, who are paid big money to understand the company, often
appear to be guessing.

A columnist for Barron'srecently asked a half-dozen Amazon analysts for their
Kindle Fire sales estimates. Their answers for 2012 ranged from seven million
units to 12.6 million. For 2013, the range was even wider: 10 million to 22.6
million.

Amazon says it sells the tablets at cost; it will make its money when people
stock up the devices with entertainment. But it does not break out sales of
digital media, either.

"They are remarkably adept at putting out a good press release that shows their
forward momentum without actually showing their cards," Tom Mainelli, who covers
tablets for IDC, told the newspaper.

Mr. Santos is still convinced he is right about Amazon, but he has thrown in the
towel. "I concede defeat,"he told his readers. He described himself to me as
"frustrated and furious."

An Amazon spokesman declined to comment about Mr. Santos, who might be defeated
but cannot stay away from the subject. A recent post laid out the reasons Amazon
is losing ground to both Google and Walmart.


     ·    Daily Report: Investors Love Amazon.com, Despite Lack of Profit
     ·    Amazon Updates Kindle Fire Line
     ·    Amazon Pairs Print and Digital Books With New Program
     ·    E-Book Sellers Face a Battle to Win iPad Customers
     ·    Disruptions: At Your Door in Minutes, Delivered by Robot


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2013 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


