                             946 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Bits)

                            January 4, 2014 Saturday

Ecuadorian Navy Delivers for Amazon Chief

BYLINE: DAVID STREITFELD

SECTION: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 253 words



HIGHLIGHT: Jeff Bezos, vacationing in the Galapagos Islands this week, felt some
serious pain. And it wasn&#8217;t just because UPS had failed to make all of
Amazon&#8217;s shipments by Christmas.


The Ecuadorian Navy offered Jeff Bezos same-day shipping on an Amazon Prime
package: Mr. Bezos himself.

Amazon's chief executive suffered a kidney stone attack visiting the Galapagos
Islands this week, according to the local press. A Navy helicopter plucked Mr.
Bezos from a cruise ship and flew him to Baltra Island, which has one of the two
Galapagos airports. His private plane then took him back to the United States.

An Amazon spokesman, asked for comment, quoted Mr. Bezos as saying: "Galapagos:
five stars. Kidney stones: zero stars."

Kidney stones form when there are elevated levels of certain substances in
urine. They may be "as small as a grain of sand or as large as a pearl. Some
stones are even as big as golf balls," the Mayo Clinic says. The bigger they
are, the more pain they cause as they make their way through the urinary tract.

While not usually a sign of serious problems, the stones - as well as Mr.
Bezos's imminent 50th birthday - might spark some questions about a succession
plan at Amazon. He founded the company, and is its largest shareholder and
driving force.

Further details were not forthcoming. Knowing Mr. Bezos' savvy use of
promotional opportunities, it's surprising he did not say he fetched help by
using the new "Mayday" feature on Kindle tablets.


     ·    Amazon Workers in Germany Strike Again
     ·    Disruptions: At Your Door in Minutes, Delivered by Robot
     ·    Amazon Floats the Notion of Delivery Drones
     ·    Daily Report: Investors Love Amazon.com, Despite Lack of Profit
     ·    A New Book Portrays Amazon as Bully


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


