                             949 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              March 3, 2014 Monday

Today in Small Business: Hiring Freeze

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 450 words



HIGHLIGHT: NIne new marketing software offerings. Why TV commercials are bad
investments for small businesses. And why more businesses are starting to use
drones.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today?

The Economy

The supply of new homes for sale remains extremely low despite explosive price
gains.

Some analysts feel that even as the recovery falters, manufacturing and energy
are in the midst of a broad expansion that is helping to generate growth.

When it comes to spending on food as a share of total consumer expenditures,
Americans have the most affordable food on the planet.

A monthly survey indicates that small-business hiring is frozen, matching the
unusually cold weather experienced throughout much of the country.

Washington

Here's the latest look at the Senate landscape and the mid-term elections.

Management

About two-thirds of business owners surveyed expect to transferownership in the
next 10 years. But their businesses probably are not worth as much as they
think.

Two top Microsoft executives are reported to have quit after a new chief
executive was named.

"Sometimes, you gotta blow things up!" says an executive coach.

An entrepreneur explains how you can increase your business performance by
treating your body better.

Marketing

Here are nine software offerings to help marketers manage and convert leads.

This is why TV commercials are a bad investment for small businesses.

Here are eight big business branding mistakes that no small business wants to
make.

Around the Country

A few suburban Seattle franchise owners share some lessons learned.

Arizona is expected to post the second-highest rate of job growth among states
in 2014, according to a recent report, trailing only North Dakota.

Small-business development centers across the country are struggling with budget
cuts.

A pizzeria is inundated with calls from American Idol viewers trying to cast
their votes.

Technology

Here are seven people who are crucial to Internet security.

A mutual fund investor explains how Starbucks' early investment in proprietary
digital and mobile payment solutions is paying off.

More businesses are starting to use drones. And a fleet of toaster-sized
satellites made by a California company will orbit earth and provide real-time
monitoring.

Here are the top trends at the 2014 Mobile World Congress.

Tech interns make more than many full-time American workers.

Why data security is not the first concern of start-ups.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa.,  consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    The Mystery of Chinese New Year, Solved
     ·    Using Skype to Build a Business
     ·    Today in Small Business: Image-Based Ads
     ·    Study Indicates That Bill Redefining Full-Time Employment Would Have
          Costs


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


