                             947 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            February 7, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: The Harlem Renaissance

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 711 words



HIGHLIGHT: Another mixed jobs report.Why immigration reform is going nowhere.
And how far would you go to get someone to invest in your business?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small business owners today.

Today's Best Reads

Meet the small businesses leading the Harlem Renaissance.

Travis Bradberry explains how successful people stay calm: "Taking time to
contemplate what you're grateful for isn't merely the 'right' thing to do. It
also improves your mood, because it reduces the stress hormone cortisol by 23
percent."

Jobs

Another mixed jobs report - shown here in charts.

Some in the finance world are suggesting we ought to give less weight to the
employment rate.

United States productivity climbed 3.2 percent in the fourth quarter but the
payroll-to-population rate fell to 42 percent in January.

The National Small Business Association says its members are not hiring because
of "Obamacare" and the National Federation of Independent Business reports that
a net 12 percent of small-business owners plan to add jobs in the next three
months - the highest percentage since September 2007.

Self-employment is down 5 percent since the end of the recession, according to
another report.

The Economy

Dun & Bradstreet's new Small Business Health Index declined slightly in January.

The trade deficit widened as exports declined.

General Motors reported lower-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings.

Washington

Here are five reasons immigration reform is going nowhere.

The Federal Aviation Administration grounds a brewery's drone beer deliveries.

A study concludes that the United States really does have the highest corporate
tax rate, loopholes and all.

A Supreme Court case could turn a business into the legal equivalent of an
individual, making owners personally liable for their business's actions.

The new commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service told Congress that his
agency is understaffed and underfinanced in every one of its mission areas, and
its ability to collect revenue and engage in taxpayer assistance will continue
to suffer until lawmakers provide more funds.

Entrepreneurship

Here are three things entrepreneurs can learn from video games.

A small business hopes to spot its Olympic bracelets at Sochi.

Social Media

Sixteen percent of social media users in the world are based in Europe.

Twitter's user growth slows and its stock dips.

Retail

An industry group says that retail sales in 2014 will rise 4.1 percent, with
online sales growing 9 percent to 12 percent. In January, however, retail sales
were chilled by bad weather and low consumer confidence.

A cash-based payments platform that allows consumers to pay their rent, utility
bills and loans, buy tickets online and more is partnering with Family Dollar
Stores.

OpenTable begins testing mobile payments at restaurants.

Finance

Small-business access to credit worries the Federal Reserve, although banks say
they are lending more.

Bank of America sends a credit card offer to the wrong customer.

How far would you go to get someone to invest in your business?

Bitcoin

Bank Indonesia says Bitcoin isn't a legal currency but allows people to trade at
their own risk.

PayPal is cracking down on the virtual currency's sellers.

A venture capitalist is betting a pair of socks (and $50 million) on Bitcoin.

Around the Country

Joe Biden's analysis of LaGuardia Airport: "I must be in some third-world
country."

Walking zombies prank New York City.

Around the World

A man in Britain finds out what life's like with a full-face tattoo - and is
pleasantly surprised.

Zimbabwe must be the only place in the world to have eight currencies as legal
tender, none of which is its own.

This photo from Mars puts things into perspective!

Technology

Google's next hardware push is videoconferencing for businesses.

Meanwhile, a company is introducing a useful tool that will fold Google+
Hangouts into its existing videoconferencing systems.

An I.T. and operations consultant explains why businesses need their own
servers.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting firm that
helps clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on
Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: A Losing Bet on the Super Bowl
     ·    An Employer Tells Congress the Health Care Mandate Could Triple His
          Costs
     ·    Today in Small Business: Joke Products
     ·    Today in Small Business: Data Breaches
     ·    Today in Small Business: Founded During the Recession


LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


