                             957 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (ArtsBeat)

                             April 3, 2014 Thursday

Popcast: Parsing Big Ears

SECTION: ARTS

LENGTH: 383 words



HIGHLIGHT: Ben Ratliff and Christopher R. Weingarten, a critic for Rolling
Stone, discuss the free-form music festival in Knoxville, Tenn.


Big Ears, the extraordinary music festival in Knoxville, Tenn., had its third
edition this past weekend.

[Audio | Parsing Big Ears : Ben Ratliff and Christopher R. Weingarten, a critic
for Rolling Stone, discuss the free-form music festival in Knoxville, Tenn. Play
Audio]

It was broad and wise enough to contain the following: Steve Reich's "Music For
18 Musicians," played with wicked precision by Ensemble Signal; the drone-doom
instrumental band Earth; the precise, quasi-minimalist acoustic trio Dawn of
Midi; the five-alarm improviser Keiji Haino, moaning slogans of aesthetic
autonomy and playing wooden flutes, electric guitar and air-synths with the
free-rock power trio Nazoranai; the improvised vocals-and-electric guitar duo
Body/Head, with Kim Gordon and Bill Nace; John Adams's modern classic "Shaker
Loops," performed by a string septet from the Wordless Music Orchestra;
Radiohead's Jonny Greenwood, playing new works for electric guitar and
orchestra; the post-Velvet Underground art songs of Dean and Britta, played in
front of Andy Warhol's black-and-white, slowed-down "Screen Tests"; the raw
acoustic guitarist Bill Orcutt; and the zither improviser and laughter
workshopper Laraaji.

It is not the only putatively free-form or outsider-music festival in the United
States - not even close. (Hello, Boomslang; hello, Pickathon; hello, Neon
Marshmallow; et cetera.) But it stands apart because of its commitment to
excellence in extremes: music from the classical tradition, presented in the
optimal conditions of Knoxville's historic Bijou and Tennessee Theaters, as well
as gnarly drones and noise and much else from the tradition that the Rolling
Stone critic Christopher Weingarten describes loosely as punk rock.

Mr. Weingarten and I both covered the festival last weekend, and got together a
few days later to make sense of what we saw. Listen above, download the MP3 or
subscribe in iTunes.

RELATED

Ben Ratliff on Big Ears

Christopher R. Weingarten on Big Ears

SPOTIFY PLAYLIST


Tracks from the recordings discussed this week can be found on Spotify.


     ·    Steve Reich Is Awarded $550,000 Prize by Spanish Foundation
     ·    Popcast: The Latest Reinvention of Kim Gordon
     ·    Calling All Nico Fans
     ·    Jack White Plans to Record and Produce a Single on Record Store Day
     ·    Jazz Festival to Honor Eric Dolphy


LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


