                             958 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            April 16, 2014 Wednesday

Bank of America's Big Loss

BYLINE: SYDNEY EMBER

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2569 words



HIGHLIGHT: Bank of America posts a $276 million loss. | Fed chairwoman suggests
new rules for short-term borrowing. | Moelis &#038; Company faces an I.P.O.
market chill. | Investors got a glimpse of Alibaba&#8217;s growth in
Yahoo&#8217;s earnings report. | Questions about the value of corporate
monitoring programs.


Bank of America reported a first-quarter loss of $276 million on Wednesday, as
legal expenses related to the financial crisis mounted, Michael Corkery writes
in DealBook. The bank said its litigation expenses increased to $6 billion in
the quarter, showing how Bank of America is still paying for its mortgages
missteps nearly six years after the financial crisis.

Its quarterly loss of $276 million, or a loss of 5 cents a share, was in sharp
contrast with a profit of $1.5 billion, or earnings of 10 cents a share, it
posted in the period a year earlier. Analysts polled by Bloomberg News had been
expecting earnings per share of 5 cents.

Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are to report first-quarter results on Thursday
before the bell.

NEW RULES ON SHORT-TERM BORROWING?  |  Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the
Federal Reserve, suggested some measures on Tuesday that could restrain the use
of short-term borrowing at the largest banks, including requiring them to hold
more capital, Peter Eavis writes in DealBook. Capital is the financial
cornerstone of a bank. A bank with more capital can, in theory, absorb more
losses and may be less vulnerable to a bank run.

Banks, particularly those that borrow billions of dollars a day in the
short-term debt markets, may oppose the measures out of self-interest, since
holding more capital can make it harder for banks to post the sort of returns
that their shareholders expect. Bankers may also argue that the Fed is
practicing overkill. And though bank lobbyists might note that since the crisis,
Wall Street firms make much less use of the so-called repo lending market - in
which banks lend and borrow money for short periods against financial collateral
- Ms. Yellen said in her speech that the existing overhaul might not address
potential weaknesses in such places.

MOELIS & CO. FIGHTS I.P.O. MARKET CHILL  |  When Moelis & Company begins trading
on Wednesday, it will be contending with a volatile market that is weighing on
initial public offerings. The pricing of its offering at $25 a share - below its
expected range - suggests that not even a strongly performing investment bank
can escape the chill in the I.P.O. market, which had flown high until recently,
Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook. The bank's I.P.O. will also test
whether investors believe it is different than other boutique banks, which shone
in 2013 but whose shares have suffered a bit recently.

For the bank's founder, Kenneth D. Moelis, going public has always been part of
the plan. Part of what attracted many bankers to the firm was the lucrative
stock compensation packages, giving them shares that they hoped to sell in an
I.P.O. someday. And while the offering will give them that long-awaited payday,
the bank will remain firmly under the control of Mr. Moelis, who will control
the Class B shares of Moelis & Company, giving him roughly 97 percent of the
voting power.

A GLIMPSE OF ALIBABA'S GROWTH  |  Investors on Tuesday got a sneak peek at the
earnings of the Chinese online commerce giant Alibaba Group. What they found may
cause some excitement as Alibaba's long-awaited initial public offering draws
closer, Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook.

Alibaba had profit of $1.4 billion in its fourth quarter, more than double the
amount it made during the period a year earlier. Revenue jumped 66 percent, to
nearly $3.1 billion. Such a big jump may help allay concerns that Alibaba's
enormous growth had begun to slow. Those worries began to arise when Alibaba
reported only a 51 percent gain in third-quarter revenue compared with figures
in the period a year earlier.

The window into Alibaba's financial results came courtesy of Yahoo, which owns
24 percent of Alibaba and must disclose some of its financial data as part of
its own quarterly reports, Vindu Goel writes in The New York Times. But Alibaba
will soon provide much more information about its business - it plans to file
paperwork as early as next week for an initial public offering of stock on an
American exchange. For its part, Yahoo said revenue and profit growth were flat
for the first-quarter, a slight improvement from previous quarters. Yahoo's
shares soared in after-hours trading, primarily on Alibaba expectations.

ON THE AGENDA  |  Housing starts for March are out at 8:30 a.m. The index of
industrial production for March is released at 9:15 a.m. The Fed's regular
report on economic activity across the country, known as the beige book, is out
at 2 p.m. Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, delivers remarks
at 12:15 p.m. to the Economic Club of New York. Richard W. Fisher, president of
the Dallas Fed, gives a speech on the economic outlook at 1:25 p.m. Kenneth D.
Moelis, founder and chief executive of Moelis & Company, is on CNBC at 10:15
a.m. and on Bloomberg TV at 10:40 a.m.

QUESTIONING CORPORATE MONITORS  |  "In the insider trading case against SAC
Capital Advisors, federal prosecutors have given a particularly nice gift to a
former federal prosecutor, Bart M. Schwartz," Steven M. Davidoff writes in the
Deal Professor column. Mr. Schwartz, who is now the chairman of the consulting
firm Guidepost Solutions, was appointed SAC's independent compliance consultant
as a condition of SAC's guilty plea to insider trading charges, which was
accepted by a federal judge last week.

Mr. Davidoff writes: "The job is likely to earn Mr. Schwartz millions, but it
will do little more than that. It's all part of the corporate monitoring
industry, a full employment act for former federal prosecutors that may have
little effect on the way any company that is forced to hire a monitor conducts
its business." He adds, "When a corporation accused of wrongdoing agrees to
settle the charges or is sentenced to probation, it is often required to pay for
a monitor to ensure that it does not break the law again."

But it turns out, there may be problems. One of the main criticisms of these
compliance programs is that they perpetuate an "old boys' network," rewarding
former federal prosecutors with a job that pays millions of dollars. The work of
these monitors is also secretive. Mr. Davidoff writes, "Without seeing the
monitors' work, it's hard not to think that this is all just part of one of the
biggest growth industries around - the corporate investigation industry. It's a
nice profit center for former prosecutors, but it may not be much more."

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Citic Group Seeks $36.5 Billion in Hong Kong Listing  |  The cash-and-stock deal
calls for the Citic Group to sell almost all of its operating assets to its Hong
Kong-listed unit, Citic Pacific. DealBook »

Metso Board Rejects Merger Approach by Scottish Rival  |  The Finnish
engineering company Metso, which provides services for the mining, construction
and energy sectors, said its board had decided a proposal by the Weir Group was
not in the interest of shareholders. DealBook »

Diageo Makes New Bid for Controlling Stake in United Spirits of India  |
Diageo, the world's largest distiller, offered to pay about $1.9 billion for an
additional 26 percent stake in United Spirits of India, after an unsuccessful
bid to take a controlling stake last year. DealBook »

Twitter Acquires Gnip, Bringing a Valuable Data Service in House  |  Twitter
announced on Tuesday that it had acquired Gnip, a company that provides data
about activity on the social network as it is occurring, the Bits blog writes.
The eight-year-old company is the latest data company to be acquired by Twitter.
NEW YORK TIMES BITS

Facebook Requires Users to Install Separate Messaging App  |  Facebook is
removing messaging from its smartphone app, requiring users to install a
separate app - a move the company says will improve user experience, the Bits
blog writes. The new Messenger app will also include features that are in
competing messaging apps, including WhatsApp, which Facebook recently agreed to
buy for more than $16 billion. NEW YORK TIMES BITS

Game of Drones  |  It just might be the right time for a "Top Gun" sequel,
considering we are already on the highway to the danger zone, Maureen Dowd
writes in a New York Times Op-Ed column. "Instead of unmanned planes controlled
by terrorists, the drones could be an army of angry birds amassed by our
computer overlords, Google, Facebook and Amazon," she writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Washington Post Editorial Backs Comcast-Time Warner Cable Deal  |  "The
government's smartest move is not to block the merger, but to make clear that
regulators will respond if big industry players begin to violate basic
principles of market fairness," according to an editorial in The Washington
Post. WASHINGTON POST

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Credit Suisse Profit Falls 34% in First Quarter  |  The bank reported quarterly
earnings of 859 million Swiss francs, or about $976 million, compared with
profit of 1.3 billion francs in the year-earlier period. DealBook »

European Parliament Approves Laws on Banking Overhaul  |  The move put in place
the final pieces of a landmark plan for managing a banking system whose troubles
have dented the bloc's economic prospects, The New York Times reports. NEW YORK
TIMES

Barclays Picks Former Bain & Co. Executive to Lead Compensation Committee  |
The addition of Crawford Gillies to the board of directors comes after Barclays
increased its bonus pool for last year despite a steep loss in the fourth
quarter. DealBook »

As Credit Dries Up, Smaller Companies in China Feel the Pinch  |  Exorbitant
interest rates and a scarcity of loans have turned financing into a challenge
for those without the political connections to borrow at regulated rates, The
New York Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Intel's Profit Slips, but Investors Are Still Turning Toward Tech's Staid
Stalwarts  |  While tech's Internet darlings have stumbled, a number of older
tech giants, like Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft and Oracle, have so far this year
outperformed market averages, The New York Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

PRIVATE EQUITY »

German Firm Sells Heat Exchanger Operations to Funds Advised by Triton  |  The
GEA Group said the deal valued the unit at about $1.8 billion and was part of
its strategy to focus on supplying systems to the food industry. DealBook »

Symantec Draws Buyers and Activists  |  The sudden firing last month of Steve
Bennett, Symantec's chief executive, is said to be luring private equity firms
and activist investors to the company, which makes security software, Reuters
reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation. A number of
private equity firms, including Bain Capital, the Blackstone Group and the
Carlyle Group, have begun considering the possibility of a leveraged buyout of
all or parts of Symantec, the people said. REUTERS

CVC Capital's Auto Racing Gamble Pays Off  |  The private equity firm CVC
Capital has made $8.2 billion from its investment in Formula One auto racing,
Forbes reports, citing new research. The firm bought F1 for $2 billion in 2006
in a leveraged buyout financed with two loans. FORBES

HEDGE FUNDS »

Elliott Holds Firm With $21 a Share Bid for Riverbed  |  The activist hedge fund
Elliott Management said on Tuesday that it was keeping its takeover bid for
Riverbed Technology at $21 a share, or $3.3 billion, noting that its offer
remained well above where Riverbed's stock is trading. DealBook »

R.B.C. to Turn Trading Desk Into Hedge Fund  |  The Royal Bank of Canada is said
to be planning to spin off its global arbitrage and trading arm, based in New
York, into a stand-alone hedge fund as soon as the end of this year, The Wall
Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

Hacker Discusses Plans for Hedge Fund  |  Weev, the 29-year-old hacker also
known as Andrew Auernheimer who was released from federal prison last weekend,
said he was planning to start a new hedge fund called TRO LLC, TechCrunch
writes. TECHCRUNCH

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

New Crop of I.P.O.'s Getting Back to Basics  |  A fresh crop of eager initial
public offerings this week may encounter a more rational market as investors now
seem to want companies they can understand, Robert Cyran writes in Reuters
Breakingviews. DealBook »

SoftBank Shares Rise on Alibaba Profit Report  |  Shares in SoftBank rose as
much as 8 percent after Alibaba, which is 37 percent owned by SoftBank, reported
$1.4 billion in profit for the October to December quarter. DealBook »

Associated Materials Withdraws I.P.O.  |  Associated Materials, a maker of
homebuilding products, said on Tuesday that it had decided to withdraw its plans
for an initial public offering, Reuters reports. The company, owned by the
private equity firm Hellman & Friedman, filed last July for an I.P.O. of up to
$100 million. REUTERS

I.P.O. of China's WH Group Involves 29 Banks  |  "The spread of the company's
operations may have resulted in a myriad of banking relationships, but certainly
not any divisional coherence," The Financial Times writes in the Lex blog.
FINANCIAL TIMES LEX

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Squarespace Raises $40 Million From General Atlantic  |  Squarespace, an
all-in-one website and e-commerce service provider, said on Tuesday that it had
raised $40 million from the private equity firm General Atlantic. That brings
the start-up's fund-raising total to nearly $80 million. DealBook »

Automattic Said to Be Seeking More Than $100 Million  |  Automattic, which runs
the blogging platform WordPress, is said to be raising between $100 million and
$150 million in new venture capital funding round, Fortune reports, citing
unidentified people familiar with the situation. The round will value the
company at more than $1 billion. FORTUNE

Anti-Tech's New Nativism  |  "In the past, it was racists and homophobes who
attacked newcomers to San Francisco. Today, anti-tech activists are promoting a
new nativism, charging incoming tech workers with undermining the city's
traditional values," Randy Shaw writes in BeyondChron, San Francisco's
alternative online daily. BEYONDCHRON

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Pension Deal Edges Detroit a Step Closer to Recovery  |  In its rush to exit
bankruptcy, the city reached an agreement that would prevent cuts to pensions of
retired police officers and firefighters, The New York Times reports. NEW YORK
TIMES

3 Former ICAP Brokers Appear in British Court in Libor Manipulation Case  |  At
a brief hearing in Westminster Magistrates' Court, the former brokers Danny
Martin Wilkinson, Darrell Paul Read and Colin John Goodman spoke only to confirm
their identities. DealBook »

Not All Investigations Are Alike  |  Not all criminal investigations of a
company are alike, and there are telltale signs about how serious a threat one
may present, writes Peter J. Henning in the White Collar Watch column. DealBook
»

Brazil's Star, Petrobras, Is Hobbled by Scandal and Stagnation  |  Petrobras has
recently come to symbolize disarray in Brazil's sluggish economy and the
reassessment of growth prospects in emerging markets, The New York Times writes.
NEW YORK TIMES

Troubled Italian Bank May Seek Larger Share Sale  |  Monte dei Paschi will try
to raise (EURO)5 billion instead of the expected (EURO)3 billion, Italian news
reports said, sending shares lower, The New York Times writes. NEW YORK TIMES

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


