                             950 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                             March 4, 2014 Tuesday

A Calming of Global Markets

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2211 words



HIGHLIGHT: Market tensions ease after Russia appears to back away from further
action in Ukraine. | A Citigroup affiliate in Los Angeles receives a federal
subpoena. | A small-business owner continues his battle against U.S. Bancorp. |
Men&#8217;s Wearhouse and Jos. A. Bank reach a nondisclosure accord, paving the
way for a merger.


GLOBAL MARKETS RISE AFTER UKRAINE TENSIONS COOL  |  Global markets calmed on
Tuesday after Russia appeared to back away from further action in Ukraine, with
President Vladimir V. Putin calling an end to a military exercise he ordered
last week. The crisis in Ukraine had caused turmoil in the global financial
markets on Monday, hitting stocks and driving up energy prices. Analysts
maintained that there was little risk of damage to Western economies, but the
rising tension nevertheless unsettled investors, who were already concerned
about emerging markets, David Jolly writes in The New York Times.

The Euro Stoxx 50 index of euro zone blue chips rose 1.2 percent and the London
benchmark FTSE 100 rose 1.1 percent on Tuesday morning. Trading in Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index futures pointed to a positive opening of the trading
session in New York. Asian markets were also stronger on Tuesday, with the Tokyo
benchmark Nikkei 225 gaining 0.5 percent. The price of gold, which spiked on
Monday along with oil and gas, also eased.

As a prime trading partner, it could be Germany that holds the key to any
long-lasting entente between Russia and Ukraine, Landon Thomas Jr. writes in The
New York Times. Lately, Germany, which imports more natural gas from Russia than
any other European country, has taken the upper hand in the balance of power,
offering insight into the role that Germany will play in any negotiations with
the Russian president.

In Politico, MJ Lee and Ben White write: "Ukraine represents a very small slice
of the global economy and its default, should it occur, would probably not cause
more than a temporary ripple in bond and equity markets. The United States is
also much less reliant on foreign oil than in the past. And the rise in oil
prices impacting European economies should be limited given the current ample
global supply."

TROUBLES MULTIPLY FOR CITI AFFILIATE  |  A headache is growing for Citigroup,
which said on Friday that its Mexican unit Banamex had been defrauded of as much
as $400 million. Now, a Citigroup affiliate based in Los Angeles, Banamex USA,
has been served a subpoena by federal prosecutors in Massachusetts related to
money-laundering compliance, Michael Corkery and Jessica Silver-Greenberg write
in DealBook. Until recently, the affiliate was a large player in transferring
money across the border between family members.

Mr. Corkery and Ms. Silver-Greenberg write: "People briefed on the matter say
that the two issues - one involving fraud and the other involving
money-laundering compliance - are unrelated. But together they show the perils
of building a large banking business in and around a country that has wrestled
with drug trafficking and corruption."

BATTLING A BANK TO COLLECT A JUDGMENT  |  For the last six years, Maury
Rosenberg, a small-business owner from Philadelphia, has been battling U.S.
Bancorp, which he says forced him and his business into involuntary bankruptcy.
Indeed, Mr. Rosenberg has won a series of rulings in federal courts, but U.S.
Bancorp will not surrender, instead arguing that Mr. Rosenberg, who said he was
once worth $50 million from a real estate career, is just trying to evade his
obligations, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes in the DealBook column.

Mr. Rosenberg compares his situation to that of homeowners who lost their houses
through foreclosure. Like many of these homeowners, Mr. Rosenberg wanted to
restructure payments to the bank during the financial crisis (his payments were
related to leases on radiology machines). The bank refused to negotiate new
payment arrangements, he said, instead filing an involuntary bankruptcy
proceeding against him and his company. "When you compare it to the mortgage
business, it's exactly the same issue," Mr. Rosenberg said. "The little guy that
owns a mortgage and has been assigned to a million different people and nobody
knows who the debt is really due to, can't afford to go fight it."

ON THE AGENDA  |  The Senate Banking Committee's confirmation hearing for
Stanley Fischer, formerly governor of the Bank of Israel, has been postponed
because of weather. Jeffrey M. Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, speaks in New York at 4:15 p.m. The White House releases President
Obama's 2015 budget plan. William I. Koch, the billionaire industrialist, is on
Fox Business Network at 10:30 a.m. Ben Horowitz, co-founder of the Andreessen
Horowitz venture capital firm, is on CNBC at 8 a.m. Secretary of State John
Kerry is in Kiev to support the new Ukrainian government.

DEAL MAY BE NEAR FOR MEN'S WEARHOUSE AND JOS. A. BANK  |  The monthslong
takeover battle between Men's Wearhouse and Jos. A. Bank Clothiers may soon be
drawing to a close, Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook. Men's Wearhouse
said on Monday that it had reached a nondisclosure agreement with its rival,
setting up talks that could lead to a merger of the men's retailers in a deal
valued at more than $1.8 billion. Men's Wearhouse last offered to buy Jos. A.
Bank for $63.50 a share, which Jos. A. Bank called too low. But Men's Wearhouse
indicated it would be open to raising the bid to $65 a share if certain
conditions were met.

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

French Cable Operator May Make $20 Billion Bid for Vivendi Mobile Unit  |  The
French cable operator Numericable and its largest shareholder, Altice, are said
to be preparing a bid of up to $20 billion for SFR, the mobile unit of the
conglomerate Vivendi, though it is unclear when an offer may be formally made.
DealBook »

Philadelphia to Sell Its Gas Works Utility for $1.9 Billion  |  Philadelphia
agreed on Monday to sell its natural gas utility to UIL Holdings, a publicly
traded power company, for about $1.9 billion, in a deal that would put the
country's biggest city-owned gas works in private hands. DealBook »

Carlyle Agrees to Buy Tyco's South Korean Security Business  |  The $1.9 billion
deal to acquire the Tyco Fire and Security Services Korea Company and its
subsidiaries, including ADT Korea, is the largest private equity buyout deal in
South Korea since 2008, the Carlyle Group said. DealBook »

Caesars Entertainment Sells Casinos to Affiliate  |  Caesars Growth Partners is
buying four casinos for $2.2 billion, in a deal intended to help the Caesars
Entertainment Corporation gain access to cash it needs to service its huge debt
load. DealBook »

Facebook Said to Be in Talks to Buy Drone Maker  |  Facebook is said to be in
acquisition discussions with Titan Aerospace, which makes solar powered drones
that can fly for five years without needing to land, TechCrunch reports, citing
an unidentified person familiar with the situation. TECHCRUNCH

Unilever Prepares for $2 Billion Sale of Ragu  |  Unilever has hired Morgan
Stanley to help with a potential $2 billion sale of Ragu, its pasta sauce brand,
The Wall Street Journal reports, citing unidentified people familiar with the
situation. Unilever is in the process of paring down its food brands. WALL
STREET JOURNAL

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Citigroup Expects Drop in Trading Revenue  |  John C. Gerspach, the chief
financial officer of Citigroup, said at a conference on Monday that he expected
the bank's trading revenue for the first quarter to decline by a percentage in
the "high mid teens" compared with a year ago, Bloomberg News reports. BLOOMBERG
NEWS

Cantor Acquires Hedge Fund Fintan  |  The investment bank Cantor Fitzgerald said
on Monday that it had acquired the hedge fund Fintan Partners to bolster its
money management business, Bloomberg News writes. The deal will bring Cantor's
assets under management and advisory to about $3 billion. BLOOMBERG NEWS

Detroit Agrees to Pay $77 Million to End Swaps  |  Detroit agreed to pay $77.6
million to UBS and Bank of America to end interest rate swaps that have cost
taxpayers more than $200 million since 2009, Bloomberg News writes. BLOOMBERG
NEWS

PRIVATE EQUITY »

Apollo Global Chief Earned $546 Million in 2013  |  Amid flush times for Apollo
Global Management, Leon D. Black, the co-founder and chief executive, received
the highest compensation by a single executive of a publicly traded private
equity firm last year. DealBook »

Carlyle Insiders to Sell Some of Their Stock  |  Two of the Carlyle Group's
three founders plan to sell 7.5 million common units of Carlyle, according to a
filing on Monday. Carlyle itself is selling 4.5 million common units. The
offering of 12 million shares would raise about $435 million. DealBook »

A Discussion with K.K.R. on Private Equity in Europe  |  Johannes P. Huth, the
head of Europe, the Middle East and Africa at the private equity firm Kohlberg
Kravis Roberts, considers the current outlook for private equity in Europe in an
interview with Privcap. PRIVCAP

HEDGE FUNDS »

Andreessen Defends His Behavior on eBay's Board  |  In a post on the blog of his
venture capital firm, the technology investor Marc Andreessen defended his
conduct as an eBay director in the face of repeated criticism from Carl C.
Icahn. DealBook »

Buffett and Icahn: Birds of a Feather?  |  The styles of Warren E. Buffett and
Carl C. Icahn could not be more different. But Jeffrey Goldfarb of Reuters
Breakingviews notes that both men beat the market by betting on America, playing
hardball and trading on personal brands. DealBook »

Red Lobster Spinoff On Track  |  Darden Restaurants on Monday said the sales
process for its Red Lobster restaurant chain was "well underway," despite the
hedge fund Starboard Value's efforts to pause the spinoff, The Wall Street
Journal writes. Darden also said that it had considered a spinoff of its real
estate holdings, but decided against the move because it would not create
meaningful shareholder value and would separate Darden from a strategic asset.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Danish Outsourcing Firm Aims to Raise $1.4 Billion in Float  |  The Danish
outsourcing firm ISS said on Monday that it was hoping to raise about $1.4
billion through its initial public offering, planned for March 17, Reuters
reports. REUTERS

Opower Plans $100 Million I.P.O.  |  Opower, which provides software to
utilities to help homeowners reduce their energy use, said on Monday that it
would raise $100 million in its initial public offering, making its plans public
after filing confidentially for an I.P.O. last month, Reuters writes. REUTERS

Turmoil in Ukraine Casts Doubt on Metro's Russia I.P.O.  |  The future of the
German retailer Metro's 1.75 billion euro partial listing is now uncertain as
the value of the ruble continues to fall and markets remain volatile, The
Financial Times writes. FINANCIAL TIMES

Brit Insurance Plans I.P.O.  |  Brit Insurance, which is owned by the private
equity firms Apollo Global Management and CVC Capital Partners, is planning an
initial public offering in London next month, Bloomberg News reports. A minimum
of 25 percent of the company will be sold to investors, with Apollo and CVC
remaining the largest shareholders. BLOOMBERG NEWS

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Messaging App Wickr Closes $9 Million Funding Round  |  Wickr, a mobile
messaging application that allows its messages to self-destruct, has secured $9
million in Series A funding from the venture capital firms Alsop Louie Partners,
Juniper Networks and the Knight Foundation, ReCode reports. RECODE

Start-Up Zumper Raises $6.5 Million  |  Zumper, an apartment rental search and
tools website, announced on Monday that it had raised $6.5 million in a funding
round led by the venture capital firms Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, NEA and
Dawn Capital, ReCode writes. RECODE

Speek Collects $5.1 Million  |  The conference calling start-up Speek announced
on Monday that it had raised $5.1 million in Series A funding, including $2.7
million in previously raised convertible notes, TechCrunch writes. One of the
investors is the actor Edward Norton. TECHCRUNCH

No Gender Gap in Tech Salaries  |  New research shows that there is no
statistically significant difference in earnings between male and female
engineers who have the same credentials and have made the same career choices,
Quartz writes. QUARTZ

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Bitcoin Loss Highlights Elusive Paths of Regulation  |  The collapse of Mt. Gox
and the loss of $450 million in Bitcoins is pushing governments to enhance
regulation of virtual currencies, Peter J. Henning writes in the White Collar
Watch column. DEALBOOK

Britain Drops Plan to Tax Trading of Bitcoins  |  Britain's tax agency said on
Monday that it would not charge a 20 percent tax, known as a value added tax, or
VAT, on trades of the virtual currency. DealBook »

Tax Reform's Hard-to-Find Payoff  |  Much ballyhooed tax reform legislation
generally makes little difference to the economy, and the most recent proposal
is unlikely to change that, an economist writes in the Economix blog. NEW YORK
TIMES ECONOMIX

Why Puerto Rico's Bonds Are Moving to New York  |  If Puerto Rico, whose debt is
already rated junk, wants to borrow new money, it will have to make concessions
to lenders and change the governing law of the bonds from Puerto Rico to New
York, Felix Salmon writes in Reuters. REUTERS

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


