                             956 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                             March 28, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: The S.B.A.'s Red Tape Ombudsman

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 590 words



HIGHLIGHT: Facebook&#8217;s drones. Why your emails are not getting opened. The
least costly city in which to do business.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The average 30-year mortgage rate rose to 4.4 percent.

Pending home sales fell to their lowest level since October 2011.

Here are three reasons the manufacturing comeback is no myth.

This is what another year of record corporate profits means for the economy.

Retail

These seven retailers are closing a lot of stores.

Health Care

The Affordable Care Act now has six million sign-ups.

A poll finds that just 39 percent of uninsured adults below the Medicare age
knew that March 31 was the deadline to sign up for health insurance.

Washington

The Small Business Administration finally has a new leader.

It also has an ombudsman for regulatory issues affecting small businesses.

Marketing

Here are 10 mobile marketing solutions for small businesses.

Millenials don't care about owning a car, and carmakers are trying to figure out
why.

Some movie theaters plan to test discount ticketing pricing.

Here's why your emails are not getting opened.

Productivity

Laura Vanderkam shares what she learned from a week of waking up early: "The new
routine didn't exactly work miracles."

Social Media

An orthodontist explains how he uses Google Plus Hangouts to build his practice.

A hotel chain is offering a new social media wedding service - for $3,000 - that
includes: "live tweeting of the ceremony and reception, customized hashtags for
the big day, a 'curated' wedding registry and a dream honeymoon Pinterest
board."

Start-Up

Ben Horowitz shares start-up lessons with the chief executive of Box.

Management

The "Adventures of Business Cat" debuts.

Finance

The finance director of a defunct law firm admits that its accounting was false.

Online

Facebook confirms plans to bring the Internet to the world with a fleet of
solar-powered drones.

Around the Country

According to a study, Atlanta is the least costly location to do business among
the 31 largest metro areas in the United States.

A canine-loving entrepreneur turns her passion into a potentially profitable
enterprise in Pittsburgh.

A Chicago entrepreneur is finding success in the security business.

These are the most popular cities for immigrants coming to America.

A North Carolina citychanges its laws to attract more businesses.

An Iowa event this weekend will feature booths, products, raffle prizes, and
demonstrations from more than 20 local women-owned businesses.

It seems the best tippers are from Alaska, the worst from Delaware.

Around the World

The United Kingdom has been the top destination for migrating millionaires over
the past decade.

Turkey is now blocking access to YouTube.

A Swiss fondue restaurant wins a legal fight with neighbors over its cheesy
smells.

Taxes

An accountant shares 13 crazy tax deductions.

Technology

Here are 50 must-have apps for your business.

The National Security Agency's spying has hurt cloud-providers - but not to the
degree predicted.

PC sales are expected to drop another 6 percent in 2014.

Microsoft Office goes fully free on Android and iPhones and a tech writer says
that the new Microsoft Office for iPad "sets the gold standard" for tablet
productivity.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    Today in Small Business: Can Bookstores Survive?
     ·    Today in Small Business: The Failure Fetish
     ·    Today in Small Business: From the Web to Bricks and Mortar
     ·    Today in Small Business: Clueless Sales Representatives
     ·    What 1 Million Cups Has Meant to Kansas City


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


