                             953 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                              March 7, 2014 Friday

Today in Small Business: Is It the End of the Supermarket?

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 503 words



HIGHLIGHT: The economy adds 175,000 jobs. And is Detroit emerging as a haven for
entrepreneurs?


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

The economy added 175,000 jobs but the unemployment rate ticked higher.

Productivity isat a 20-year low but stocks and housing prices have pushed
household wealth above $80 trillion.

Factory orders and shipments fell in January.

Harsh weather weighed heavily on February's retail sales.

Washington

Small companies react to the Food and Drug Administration's relabeling proposal.

Finance

Shaquille O'Neal is crowdfunding a video game sequel, and promises to follow you
on Instagram for $500.

Now part of PayPal, payments service Braintree courts start-ups by waiving the
first $50,000 in processing fees.

Marketing

Erika Weinstein examines the differences between male and female marketers:
"Mentally, women have the ability to get down to completing the tasks without
their egos getting in the way."

Management

Tyler Durben explains how a bankrupt law firm cooked its books for four years.

Caleb Wilde explains why he's a funeral director. "Perhaps there's no greater
freedom than to live life with a healthy relationship with death."

Social Media

The owner of two suburban Pittsburgh restaurants explains her passion and how
she uses social media.

Here are five hashtag-tracking tools.

Online

Staples announces the closing of 225 stores and will focus more efforts online.

Here are some tips on using Getty Images' vast collection of free photos for
your website.

The original creator of Bitcoin is finally tracked down. Or was he

The country that invented the Internet is now behind Estonia in terms of
download speeds

Opportunities

Is the traditional supermarket over?

Challenging Marc Andreessen's prediction of massive growth in the news media
business is challenged.

Around the Country

Some people believe Detroit is emerging as a new haven for entrepreneurs.

Citibank and Etsy are promising to show New Yorkers how to run a business.

New York venture capital investments topped $1 billion in the first quarter.

The Federal Reserve finds more "moderate growth" in and around St. Louis.

Business owners in Nome, Alaska are preparing for the influx of the Iditarod.

Around the World

Weather is pushing up world food prices.

Taxes

So what goes on line 22 of Schedule C?

Technology

A Google Glass app for retailers will detect a customer's emotions and relay
them.

The Federal Aviation Administration is exploring limited commercial use of
drones.

Amazon opens its first 3-D printing marketplace.

Manufacturing 3-D objects just got easier with a new bioplastic.

Wearable technology in the workplace will be dependent on applications and
services.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.


     ·    This Week in Small Business: Meet Your Start-Up Mate
     ·    For Entrepreneur in Conflict Resolution, Business Is Good
     ·    Today in Small Business: Cheese Fight
     ·    M.B.A. Students Hit the Road to Help Small-Business Owners
     ·    Have You Tried a Peer-to-Peer Lender?


LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


