                             952 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (DealBook)

                            March 5, 2014 Wednesday

A Legal Standoff in the Madoff Case

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 2572 words



HIGHLIGHT: A document sheds light on how a legal standoff has kept Bernard L.
Madoff&#8217;s ties to JPMorgan&#8217;s shrouded in mystery. | Moelis &#038;
Company files for an I.P.O. | Wall Street&#8217;s latest hot thing could be
appraisal rights. | The Supreme Court to hear arguments that could reshape
securities fraud cases. | The website Silk Road had a digital outpost in
Pennsylvania.


Even after five years, it is still unclear what exactly JPMorgan Chase bankers
knew about Bernard L. Madoff's huge Ponzi scheme. A newly obtained government
document does not provide the answer, but does shed some light on why the
mystery remains, Ben Protess and Jessica Silver-Greenberg write in DealBook. The
document reveals that JPMorgan and federal regulators fought over access to bank
employee interviews, eventually pitting the Justice Department against the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.

The document shows that, around the time of Mr. Madoff's arrest in December
2008, JPMorgan's lawyers interviewed dozens of bank employees who might have
crossed paths with Mr. Madoff's company. Federal regulators at the comptroller's
office sought copies of the lawyers' interview notes in the hopes that they
would provide a glimpse into the bank's actions, but JPMorgan refused to hand
over the notes, citing confidentiality requirements like the attorney-client
privilege.

The Treasury Department's inspector general sided with the regulators, invoking
a rare exception to attorney-client privilege and arguing that the lawyers'
interviews were essentially "made for the purpose of getting advice for the
commission of a fraud or crime." A debate ensued over how hard to press JPMorgan
to hand over the interview notes, given that the bank was sure to fight and a
judge would be free to set a harmful precedent for future cases. The Justice
Department rejected the calls for JPMorgan to turn over the interview notes,
saying there was no basis to suggest that the interview notes had been made for
the purpose of facilitating crime or fraud.

Mr. Protess and Ms. Silver-Greenberg write: "While the ruling applied to the
Madoff case alone, it could have broader implications as regulators weigh the
costs of future fights and the likelihood of passing muster with the Justice
Department. And despite being an exceptional case - banks and their regulators
typically settle disputes over attorney-client privilege without the Justice
Department getting involved - the ruling illustrated a persistent tension over
the privilege that continues to shape the government's pursuit of financial
fraud."

MOELIS & COMPANY FILES FOR AN I.P.O.  |  Moelis & Company filed on Tuesday for
an initial public offering, highlighting the rise of so-called independent or
boutique investment banks. The move would make it one of a handful of such banks
to trade on the public markets, Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook.

These specialty banks have long extolled their business plans, which focus on
advising clients, saying the plans give them an advantage over giants like
Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase. And lately, investors have appeared to agree,
pushing the shares of other public boutique banks like Lazard and Evercore up by
double digits in the last year. By going public, Moelis hopes to tap into this
investor interest.

Still, much remains unknown about the offering. The firm provided a fund-raising
target of $100 million, but the number was meant only to calculate registration
fees, and Moelis could seek significantly more. It did not disclose how many
shares it planned to sell.

A NEW FORM OF SHAREHOLDER ACTIVISM  |  The latest thing on Wall Street may be
appraisal rights, which were in play in the management buyout of Dell as well as
that of Dole Foods. So what exactly are appraisal rights? In a way, they are a
kind of protection for shareholders: If the company they own stock in is
acquired, and they think the price was too low, they can seek a better price in
court, Steven M. Davidoff writes in the Deal Professor column.

Appraisal rights are risky and expensive - shareholders have to pay their own
legal fees - but they also have benefits for a hedge fund with a lot of money.
For one, shareholders are entitled to statutory interest, which can result in a
good return, especially given today's market.

Mr. Davidoff writes: "Not all shareholders are going to exercise their appraisal
rights, but this is the way to make sure that the future management buyouts are
not the Doles of the world, paying an underwhelming price. In other words, this
may be the way that shareholders finally assert their power. You can thank the
hedge funds for that."

ON THE AGENDA  |  The Mortgage Bankers' Association purchase applications index
is out at 7 a.m. February's ADP private payroll report is out at 8:15 a.m. The
purchasing managers' index is out at 8:58 a.m. The ISM nonmanufacturing index
for February is out at 10 a.m. The Fed's regular report on economic activity
across the country, a report known as the beige book, is out at 2 p.m. The House
Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit Committee holds a hearing on data
security at 10 a.m. The House Oversight and Investigations Committee holds
hearing on the effect of financial regulation on international competitiveness
at 2 p.m. Carl C. Icahn is on CNBC at 6 a.m. Peter R. Orszag, the vice chairman
of Citigroup, is on CNBC at 6:40 a.m. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of
Israel is on Fox Business Network at 5:45 p.m.

THE END MAY BE NEAR FOR SECURITIES FRAUD CASES  |  The Supreme Court will hear
arguments on Wednesday that could drive a stake through the heart of securities
fraud cases, Steven M. Davidoff writes in a Deal Professor column. In
Halliburton v. Erica P. John Fund, a group of shareholders contends that
Halliburton (yes, that Halliburton) falsified results and lied to the public
about its asbestos liabilities, which ultimately caused share values to plunge.
In its argument, Halliburton is asking the Supreme Court to strike down a
fundamental tenet in securities fraud litigation, known as "fraud on the
market," arguing that its standard should never have been adopted.

The "fraud on the market" doctrine has its origins in the 1986 Supreme Court
case Basic v. Levinson, in which the Supreme Court reasoned, based on the
efficient market hypothesis, that all publicly available information about a
company was incorporated into its stock price.

FOLLOWING THE WINDING SILK ROAD  |  The last few months have not been easy for
Bitcoin. One Bitcoin exchange filed for bankruptcy on Friday after it lost more
than $450 million in a theft. And before that, a prominent Bitcoin proponent,
Charlie Shrem, was arrested on money-laundering charges. Now, Bitcoin's
continuing tale seems to have come full circle, with the latest development
involving the website Silk Road, whose shutdown last fall was one of the first
indications that everything was not rosy in Bitcoin land.

In a somewhat bizarre twist, a staff member in the electrical engineering
department at Lafayette College in eastern Pennsylvania appears to have played a
small role in the investigation that resulted in the shutdown of Silk Road, an
online marketplace where drugs and weapons could be bought with Bitcoin, Matthew
Goldstein writes in DealBook. The staff member owned a company, JTAN.com, that
provided Silk Road with a backup server for its website. A search warrant
reveals that JTAN potentially provided the authorities with a wealth of
information about Silk Road and Ross William Ulbricht, the man authorities say
founded the site.

 |  Contact: @melbournecoal | E-mail

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

Mergers & Acquisitions »

Facebook in Talks to Buy Drone Maker for $60 Million  |  Facebook is in
discussions to acquire a manufacturer of high-altitude drones for about $60
million. The purchase would allow Facebook to advance its ambitions of
connecting everyone in the world to the Internet, the Bits blog reports. NEW
YORK TIMES BITS

Inside Facebook's Megadeal for WhatsApp  |  Forbes provides an inside look at
the courtship, secret meetings and other events that led to Facebook's deal for
WhatsApp, which could be worth as much as $19 billion. FORBES

Imerys Revises Offer for Amcol International, Again  |  The French group Imerys
said it would now pay $45.25 a share in cash for Amcol International, valuing
the Illinois company at $1.7 billion, including the assumption of debt. DealBook
»

Morgan Stanley Considering Sale of Swiss Private Bank  |  Morgan Stanley is
exploring a sale of its private bank in Switzerland, which has about $11 billion
in assets under management, Reuters reports, citing an unidentified person
familiar with the situation. REUTERS

Comcast Extols Its Low-Cost Web Program  |  Comcast said on Tuesday that it
would extend indefinitely its Internet Essentials program, which allows
low-income families to gain access to the Internet, Bloomberg News writes. The
announcement came on the same day as top executives began meeting with United
States regulators who will review the company's $45.2 billion bid for Time
Warner Cable. BLOOMBERG NEWS

Blockchain to Expand Bitcoin App ZeroBlock  |  In a move to build a
comprehensive Bitcoin trading platform, Blockchain.info has acquired the trading
platform website RTBTC.com, which it plans to combine with its Bitcoin mobile
application ZeroBlock, The Wall Street Journal writes. The purchase price was
not disclosed. WALL STREET JOURNAL

INVESTMENT BANKING »

Apple's Departing Finance Chief Is Goldman's Newest Director  |  With his newly
announced role at Goldman Sachs, Peter Oppenheimer, who plans to retire as
Apple's finance chief in September, deepens the longstanding ties between the
investment bank and the technology giant. DealBook »

The Writer Behind @GSElevator Speaks Out  |  Remaining anonymous as he posted on
Twitter under the handle @GSElevator was simply a "device" that allowed him to
paint a broader picture of life on Wall Street, John LeFevre said on Tuesday.
DealBook »

Guggenheim Lures a Tech Banker From Evercore  |  Eric Mandl, who specialized in
cloud computing and big data deals at Evercore, jumped to Guggenheim Securities
on Tuesday. DealBook »

JPMorgan Takes Top Spot on List of the Best-Paid Investment Banks  |  JPMorgan
Chase, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley generated an estimated $3.77 billion in
total fees last year, Bloomberg Markets magazine writes. The three banks ranked
the highest on a list of the best-paid investment banks. BLOOMBERG MARKETS

Final Rules, and a Warning, on Banker Bonuses in Europe  |  The European
Commission has adopted final rules for limits on banker bonuses, and a top
official warned banks against pushing too far in trying to "circumvent
remuneration rules." DealBook »

PRIVATE EQUITY »

Market and Rates Helped Private Equity Chiefs Thrive Last Year  |  Lucrative
payouts were helped greatly by the combination of low interest rates and high
stock prices, which was ideal for selling investments. DealBook »

Football Star's Private Equity Firm Raising $1 Billion  |  The private equity
firm HGGC, which was co-founded by Steve Young, the hall-of-fame National
Football League quarterback who won three Super Bowls with the San Francisco
49ers, is raising $1 billion for its second fund, Fortune reports. FORTUNE

Private Equity Recruiting Begins Earlier  |  Private equity firms and hedge
funds have begun this year's hiring of Wall Street's most junior bankers,
beginning the process earlier than usual, Bloomberg Businessweek writes.
BLOOMBERG BUSINESSWEEK

HEDGE FUNDS »

Cevian Capital Increases Its Stake in ThyssenKrupp  |  The activist investment
firm Cevian Capital has been gradually increasing its position in the troubled
German conglomerate ThyssenKrupp. DealBook »

Church of England Increases Exposure to Alternative Assets  |  The Church of
England is ramping up the exposure of its 6 billion pound endowment to
alternative investments like hedge funds and private equity, The Financial Times
writes. The move will solidify the church's position as one of Britain's largest
single investors in these types of assets. FINANCIAL TIMES

Sherborne Raises Stake in Electra Private Equity  |  The hedge fund Sherborne of
New York has increased its stake in Electra Private Equity to 13.7 percent of
the trust's voting rights, The Financial Times reports. FINANCIAL TIMES

I.P.O./OFFERINGS »

Brit Insurance Joins I.P.O. Flurry Among Private Equity Holdings  |  Brit
Insurance is the latest company owned by private equity to announce an initial
public offering in London. The insurer was taken private by Apollo Global
Management and CVC Capital Partners in 2010. DealBook »

ONO Looks to I.P.O. After Takeover Approach Stalls  |  An initial public
offering of the Spanish cable operator ONO seems increasingly likely after the
Vodafone Group's attempts to buy ONO appear to have been rebuffed, The Wall
Street Journal writes, citing unidentified people familiar with the situation.
WALL STREET JOURNAL

VENTURE CAPITAL »

Bitcoin Bank Flexcoin Shuts Down After Theft  |  Flexcoin, a Bitcoin wallet and
banking service, announced it was shutting down, saying it had lost 896
Bitcoins, worth about $600,000, in a theft, The Verge writes. THE VERGE

Overstock Passes $1 Million in Sales Made in Bitcoin  |  The online retailer
Overstock, which started accepting Bitcoin as payment in January, said on
Tuesday that purchases made with the virtual currency have topped $1 million,
ReCode reports. RECODE

DocuSign Collects $85 Million  |  DocuSign, a digital signature software
company, has raised $85 million in new funding from institutional investors,
valuing the company at $1.6 billion, The Wall Street Journal reports, citing
unidentified people familiar with the situation. WALL STREET JOURNAL

ServiceMax Secures $71 Million in Funding Round  |  ServiceMax, which has a
cloud-based application that helps companies manage industrial services,
announced on Tuesday that it had raised $71 million in a Series E funding round,
ReCode writes. The new funding brings ServiceMax's total capital raised to $120
million. RECODE

LEGAL/REGULATORY »

Bank of England Suspends Employee Amid Currency Manipulation Inquiry  |  The
central bank said an "extensive review" had found no evidence that staff members
colluded to manipulate currency markets, but it suspended an employee as it
continued to investigate whether its internal control processes were followed.
DealBook »

Japan Said to Be Ready to Impose Bitcoin Rules  |  The new guidelines, which ban
banks and securities firms from handling Bitcoins, will reportedly treat Bitcoin
as a commodity rather than a currency. DealBook »

Bond Market in China May See First Local Default  |  A small solar company in
Shanghai has said it is unlikely to meet a Friday deadline for an annual
interest payment owed to investors. DealBook »

Budget for Trading Commission Called 'Woefully Insufficient'  |  Bart Chilton, a
commissioner on the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, said President Obama's
$280 million request for the agency in the next fiscal year was inadequate for
the agency's expanded mission. DealBook »

In Change, Tourre Won't Be Teaching University of Chicago Course  |  The former
Goldman Sachs trader Fabrice Tourre had been scheduled to teach an undergraduate
course on economic analysis beginning March 31. But a University of Chicago
spokesman said on Tuesday that he would no longer be an instructor. DealBook »

Where There's Smoke, There's Scrutiny  |  While a combination of Reynolds
American and Lorillard may make strategic and financial sense, antitrust and
other watchdogs could still act as spoilers, Kevin Allison writes for Reuters
Breakingviews. DealBook »

Sign up for the DealBook Newsletter, delivered every morning and afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


