                             961 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op Talk)

                             June 7, 2014 Saturday

Morning Views

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 475 words



HIGHLIGHT: Morning Views


The New York Times cautions American officials dealing with the Palestinian
Authority's new unity government, a coalition of the extremist Hamas and more
moderate Fatah factions. "Many experts say that if there is ever to be an
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement," the editorial board writes, "the
Palestinians must be united. But the United States has to be careful to somehow
distinguish between its support for the new government and an endorsement of
Hamas and its violent, hateful behavior."

Other significant viewpoints from around the world:

 The Chicago Tribune admonishes General Motors for permitting the production of
vehicles with cheaper yet substandard, potentially dangerous parts. "There's a
lesson in this debacle that we ignore at grave peril," the editorial board
writes, echoing the words of the former Sears executive Arthur C. Martinez when
he told top brass about a $60 million fine: "After this meeting, spend the next
half-hour at your desk. Do nothing but think about your own operation. Not just
to identify additional exposure, but to fundamentally rethink - is what I do,
the direction I give, the body language I use, creating an environment where
something like this could happen? Is my message, 'Make the numbers at any
cost?'"

The Irish Times calls for "a root and branch clear-out" of FIFA, the world
soccer federation. This following revelations that a former FIFA vice president
paid more than 4 million euros to top executives, which may have resulted in
Qatar's securing of the 2022 World Cup. This is the only route to a restoration
of confidence in soccer's global governing body, the editorial board insists.

The Washington Post celebrates the recent increase in American job creation, but
warns the new numbers don't tell the full story: "As economic life continues to
normalize, government will increasingly have to focus its efforts on countering
the decline in labor participation."

The Texas attorney general's office has rejected requests for information on the
drugs used for death-row lethal injections, such as the vendors from which they
are purchased. The Houston Chronicle says that Attorney General Greg Abbott is
known for supporting transparency in government - "so Texans of all stripes
should be particularly distressed by his office's recent rejection of an open
records request concerning the Texas Department of Criminal Justice."

"California can't wait another year to regulate the use of drones," says The San
Jose Mercury News. The editorial board admits, "Drones certainly carry the
potential for valuable applications by private industry and law enforcement
agencies, including crop management and search and rescue missions." But there
is concern for "a huge potential for abuse. The valley needs to be proactive in
helping write laws to prevent unwarranted intrusions into our privacy."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


