                             965 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                               (You're the Boss)

                            June 25, 2014 Wednesday

Today in Small Business: Women Are Starting More Businesses (But That Might Not
Be Good)

BYLINE: GENE MARKS

SECTION: BUSINESS; smallbusiness

LENGTH: 484 words



HIGHLIGHT: Looking at Israeli tech start-ups and anti-spam legislation in
Canada.


What's affecting me, my clients and other small-business owners today.

The Economy

Gross domestic product actually fell 2.9 percent in the first quarter, mostly
because of a decline in exports and a slowdown in inventory investment.

New home sales skyrocketed in May to their highest rate in six years, and here's
what's behind the blowout.

More than three-quarters of small-business owners expect to be profitable in the
second half of 2014, according to SurePayroll.

Equipment leasing and financing activity is down month-over-month but remains
ahead of last year.

The Federal Reserve can wait until next year to raise interest rates, according
to the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

The Conference Board's consumer confidence index has returned to its 2008
levels.

The national average for a gallon of regular gasoline is 13 cents higher than a
year ago.

Entrepreneurship

A post in The Harvard Business Review looks at why women are starting more
businesses and why that isn't necessarily be a good thing.

This man went from Buddhist Monk to superstar tech founder.

Start Up

Here are eight surging start-up industries to watch.

These emerging segments will shape the future of wine.

Cash Flow

The role of finance teams continues to expand beyond traditional accounting and
financial reporting, according to a new survey.

M-Pesa may be a better model than Bitcoin for mobile money.

Virtual companies are becoming more common.

Employees

Here's why the Gap thinks a higher minimum wage is good for business.

A poll of small-business owners found that only one in five are planning to hire
student workers this summer.

Why LeBron James is underpaid.

Marketing

Here's the business case against calling your football team the Redskins.

Washington

The Supreme Court rules against Aereo - and says the police need a warrant to
search a cell phone.

Online

Jerry Seinfeld explains how to not be a jerk in the digital age.

Google gets into the domain name business.

Technology

The PC isn't dead yet, according to one tech supplier.

The Federal Aviation Administration is taking a hard line against the commercial
use of drones.

Ideas

An Ohio business owner proposes an electronic crime-alert system for local
businesses.

Around the Country

A federal judge says the no-fly list is unconstitutional.

Dallas home prices continue to reach new highs.

A dozen Israeli tech start-ups pitch investors and fellow entrepreneurs in Santa
Monica, Calif.

Around the World

When Canada's tough new anti-spam legislation kicks in on July 1, businesses
that send out unwanted emails and social media messages could face fines.

Health Care

A half-decade-long contraction in employer health care spending is set to end in
2015, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Gene Marks owns the Marks Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., consulting firm that helps
clients with customer relationship management. You can follow him on Twitter.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


