                             963 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (Op-Talk)

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday

Morning Views

BYLINE: JAKE FLANAGIN

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 588 words



HIGHLIGHT: Opinions on the drone memo, an emissions ruling, Israel&#8217;s hunt,
high-seas slavery and jailed journalists.


The Obama administration made public a memo explaining the rationale behind a
2011 drone strike that killed an American citizen, Anwar al-Awlaki, in Yemen,
The New York Times reports. "But the rationale provides little confidence that
the lethal action was taken with real care," the editorial board writes.
"Instead, the memo turns out to be a slapdash pastiche of legal theories - some
based on obscure interpretations of British and Israeli law - that was clearly
tailored to the desired result." The board remains unpersuaded that Mr. Awlaki's
due-process rights were given proper consideration. "More documents must be made
public. The public is still in the dark on too many vital questions."

Other significant viewpoints from around the world:

"Those who oppose the E.P.A's bureaucratic, rulebound approach to cutting carbon
dioxide cannot rely on the courts to preserve the status quo," writes The
Washington Post. "They need to abandon the nihilistic refusal to address climate
change that has prevailed in Congress and propose a more economically rational
strategy." The Post believes the E.P.A.'s rules provide a decent foundation for
combating climate change: "But they are neither efficient enough nor ambitious
enough to be the comprehensive national climate policy the country needs. The
agency's rules are as economically rational as the law will allow. But Congress
could do much better by legislating a market-based approach to carbon dioxide
regulation."

"The search for the kidnapped teenagers and their abductors is indeed the
supreme goal," The Haaretz editorial board writes, regarding three missing
Israelis the government believes are in the hands of Hamas operatives. "But 10
days after the kidnapping, it's permissible to ask what Israel really wants to
achieve through this operation. Is this demonstration of force - which has
included deploying thousands of soldiers in the Hebron area and beyond,
house-to-house searches and hunting through cellars and caves - really meant to
find the abducted teens, or is it meant to create a routine of domination and
intimidation as a form of collective punishment?" The board calls on government
officials to refrain from using this tragedy as a military or political
showcase.

"If you go to your freezer and find Charoen Pokphand (CP) Foods' frozen shrimp
products bought at Costco, Wal-Mart or other major retailers, chances are good
you'll see the end of a food supply chain that began with slave-staffed ships
registered in Thailand," The Los Angeles Times reports. In this complex
high-seas slavery system, "human traffickers lure workers from poor Southeast
Asian countries with promises of jobs in Thailand. Instead, the smugglers sell
the laborers to ship captains, who force them to harvest fish to be ground into
meal and sold as feed to shrimp farms whose products ultimately end up in
consumers' kitchens." The editorial board applauds the United States  for
criticizing the Thai government for allowing the practice to continue, "and it
should continue to press the case."

"There could be no clearer evidence that Egyptian society is still in a state of
civil war than the verdicts which Egyptian judges have been handing down in
recent cases," writes The Guardian. In particular, the editorial board condemns
the sentencing of three Al Jazeera journalists yesterday on what the board views
as trumped up charges. "The journalists were accused of falsely suggesting that
Egypt is a deeply divided nation, yet these perverted verdicts prove just that."

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


