                             967 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                     (Lens)

                             July 29, 2014 Tuesday

Photographing on the Ground in Gaza

BYLINE: JAMES ESTRIN

SECTION: MULTIMEDIA

LENGTH: 1302 words



HIGHLIGHT: Sergey Ponomarev has encountered a war routine in Gaza, documenting
the destruction and casualties of the latest conflict.


Sergey Ponomarev , 33, is a freelance photographer covering the conflict in Gaza
on assignment for The New York Times. He grew up in Moscow and Ireland and has
previously worked for The Associated Press. He spoke to James Estrin from Gaza
City on Saturday evening. The conversation has been edited.

Q.

What were you doing today?

A.

I just came back from a funeral. I've shot many of them here, but this was
different because the shell hit a church and killed a Christian woman, and they
had a Christian funeral. I've only had Muslim funerals here.

Q.

When did you arrive in Gaza?

A.

More than a week ago, last Thursday. Tyler [Hicks] stayed in Gaza City and I
covered the south. I went straight to Rafah and stayed almost a week there at
the home of a local photographer.

The first day I photographed some destruction and then he took me to an office
that he and other freelancers were renting. While I was filing for early
deadline a rocket exploded outside the building. We packed our stuff and ran
downstairs just when another rocket hit the building.

Israel usually fires a warning shot - a small explosive shell that doesn't even
hit the house to make a big boom next to the building, and this means that you
have to leave the house now. And then you might have five to 10 minutes to leave
the building before the real shell arrives and destroys the building.

Q.

So what were your days like in the south of Gaza?

A.

It was a war routine. You leave early in the morning to see the houses destroyed
the night before. Then you go to funerals, then to the hospital because more
injured people arrive, and in the evening you go back to see more destroyed
houses.

It was the same thing every day, just switching between Rafah and Khan Younis.
One morning we woke up quite early from a huge explosion nearby and the
neighboring house was destroyed. A day later I moved to Gaza because Tyler was
leaving and I had to replace him here.

Q.

Can you tell me about the scene in the hospital in Rafah?

A.

There was a huge shelling in the suburbs of Rafah and we went to the hospital.
First I saw a flood of people arriving to the center of Rafah, and we went to
the hospital to see the wounded. Several ambulances showed up and there were
some children injured. In one ambulance there was a heavily injured older man
and two younger men, and one of them was covered with blood and really upset. He
fell on his knees, calling on Allah and gesturing.

There was a huge crowd around those people arriving, including guards and
medical personnel. They went to the operating room and I followed them. The same
upset man was yelling and gesturing, and we were all kicked out from the
operating room so as not to distract the doctors.

Then he was gesturing and crying in the hospital corridor. I believe he was the
son of the older man who was injured. So I photographed other people and then
came back after the other media left him alone. I saw his brother take him to a
nearby room and he must've washed him off because afterward there was no blood
on his face and his hands were clean. He was sitting on the chair and seemed
calmer, and that's when I took the photo.

Q.

So was there a difference between working in the south and working in Gaza City?

A.

Working in the south is much easier because people are more open and easy. In
Gaza there is much more media around at funerals or hospitals, and sometimes
people get annoyed.

It was easier to work in Khan Younis and Rafah, even though few people
understand English. I have light hair and blue eyes and I am from Russia. I am
like an elephant in a desert.

During Ramadan you are not allowed to smoke or eat during the day, and they
really respected that I didn't do that. Day by day I built relations with the
locals, and they were fine with my being there.

Q.

Did you fast in Gaza too?

A.

Well, in western enclaves in Gaza you can drink and eat whatever you want, but
in Rafah it is better that you fast.

Q.

So how does this compare to other conflicts? You were recently in Ukraine.

A.

This conflict is easier to cover than Ukraine because there are only two
different sides and you can clearly understand the motivations of both sides.

There is a clear front line between them, and you understand the threats coming
from one side and threats coming from the other side. You should be aware of
rockets in Israel and you should be aware of ground attacks or shellings in
Gaza.

There are different layers of Ukrainian-held territories and separatist
territories, and almost everyone speaks Russian and Ukrainian. It's just a
matter of your accent. So you can be O.K. crossing one checkpoint but not be
O.K. crossing another checkpoint because you speak with a slightly different
accent. For foreigners it was even tougher because both sides don't like
foreigners.

Here they seem to have more respect for foreigners and more respect for the
media.

Q.

How do you prepare and reduce your risk of being hit by a missile if you can't
know where it's going to hit.

A.

We have to separate ourselves from normal cars, so we stick the letters "TV" in
gaffer's tape on the roof of the car. We also use flak jackets with helmets.

You need to understand how an operator of a drone or jet thinks and the history
of the conflict. In Gaza I have been trying not to travel early in the morning
or late at night if I need to move from one city to another. I prefer to travel
during the day when there is more traffic on the road so a drone operator won't
be suspicious about a single car traveling on the highway at 120 kilometers per
hour.

When we were trying to approach Israeli troops, we put our cameras out from the
windows to show we're journalists because they might not see the sign on the
windshield or on the roof, but they could see cameras in hands and understand
journalists are approaching. During the cease-fire we came close to the border,
but when I tried to photograph a Palestinian flag in front and the border fence
in the back there were warning shots from Israeli soldiers to tell me to go
away.

Q.

What has the last few days been like? There looks like there's a lot of
destruction.

A.

Some neighborhoods were almost destroyed. Most of them closest to the border
fence. But some streets nearby are completely O.K.

Q.

Have you seen any Hamas fighters?

A.

When I was in Rafah the photographer I was with would point out a man on the
street with a radio and say that he was with Hamas, but they were in plain
clothes without vests and guns and no green Hamas ribbon.

Q.

How about in Gaza City?

A.

No, I haven't seen anyone that I can clearly tell is a Hamas fighter.

Q.

So is this your first time in Gaza, the West Bank or Israel?

A.

I covered the Israel-Lebanon conflict in 2006 and I've been other places in the
Middle East. I have been to the West Bank on my own projects, but this is my
first time in Gaza.

Q.

And so what is life like in Gaza? Is there enough food?

A.

People there have told me that, compared to the war in 2012, they have water and
they have enough food and they even have electricity.

In the refugee camps they are receiving supplies and receiving food and even
though during Ramadan they eat mostly once a day, they have something to eat.

Q.

What is it like to photograph funerals every day?

A.

That's the way this city lives now - one funeral to another, hiding from bombs
and collecting the dead. Bury them and hide again.

People in shelters in schools or in their houses on the ground floor waiting for
a bomb to come. Or they hear the sound and wonder whether it is going toward
them, or hitting a house nearby. They really have nowhere to hide. What I see is
a routine for them of hide, bury, wait, hide again and bury again. Day by day.

Follow @SergeyPonomarev, @JamesEstrin, @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Lens is also on
Facebook.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


