                             966 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (Times Insider)

                              July 25, 2014 Friday

1875: The Airplane, Still a Flight of Fancy

BYLINE: Mark Bulik

LENGTH: 232 words



HIGHLIGHT: This feature looks at the first time famous names or terms appeared
in The Times.


 This feature looks at the first time famous names or terms appeared in The
Times. Have an idea for someone or something you would like to read about? Send
a suggestion in the comments section.

In this era of air wars, missile attacks and drone strikes, it may be hard to
imagine a time when aviation itself did not yet exist. But that was the case in
1875, when long-distance locomotion was still the province of the train and the
steamship.

On Jan. 22 of that year, The Times floated another possibility: the "aeroplane."

"We must have an artificial motor to drive the wings which lift us, and
propellers which give us movement in the proper direction," the article pointed
out:

Fifteen years later, the inventor Hiram Maxim was hard at work making the dream
of a "flying machine" come true, as The Times recounted on Sept. 21, 1890:

His experiments with airplanes proved less successful than his work with the
machine gun that bears his name, one of the most lethal weapons the planet has
ever seen.

The Maxim plane never really got off the ground, but in late 1903, when the
Wright brothers made their historic flight at Kitty Hawk, the military
implications were immediately apparent:

It took little more than a decade for the airplane and weapons to be wed. The
"war plane" debuted in The Times on Nov. 5, 1914:

The skies have only grown deadlier in the century since.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


