                             968 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                  (City Room)

                             August 4, 2014 Monday

New York Today: Early Birds

BYLINE: ANNIE CORREAL

SECTION: NYREGION

LENGTH: 548 words



HIGHLIGHT: What you need to know for Monday: The morning habits of city birds,
muggy weather, and the rise of personal drones.


 Good morning on this muggy Monday.

Listen.

You can probably hear the birds.

First, a piercing call or two, then the rising sound of a hundred little voices
in the trees.

We asked John Rowden, a zoologist at the Audubon Society and a professor of
ornithology, about these early risers.

City birds, according to Mr. Rowden, actually behave differently than their
rural counterparts.

"The birds here are disturbed more and so wake up early," he said. "They're
waking up before the sun rises, which is unusual."

The cause is ambient light, and possibly ambient noise.

The first to rise are blue jays, mockingbirds, starlings and mourning doves, he
said.

Then come the twittering house sparrows.

City birds may also be somewhat louder.

The male birds are the ones making those wake-up calls, Mr. Rowden noted.

"They're singing to announce to the other males, 'This is my territory,' " he
said.

If they're confined to a small area with lots of birds and few resources - say,
a courtyard - they may sing louder, and earlier.

"It's getting a jump on your competition," Mr. Rowden said.

"Birds in New York are survivors."

Here's what else you need to know.

WEATHER

Mouth feel: soupy.

Partly sunny skies with highs in the lower 80s.

And a chance of showers overnight.

COMING UP TODAY

The Green Party candidate for governor, Howie Hawkins, holds a news conference
outside Tweed Courthouse. 1 p.m.

Electronic billboards in Times Square rotate through dozens of American
artworks, part of "the largest outdoor art show ever conceived." 7 a.m. to noon.

Submersible fans: The submersible from James Cameron's new film "Deepsea
Challenge 3D" is on display outside the American Museum of Natural History. 10
a.m. [Free]

A stunt cyclist performs in Morningside Park, part of the SummerStage events for
children. 10:30 a.m. [Free]

A party at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx commemorates the 2004
operation that separated a pair of conjoined twins. 4 p.m.

An exhibition on the films of World War I at MoMa opens with "Hearts of the
World," D.W. Griffith's silent film about the German invasion of France. 7:30
p.m. [$12]

Outdoor film roundup: "The Karate Kid" at Bryant Park and "American Hustle" on
Coney Island. 7:30 p.m. [Free]

For more events, see The New York Times Arts & Entertainment guide.

COMMUTE

Subway  and  PATH

L.I.R.R., Metro-North, N.J. Transit, Amtrak

Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.

Alternate-side parking: in effect.

Air travel: La Guardia, J.F.K., Newark.

IN THE NEWS

The death of Eric Garner was ruled a homicide. [New York Times]

The man who captured Mr. Garner's arrest on video was arrested on weapons
charges. []

Drones are becoming more popular in New York City, where there are few
regulations that cover them. [New York Times]

The lives behind Times Square's cartoon characters. [New York Times]

Kenneth Rosen contributed reporting.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late
morning. You can receive it via email.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at
nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Annie Correal and Andy Newman, on Twitter.

You can always find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


