                             964 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                (After Deadline)

                             June 24, 2014 Tuesday

Tangled Passages

BYLINE: PHILIP B. CORBETT

SECTION: TIMESTOPICS

LENGTH: 1530 words



HIGHLIGHT: Long, convoluted sentences are a disservice to harried readers. We
don&#8217;t have to use See-Spot-run syntax, but we should do the hard work of
ironing out our sentences so readers don&#8217;t have to.


As we've often noted, long, convoluted sentences are a disservice to harried
readers, who may be scanning the paper on the subway or checking their phone in
the checkout line. We don't have to use See-Spot-run syntax, but we should do
the hard work of ironing out our sentences so readers don't have to.

It's particularly daunting to encounter a complex sentence that includes several
different time elements. Readers are forced to slow down or double back to sort
out the events - or, worse, they simply give up and stop reading.

Here are three such cases from one recent day. Pare them down, straighten them
out or break them up.

This week, two officials who last year met secretly with the Iranians to get
negotiations underway - William J. Burns, the deputy secretary of state, and
Jake Sullivan, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s national security adviser -
met again with their Iranian counterparts, trying to get the negotiations back
on track before a July 20 deadline for a final agreement.

A single 62-word sentence crams together the news from this week, the background
from last year and the deadline coming next month. Along with the long
parenthetical identifications, it makes for tough slogging. Untangle the
elements into a couple of sentences.

The American drone strikes, after an almost six-month lull in the operations
while Pakistani officials tried and failed to negotiate a peace deal with the
Taliban, come as Pakistan is mulling a new offensive of its own against
militants in the northwestern tribal belt.

Another long sentence that includes what's going on now (the drone strikes);
what happened before (the lull and negotiations); and what's coming up (a
possible new offensive). A lot to digest without a breath.

The mounting pile of judgments has now become a serious obstacle to the
austerity drive of Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, with the International
Monetary Fund warning this week that the "adverse court rulings" threaten to
undo the country's reforms, which its creditors are scheduled to begin reviewing
in July.

And again - a 49-word journey with shifting time frames, many players and
multiple clauses. Especially given the dense topic, we should work harder to
help readers navigate.

 Still More Tangles

We often tangle up sentences with too much secondary information, holding the
threads together with commas and a prayer. There's nothing wrong with a
well-placed period and a fresh start.

The Sunni militants, who include many aligned with the jihadist Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria as well as loyalists to the old Saddam Hussein government swept
from power by the American-led invasion a decade ago, have confronted the
government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki with its worst crisis and
threatened to plunge Iraq into a sectarian war.

A 33-word relative clause wedged between the subject and verb makes this
sentence very hard to read.

WORCESTER, Mass. - Massachusetts Democrats on Saturday endorsed for governor
Steve Grossman, the state treasurer, passing over Martha Coakley, the attorney
general, and setting up an intense fight for the party nomination in the
September primary.

The outcome at the Massachusetts Democratic Convention was a defeat for Ms.
Coakley, not so much because Mr. Grossman, a former party chairman, beat her, as
expected, but because a third candidate who had never run for office before won
almost as many votes as she did.

Sprinkling nine commas into just two sentences makes for choppy reading and
suggests that we could have done more streamlining. For a start, we could have
used titles instead of the appositive constructions in the first sentence:
"Massachusetts Democrats on Saturday endorsed State Treasurer Steve Grossman for
governor, passing over Attorney General Martha Coakley ..."

 In a Word

This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help
from colleagues and readers.

Earlier, Mr. Kerry said in an interview with Yahoo! News that the United States
was "open to discussions if there's something constructive that can be
contributed by Iran."

Skip the exclamation point. From the stylebook:

company and corporation names. Generally render a name as the company does;
consult the company website. But avoid fanciful use of punctuation or other
nonalphabetic characters, which seem more like marketing logos than ordinary
names: Yahoo, not Yahoo!.

Neither its plot nor its provenance do much to recommend Terry Hayes's "I Am
Pilgrim."

The "neither ... nor" construction yields a singular subject; we wanted the
singular "does."

[Picture caption] The Mafia in Italy is a modern phenomena, John Dickie writes.

The singular is "phenomenon."

[Web summary] The resignation this week of a Democratic senator turned the tide
against Gov. Terry McAuliffe and expanded health coverage for the poor into a
flood.

Confusing. A reader may at first read "expanded" as a verb parallel with
"turned," rather than as a modifier with "health coverage." What's more, "turn
the tide" is an expression in itself, so adding "into a flood" yields more
confusion. Recast.

Though formally part of Norway, television channels here broadcast only Russian
programming.

Dangler. The place, Barentsburg, is formally part of Norway; the television
channels are not.

"In both instances, voters decided they wanted something different from business
as usual in Washington," Mr. Cruz, who is a vice-chairman of the Senate
Republican campaign arm supporting Mr. Cochran, told reporters.

No hyphen necessary in this title - same as "vice president."

Mr. Brat may have remained largely unknown were it not for Mr. Cantor himself,
who attacked him early in the race as a "liberal professor."

In this contrary-to-fact construction, we needed "might," not "may."

But are [#x200b][#x200b]father's[#x200b] rights[#x200b] a legitimate claim for
equality, or a conflict with women's interests?

Plural possessive: "fathers' rights," parallel to "women's interests."

If you're in your 20s now and your employer matches savings in a workplace
retirement account, do not miss out on that if you possibly can.

If you possibly can miss out? The expression ran off track.

His megaphone was conservative radio show host Laura Ingraham, who criticized
Mr. Cantor's positions on immigration.

Don't use a description as if it were a formal title. (Also, "show" is
redundant.) Make it "His megaphone was Laura Ingraham, the conservative radio
host, who criticized ..."

Mr. Mickelson, Mr. Icahn and Mr. Walters have issued statements denying any
wrongdoing. Mr. Mickelson, who said he has "done absolutely nothing wrong,"
added "I'll cooperate as much as I can with the F.B.I."

Sequence-of-tense rules call for "had" after the past-tense "said."

The red wine was among the first bottles made at Taybeh, the West Bank's only
brewery (Mr. Ratney had to fill out a special form to serve non-American wine).

Breweries produce beer; wine comes from wineries.

FreedomWorks and other leading Tea Party organizations did not put money and
resources behind Mr. Brat, a college professor, like they have in the case of
Chris McDaniel, who is opposing Mr. Cochran in Mississippi.

Avoid "like" as a conjunction introducing a full clause like this; make it "as."

The 12th-tallest building in the world, the tower was constructed of 30 miles'
worth of glass that rockets into the sky, surrounded by some of Chicago's most
famous architectural accomplishments.

Glass covers an area; it's not clear how we are measuring it to get to 30 miles.

Mr. Stevens stopped cashing the checks he received, Mr. Bahn said, though some
of the affected couples have said that he had continued to accept payments as
though nothing was amiss.

Use the subjunctive for this contrary-to-fact construction: "as though nothing
were amiss."

Gov. Bobby Jindal on Thursday signed into law new restrictions against abortion,
saying they will protect women and the unborn.

It's more precise to say "restrictions on abortion."

But as the sun sinks on Eric Cantor, we have to reflect that one of the plusses
to this story is that the House majority leader may have lost his seat because
he made a mistake in presuming that Americans hate college professors more than
professional politicians.

Our newsroom dictionary, Webster's New World College, gives "pluses" as the
preferred spelling.

When the Mets arrived home Sunday after an 11-game trip, in the middle of a
six-game losing streak, they appeared to have reached that point more quickly
than they had expected.

Actually, it turned out they were not "in the middle" of the losing streak but
at the end; they won their next game. Rephrase.

Hockey has an ineffable quality that bestows teams the ability to rally against
nearly impossible odds.

"Bestows" should be followed by "on" or "upon," or use a different verb like
"gives" or "lends." (I leave aside the question of whether "ineffable," meaning
"unutterable, inexpressible," is exactly the right word in this context.)

Jackie Cartier of Boulder, Colo., has been running for 10 years. That has left
her feet beaten up and bruised, with thick calluses and the occasional missing
toenail. But she won't step foot in a salon to have a pedicure.

The idiom is "set foot."

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


                   Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


