                             970 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                    The Fix

                      January 20, 2014 Monday 4:14 AM EST

17 highlights from the New Yorker's 17,000-word profile on Obama;
President talks about football, his memoir, marijuana and Snowden with magazine
editor David Remnick.

BYLINE: Zachary Goldfarb

LENGTH: 1466 words


President Obama sat for lengthy interviews with New Yorker magazine editor David
Remnick, who has written a nearly 17,000-word profile of the president as he
begins his sixth year in office. Remnick interviewed Obama for hours in the Oval
Office and on Air Force One late last year and earlier this month. The story is
a great long-read, and you should get a cup of your favorite hot beverage and
sit down with it for an hour. But here are the highlights -- roughly in order of
how they appeared in the story -- for those on a tighter schedule:

1. The NFL: Obama feels fine about watching football despite the reports of
severe concussions and retired players with brain damage. "I would not let my
son play pro football," he said. "But   these guys, they know what they're
doing. They know what they're buying into. It is no longer a secret. It's sort
of the feeling I have about smokers, you know?"

2. Obama's memoir: When Obama leaves the White House, he will write a memoir
that literary agent Andrew Wylie predicted would fetch $17 million to $20
million. First lady Michelle Obama has already started to work on her memoir.
Marty Nesbitt, Obama's friend, said the president will likely focus on "human
rights, education, and health and wellness."

3.  Race: Obama acknowledges that the color of his skin might have affect how
some Americans perceive his presidency, but he doesn't think it has a major
overall effect one way or the other. "There's no doubt that there's some folks
who just really dislike me because they don't like the idea of a black
President," he said. "Now, the flip side of it is there are some black folks and
maybe some white folks who really like me and give me the benefit of the doubt
precisely because I'm a black President."

4. What's in Obama's bag: Remnick tells readers what Marvin Nicholson, Obama's
body man, carries in a bag for the president: "pens, the briefing books, the
Nicorette, the Sharpies, the Advil, the throat lozenges, the iPad, the iPod, the
protein bars, the bottle of Black Forest Berry Honest Tea."

5. Obama has started socializing more: Obama said he hadn't socialized more in
the past because he has two young daughters at home. "I had two young daughters
who I wanted to spend time with-and that I wasn't in a position to work the
social scene in Washington," he said. But now that they're older, Obama and his
wife have been hosting more dinners, with the president drinking a Martini or
two, and Obama sometimes pushing guests to stay past 1 a.m. "I'm a night owl!
Have another drink," the president encouraged one set of guests.

6. Obama meets with presidential historians: Obama has had a number of
presidential historians over as guests, including Doris Kearns Goodwin and
Robert Caro, whose work on Lyndon Johnson often is cited as an example of how a
president can more effectively get in his agenda through Congress. Remnick
writes: "At the most recent dinner he attended at the White House, Caro had the
distinct impression that Obama was cool to him, annoyed, perhaps, at the notion
appearing in the press that his latest Johnson volume was an implicit rebuke to
him. As we were leaving, I said to Obama, 'You know, my book wasn't an unspoken
attack on you, it's a book about Lyndon Johnson,'  Caro recalled." Obama and his
team continue to rebuff the idea that more social outings and pressure would
lead Republicans to embrace his ideas. Obama pointed out that when Johnson "lost
that historic majority [in Congress], and the glow of that landslide victory
faded, he had the same problems with Congress that most Presidents at one point
or another have."

7. Marijuana: Obama said he is most concerned about the impact of drug laws on
minorities and the poor.  "Middle-class kids don't get locked up for smoking
pot, and poor kids do," he said. "And African-American kids and Latino kids are
more likely to be poor and less likely to have the resources and the support to
avoid unduly harsh penalties." He added that he supports Colorado and
Washington's efforts to "go forward" with their efforts at legalization and
decriminalization.

8. Malia's career plans:              Obama's older daughter, Malia, wants to be
a filmmaker.

9. Obama's must-do list: Remnick asked Obama about what he must get done before
the end of 2016. He responded,"I will measure myself at the end of my presidency
in large part by whether I began the process of rebuilding the middle class and
the ladders into the middle class, and reversing the trend toward economic
bifurcation in this society."

10. Iran: Remnick writes that Obama believes if the current diplomatic efforts
with Iran prevail, it could bring a new stability to the region.  "It would be
profoundly in the interest of citizens throughout the region if Sunnis and Shias
weren't intent on killing each other," Obama said. "And although it would not
solve the entire problem, if we were able to get Iran to operate in a
responsible fashion - not funding terrorist organizations, not trying to stir up
sectarian discontent in other countries, and not developing a nuclear weapon -
you could see an equilibrium developing between Sunni, or predominantly Sunni,
Gulf states and Iran in which there's competition, perhaps suspicion, but not an
active or proxy warfare."

11. Syria: Obama said he feels confident that he has made the right decisions on
Syria, although he confided, when prompted, that he is "haunted by what's
happened" there. But, he added, "It is very difficult to imagine a scenario in
which our involvement in Syria would have led to a better outcome, short of us
being willing to undertake an effort in size and scope similar to what we did in
Iraq."

12. Drones:              Obama also defended his strategy of using drones to
kill terrorism suspects abroad, saying that his "preference" remains to capture
and prosecute them, but if that proves infeasible, "I cannot stand by and do
nothing." He continued, "What I've tried to do is to tighten the process so much
and limit the risks of civilian casualties so much that we have the least
fallout from those actions. But it's not perfect."

13.  NSA/Snowden:              Obama said he does not regard the leaks by former
NSA contractor Edward Snowden as comparable to the Pentagon Papers or other
leaks vindicated by history.  Remnick writes: "The leaks, he said, had 'put
people at risk' but revealed nothing illegal. And though the leaks raised
'legitimate policy questions' about N.S.A. operations, 'the issue then is: Is
the only way to do that by giving some twenty-nine-year-old free rein to
basically dump a mountain of information, much of which is definitely legal,
definitely necessary for national security, and should properly be classified?'"

14. Clemency for Snowden: Asked about the prospect of a deal with Snowden, Obama
responded, "I do not have a yes/no answer on clemency for Edward Snowden. This
is an active case, where charges have been brought."

15. How to address inequality: Although he is focused on inequality and economic
opportunity, Obama recognizes he will have a limited capacity to address the
issues. "The appetite for tax-and-transfer strategies, even among Democrats,
much less among independents or Republicans, is probably somewhat limited."
Obama said. "Marshall Plan for the inner city is not going to get through
Congress anytime soon."

16. His key strength:              Obama believes that his equanimity endures as
one of his key strengths. "I have strengths and I have weaknesses, like every
president, like every person," he said. "I do think one of my strengths is
temperament. I am comfortable with complexity, and I think I'm pretty good at
keeping my moral compass while recognizing that I am a product of original sin."

17. A president's limited power to change:              Obama said that even the
greatest presidents - like Abraham Lincoln - had to operate in the currents of
history. "[D]espite being the greatest President, in my mind, in our history, it
took another hundred and fifty years before African-Americans had anything
approaching formal equality, much less real equality. I think that doesn't
diminish Lincoln's achievements, but it acknowledges that at the end of the day
we're part of a long-running story. We just try to get our paragraph right."
Remnick concludes the story with Obama saying, "I just wanted to add one thing
to that business about the great-man theory of history. The President of the
United States cannot remake our society, and that's probably a good thing."
Obama then adds, "Not 'probably'. It's definitely a good thing."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


