                             976 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                   Right Turn

                       August 5, 2014 Tuesday 7:49 PM EST

Rand Paul's rough ride in Iowa;
He has to tell everyone the same story.

BYLINE: Jennifer Rubin

LENGTH: 827 words


In a video making its way around news sites, a woman in Iowa identifying herself
as a DREAMer approaches Rep. Steve King (R-Iowa) and Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.).
King, notoriously anti-immigrant and repeatedly denounced by fellow Republicans,

 engages with the woman. But with a jerk of his head, a pull of the arm and the
sound of a chair loudly scraping the floor (according to reports), Rand Paul's
aide gets Paul to safety. Paul, to many people's surprise given his efforts at
GOP outreach, follows dutifully along.

This is a shame on many levels. First, a U.S. senator, whatever his beliefs,
should be able to stand on his own and engage politely with those with whom he
disagrees or agrees, especially if he has made an issue about growing the party.
Second, why wouldn't Paul stand up and exclaim, "Then vote for me!"? He was an
early and rather consistent voice in favor of DREAM Act legislation. This would
have been a great time to make a connection and improve the image of his party,
exactly what he aims to do. And third, by not engaging, Paul literally left the
conversation to an egregious anti-immigrant congressman. (If he doesn't like the
obnoxious anti-immigrant views King holds and the controversies it brings, he
should have lunch with someone else.)

Paul's longtime adviser Doug Stafford was not there at the time but spoke to the
aide and told me, "He was due at a media availability, and left to be where he
was expected to be." It's not clear why the aide would have dragged Paul away so
suddenly, mid-bite. In any case, in a world of ubiquitous cellphone cameras,
every interaction or non-interaction can be captured, and this one looks bad.
There is no stage direction that can be entirely concealed.

Paul has been selective, some critics would say evasive, in choosing to talk to
minority and young audiences only on discrete topics (anti-drones, anti-National
Security Agency surveillance) that do not necessarily run afoul of other,
broader conservative audiences. In a national campaign, however, you have to
talk to the whole electoral gamut, pretty much in the same way or your words
come back to bite you. Paul will need to, if he's serious about immigration
reform, make the case strongly to whatever audiences he encounters. They may not
like it. But you don't grow the party by talking only to people who already
agree with you. That means being candid with young people and social
conservatives about gay marriage and talking frankly about ending the
"deportation mentality" (which he has done) to the Conservative Political Action
Conference and to DREAMers. It's not the worst thing in the world to get a
frosty reception from some; it's the price one pays when going fishing for new
voters. (And Paul's likely not going to get the Steve King anti-immigrant voter
anyway.)

More problematic was his encounter just before the event when discussing aid to
Israel, which, as we've previously noted, he used to favor reducing or
eliminating and now says he never did. The Wall Street Journal reports: "Another
awkward moment on the campaign trail came during a stop in nearby Omaha, Neb.,
where Mr. Paul rejected a reporter's suggestion that he wanted to reduce aid to
Israel. 'Don't mischaracterize my position on Israel,' said Mr. Paul, noting
that he voted last week to give Israel $225 million for its missile-defense
program. Paul's remarks drew a rebuke from Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chairwoman
of the Democratic National Committee. 'Now that he's running for president, he's
trying to rewrite history,' she said in a written statement with the executive
director of the National Jewish Democratic Council, Rabbi Jack Moline."

This is revealing of a central problem with Paul's potential presidential
campaign. Rather than deny what he said previously on a range of foreign policy
issues - which is memorialized in transcripts and video - he'd do much better on
these issues (the impetus for World War II, Dick Cheney's motives in the Iraq
war, aid to Israel, cutting defense, reducing bases around the world) to say, "I
was wrong. I changed my mind." That would be more honest. Voters can decide
whether they think the conversion is genuine or not. But what he can't do - and
here is the problem that will strangle a presidential run in its infancy - is to
muse about containment of Iran and keep playing to the libertarian base with
positions on slashing defense, preventing drones from targeting American
jihadists overseas, eliminating NSA, and disavowing interest in the outcome in
Iraq (and then modifying his statement) and expect to be accepted as a
mainstream Republican on foreign policy. He has to choose - a Paulite or a
mainstream foreign policy. Even if he chooses the latter, voters might not
believe that he is being candid or is sufficiently knowledgeable or experienced
to replace a president who was also a freshman senator and foreign policy
novice,  but at least he won't appear to be concealing his own record.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


