                             974 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      July 23, 2014 Wednesday 7:49 PM EST

Two Ukrainian military jets shot down over rebel-held area;
The planes were struck in the same vicinity as a Malaysia Airlines airliner that
was shot down last week.

BYLINE: Michael Birnbaum;Carol Morello

LENGTH: 1129 words


KHARKIV, Ukraine - Two Ukrainian warplanes were shot down Wednesday over
rebel-held eastern Ukraine in the same vicinity as a Malaysian airliner that was
downed last week, Ukrainian officials and rebels said.

The attack on the warplanes came just six days after the Malaysia Airlines
Flight 17 crash, which has drawn international outrage and showcased the
advanced firepower that is apparently available on the ground in the region. The
Ukrainian military said Wednesday that the two planes that were shot down were
flying at close to 17,000 feet - an altitude that is out of reach for the
shoulder-fired rockets that the rebels said they had used to down the jets.
Neither the government's nor the rebels' claims were immediately verifiable.

Ukraine has accused Russia of supplying fresh firepower to rebels over the
porous border in recent days, even as international attention has focused on a
possible Russian role in the attack on Flight 17. Although the precise details
of Wednesday's incident remain unclear, it was a warning sign that the rebels
possess the ability to inflict massive damage on the Ukrainian military, whose
major advantage over its rivals is in the air.

The planes, both Sukhoi Su-25 attack aircraft, were struck in the vicinity of
Saur Mogila, a rebel stronghold just west of the Russian border, said Aleksey
Dmitrashkovsky, a spokesman for the Ukrainian armed forces.

Vladislav Seleznev, a Ukrainian military spokesman in the eastern combat zone,
said the two jets were struck by antiaircraft missiles in the same vicinity as
Flight 17, which had 298 passengers and crew members on it. He said a pilot was
the only person in each of the two Soviet-designed military planes, which are
used for close air support. The government said both pilots ejected.

The downing of the warplanes came as bodies of Flight 17 victims were being
flown out of Ukraine en route to the Netherlands.

U.S. and Ukrainian officials have charged that pro-Russian separatist rebels
used a surface-to-air missile system supplied by Russia to shoot down the
Malaysian plane. The rebels have denied involvement, but they asserted
responsibility Wednesday for shooting down the Ukrainian jets, Russia's Interfax
news agency reported. The agency said rebels in Donetsk made the claim and were
searching for the pilot who ejected.

In a statement on its Web site, the Ukrainian cabinet said "pro-Russia
terrorists," its usual term for the separatists, fired on four Ukrainian air
force planes that were returning from a mission supporting troops positioned at
the Russian border. It said that while the planes took evasive maneuvers and
sent out flares to deflect heat-seeking missiles, two Su-25 planes were hit, and
the pilots ejected.

The statement said the incident occurred in the vicinity of the village of
Dmytrivka. Various military spokesmen have given different locations for the
shooting, but all are southeast of Donetsk between the rebel-held city and the
Russian border.

In a separate incident, the Interfax-Ukraine news agency said Ukrainian troops
shot down a Russian-made Orlan-10 drone in the Donetsk region near the village
of Amvrosievka. It said the drone was being used by rebels to target a major
Ukrainian checkpoint.

The downing of the two strike aircraft came as the Ukrainian military said it
had instituted a cease-fire within 25 miles of the site where Flight 17 went
down.

"That is the site where Ukrainian armed forces have no activities," Ukrainian
security spokesman Andriy Lysenko said before the downing of the military planes
had been disclosed. "There is a prohibition by order."

The site of Wednesday's crashes appeared to be close to the edge of that
perimeter, about 25 miles to the south.

At the main Flight 17 crash site early Wednesday afternoon - before the jets
were shot down - black columns of smoke could be seen rising on the eastern
horizon in the direction of Luhansk, a rebel-held city where there has been
heavy fighting for weeks. Military aircraft buzzed overhead.

Explosions and gunfire could be heard throughout Tuesday night in the city of
Donetsk, as the Ukrainian army continued a push against the rebels in their main
stronghold.

The fighting has caused hair-trigger tension on the rebel side. Late Tuesday at
the rebel headquarters in the main regional administration building in Donetsk,
reports that the building was about to be bombed sent crowds of men in ragtag
camouflage uniforms scurrying into a makeshift bomb shelter in the basement. The
threat never materialized.

The Ukrainian military said early Wednesday that rebel forces were abandoning
positions on the outskirts of Donetsk and regrouping in the city's center. The
claim could not be verified.

According to the Ukrainian Defense Ministry, "pro-Russian terrorists began
firing antiaircraft missile systems" at the planes in the area of Saur Mogila,
near the town of Snizhne and about 10 miles from Torez, where the bodies of the
Malaysia Airlines victims were initially taken.

"Two aircraft suffered damage," the ministry said on its Web site. "The pilots
ejected themselves."

A spokesman for the Ukrainian military said the military did not know the
current status or location of the pilots.

Donetsk rebels told the Russian Interfax that the second plane flew farther
north of the area where they were looking for a pilot who was seen ejecting.

The Ukrainian Defense Ministry said an Su-25 jet was shot down by pro-Russian
separatists in Luhansk last week, the day before the Flight 17 downing.

Luhansk rebels also told Interfax on Wednesday that they had shot down two other
military aircraft on Tuesday.

"Four Su-25 attack aircraft and two Su-27 fighters spent the whole day yesterday
flying over the Luhansk People's Republic territory," Interfax quoted a
spokesman for the rebel organization as saying Wednesday. "As a result of using
the republic's air defense weapons, two hostile aircraft were destroyed."

Even as the rebels asserted responsibility Wednesday for shooting down multiple
Ukrainian military planes, a spokesman for Russia's Foreign Ministry accused the
Ukrainian army of preventing a cease-fire by carrying out strikes near the crash
site.

"Kiev is not willing to listen to the voice reason and accept a cease-fire that
was not once but twice offered by militia representatives," spokesman Alexander
Lukashevich said in a statement posted on the Foreign Ministry's Web site
Wednesday afternoon. "Strikes from heavy weapons are being carried out, among
other things, against populated areas and in the immediate vicinity of the crash
site."

Lukashevich then repeated Russia's call for an "immediate cease-fire."

carol.morello@washpost.com

michael.birnbaum@washpost.com

Birnbaum reported from Donetsk. Karoun Demirjian in Moscow contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


