                              97 of 2956 DOCUMENTS


                                  Denver Post

                              June 8, 2014 Sunday
                              SUN BUSINESS Edition

Drone dream launches race to build better sensor

BYLINE: Thomas Black

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12K

LENGTH: 891 words


In the quest to build drones that can help companies such as Amazon.com make
door to door deliveries, engineers are racing to overcome a fundamental
challenge: helping unmanned, suitcase sized aircraft see where they're going.

The answer is developing sensors that are smart enough to keep the drones from
smacking into buildings, people and anything else that would impede travel yet
small and light enough that the machines can stay aloft.

Startups around the U.S., eager for a slice of a market projected by Teal Group
to more than double to $11.6 billion by 2023, are responding. Virginia based
Aurora Flight Sciences is testing echo location, a method that mimics how bats
navigate in the dark, while engineers at 3 D Robotics are turning to optic flow
sensors, which detect objects by examining video pixels.

"Sense and avoid is one of the biggest opportunities in the industry," said
Jesse Kallman, chief of global business development for San Francisco based
Airware, a drone equipment maker backed by Google Ventures. "The technology is
not there yet, but it's something the industry needs badly."

Size is the key to success and the smaller the better. Sagetech has reduced
transponders, which send and receive signals on aircraft location, to the
approximate dimensions of credit cards. In Alaska, a serial entrepreneur has
licensed a miniature radar system, the technology considered most difficult to
shrink because of the need for an antenna and a receiver.

Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos pushed the concept of home delivery drones to the
forefront in a Dec. 1 interview on CBS's "60 Minutes," saying Amazon plans to
use small, helicopter like aircraft to deliver packages as heavy as 5 pounds
within a 10 mile radius.

U.S. airspace regulations for drones are just starting to take shape. There are
still "serious unanswered questions" about the safety and reliability of
unmanned aircraft, a National Academy of Sciences panel said Thursday. A report
from the 17 member group cited "many substantial barriers" to integrating
unmanned aircraft into U.S. airspace, including technology, a regulatory system
unprepared to oversee them and privacy questions.

Preliminary rules due by year's end from the U.S. Federal Aviation
Administration may let drones weighing 55 pounds or less fly below 400 feet and
within sight of a licensed operator.

The first commercial applications probably will be tasks such as surveying
crops, filming movies, and inspecting bridges and flare stacks that are
difficult and dangerous to reach. In public safety, small aerial robots will
help police diagram auto accidents and firefighters highlight hot spots during a
blaze. Those duties are extensions of the way the military pioneered using
unmanned aircraft for surveillance and strike missions.

Harnessing the full potential of drones will require the ability to fly on
autopilot and beyond the line of sight.

Amazon is flight testing fifth and sixth generation drones for its Prime Air
program and is in the design phase for the next two versions, company
spokeswoman Mary Osako said.

To give small drones the sensing capabilities of jumbo jets, Hood River, Ore.
based Sagetech has shrunk the transponder for aircraft location to 3.5 ounces
from about 3 pounds, president Kelvin Scribner said. The company plans to
produce a unit to let drones avert collisions with other aircraft. That system
will weigh 7 ounces, or only about 5 percent as much as the equipment on a
commercial airliner.

The challenge doesn't stop there: Sensors still need refinement so low flying
drones dodge the trees, streetlights and humans that aren't in the path of
conventional planes.

Optical flow sensors, which allow a computer mouse to function without a
trackball, are being adapted for collision avoidance.

John Parker, who started Kenai, Alaska based Integrated Robotics Imaging Systems
in 2012, said he has an answer for equipping drones with radar.

Parker licensed a 12 ounce system from three University of Denver professors
with a range of a mile. The former private aviation investigator and owner of
real estate service companies is betting he can cut the weight by half, produce
the unit commercially in 18 months and sell it for $7,000 to $10,000.

Lucas Van Oostrum, CEO of Aerialtronics, a Dutch company that has sold 250
drones to mostly European customers, including London police, expects sensors to
shrink to the size of coins. He envisions a system in which airborne vehicles
fly autonomously within rules similar to street traffic.

The hardware solutions are within reach, and research into driverless cars will
help advance sensor technology, Van Oostrum said. The software that follows will
let the industry take off.

"We're moving from hardware to software again like with the mobile phones," Van
Oostrum said. "First you could text and then it moved on to applications, and
that's where we see this going as well."

Dronecon 2014

The annual developer conference Dronecon will be held June 20 at the University
of Colorado at Boulder. Developers will share information about their work on
land, sea and air vehicles, ground stations and other developments in open
source autonomous vehicles. The event will also include plenary talks on
technical developments and applications. Dronecon will start at 9 a.m. at the
Atlas Building on campus. For more information, go DIYdrones.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The first commercial applications probably will be tasks such as
surveying crops and filming movies. Craig F. Walker, Denver Post file

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2014 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved


