                             980 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                      August 19, 2014 Tuesday 6:57 PM EST

Iraqi effort to recapture Tikrit said to stall;
An advance on the city by Iraqi government forces came under heavy fire from
Islamist militants.

BYLINE: Karen DeYoung;Liz Sly;Loveday Morris

LENGTH: 1650 words


An Iraqi offensive aimed recapturing the city of Tikrit stalled Tuesday, a day
after Iraqi and Kurdish forces backed by U.S. airstrikes recaptured the
country's largest dam from radical Islamist militants who have rampaged across
northern Iraq.

Iraqi army units backed by Shiite militias launched a drive shortly after dawn
to retake Tikrit, the home town of former dictator Saddam Hussein, from fighters
of the Islamic State, an al-Qaeda offshoot that has been accused of widespread
atrocities and mass killings of civilians in its campaign to create a new Sunni
Muslim caliphate. But the Iraqi advance was stopped south and west of Tikrit
when the government forces came under heavy machine gun, mortar and sniper fire
and ran into land mines, news agencies reported.

An Iraqi army spokesman, Lt. Gen. Qassim al-Moussawi, said Tuesday that
government forces were engaged in a "slow and gradual push" to recapture areas
around Tikrit, a city about 110 miles by road northwest of Baghdad that was
captured by Islamic State fighters in June. He described the effort in a
televised briefing as "biting back the land," the Associated Press reported.

The Islamic State issued a grisly warning against further U.S. airstrikes,
vowing in a video posted on the Internet that "we will drown all of you in
blood" if the group's fighters are hit. The warning, in English, was accompanied
by a photo of an American who was beheaded during the U.S. military occupation
of Iraq that followed the overthrow of Hussein in 2003. The longtime Iraqi
strongman was hanged by the new government in 2006. During the occupation, the
group that became the Islamic State was known as al-Qaeda in Iraq.

On Monday, President Obama hailed the recapture of the strategic Mosul Dam as
"important progress" in the fight against the Islamic State.

While he said other U.S. goals had also been met in Iraq, including stopping a
militant surge toward the Kurdish capital of Irbil, Obama declined to set a time
frame to limit U.S. military action in the country.

"A lot of it depends on how effectively the Iraqi government comes together,"
Obama said.

The president said his primary goal in Iraq is to "make sure we have a viable
partner" and a "government formation process that is credible, legitimate and
can appeal to Sunnis" and other Iraqi minorities. "We've made significant
progress on that front, but we're not there yet," Obama said.

Iraq's new prime minister-designate, Haider al-Abadi, has said he will form a
new government within the next two weeks. "When we see a credible Iraqi
government," Obama said in remarks in the White House press briefing room, "we
are then in a position to engage in planning" for the future.

Asked whether he was concerned about U.S."mission creep," Obama said that "if we
have effective partners on the ground, mission creep is much less likely." When
U.S. officials "start deciding that we're the ones that have to do it all
ourselves, because of the excellence of our military, that can work for a time,
we learned that in Iraq. But it's not sustainable, it's not lasting."

In Iraq, fighting continued on the western bank of the lake at the head of the
Mosul Dam on Monday, and government troops were unable to enter the facility
because it was booby-trapped by the retreating militants, officials said.

But Iraqi and Kurdish officials claimed that Islamic State fighters were on the
run after the offensive launched by Iraqi special forces and Kurdish pesh merga
fighters backed by U.S. air support Sunday.

The U.S. military's Central Command said the airstrikes continued Monday, with a
mix of fighter jets, bombers and drones successfully conducting 15 strikes
against Islamic State targets near the Mosul Dam. It said the airstrikes damaged
or destroyed nine fighting positions, a checkpoint, six armed vehicles, a light
armored vehicle, a vehicle-mounted antiaircraft gun and an "emplacement belt"
for improvised explosive devices, known as IEDs.

"All aircraft exited the strike areas safely," the Central Command said in a
statement. It said U.S. forces have carried out a total of 68 airstrikes in Iraq
since Aug. 8, of which 35 have been in support of Iraqi forces near the Mosul
Dam.

Lt. Gen. Qassim Atta, an Iraqi army spokesman, told journalists in Baghdad that
the joint operation "fully liberated the dam" and that the troops "hoisted the
Iraqi flag over it."

Brig. Gen. Abdulwahab al-Saidi, an Iraqi special forces commander, said: "The
dam is completely under our control. Our soldiers are now relaxing swimming in
the lake."

The claims came a day after Iraqi and Kurdish commanders said they had made
unexpectedly swift progress after the operation was launched. They said their
forces sliced through a series of villages and reached the dam after a wave of
U.S. attacks in which fighter jets, drones and bombers pummeled the extremists'
positions.

It was the biggest offensive since the latest U.S. intervention in Iraq was
announced 10 days ago, and it signaled an expansion of what was originally
defined as a narrowly focused mission to protect American personnel in Iraq and
help fleeing Yazidi villagers trapped on a mountain.

In a letter released Sunday notifying Congress of the action, Obama said the
militants' control of the dam posed a threat to the U.S. Embassy 200 miles away
in Baghdad, which could be inundated if the dam were breached.

"The failure of the Mosul Dam could threaten the lives of large numbers of
civilians, endanger U.S. personnel and facilities, including the U.S. Embassy in
Baghdad, and prevent the Iraqi government from providing critical services to
the Iraqi populace," he wrote.

Obama had signaled in a statement last week that protecting "critical
infrastructure" would be part of what officials have described as a limited
military intervention. This was, however, the first time Iraqi, Kurdish and U.S.
forces had come together to launch a major ground assault.

A week ago, U.S. airstrikes helped clear Islamic State positions, enabling
Kurdish fighters to retake two small towns south of the Kurdish capital, Irbil.
That marked the Kurds' first successful effort to recapture territory they had
lost to an Islamic State offensive launched two weeks ago.

Kurdish and Iraqi officials said that Sunday's operation was going better than
expected and that the dam would soon be under full government control. "We
expect to finish this within hours," said Helgurd Hikmat, a spokesman for the
pesh merga.

A U.S. official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the
sensitivity of the situation, also said that the operation had "made significant
progress." But he said that recapturing the dam would take time "because there
are a lot of IEDs."

Late Sunday night, a senior Kurdish official said that Islamic State fighters
had abandoned their positions at the dam but that Iraqi and Kurdish forces had
refrained from entering the facility because of concerns that it was
booby-trapped.

"Everybody is being really careful about their sinister tactics. When they leave
their positions, they mine them," said Hoshyar Zebari, a former Iraqi foreign
minister who is working closely with the Kurdish government.

"But we don't see any resistance whatsoever."

The Islamic State's Aug. 7 capture of the Mosul Dam, just hours before Obama
announced his decision to send U.S. warplanes back into action in Iraq, was a
high point in the group's campaign to establish a caliphate across the Middle
East, putting the militants in control of one of Iraq's most vital facilities.

Ten days on, it seemed that the intervention was starting to turn the tide.

At the Badriya checkpoint, six miles north of the dam, spirits were high among
pesh merga troops blocking the road ahead, citing the danger posed by explosives
planted by the retreating militants. Several Islamic State fighters had been
captured trying to sneak through Kurdish checkpoints in a bid to escape, said
Yunus Said, a volunteer fighter. Others had retreated to the western bank of the
Tigris River, he said.

As he spoke, a convoy of SUVs and armored vehicles sped past from the direction
of the front line, escorting a pickup in which a bound, blindfolded captive sat.

The soldiers cheered. "Daish," they shouted, using the Arabic acronym for the
Islamic State. "Beat them, beat them."

Iraq's elite special forces, which worked closely alongside U.S. Special Forces
units before U.S. troops withdrew in 2011, took the lead in the fighting around
the dam, while pesh merga troops closed in on the surrounding villages from the
north. Saidi, the special forces commander, said the Iraqi air force and SWAT
teams also were involved.

Their advance was preceded by the most intense U.S. bombardment yet, with 17
airstrikes Sunday destroying armed vehicles, Humvees, armored personnel carriers
and a checkpoint belonging to the militants, according to U.S. Central Command
statements. The strikes followed nine in the area the previous day near Irbil
and the Mosul Dam.

The assault was the worst setback for the Islamic State since the militants
embarked on their stunning rout of the Iraqi army across northern Iraq in June.
The group has since continued to expand across Iraq and Syria.

The extremists also came under pressure in Syria on Sunday, with activists in
their northern stronghold of Raqqah reporting 23 bombing raids by Syrian
government warplanes against Islamic State targets there. The Britain-based
Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said there were 84 Syrian airstrikes Sunday,
an unusually high number. Of them, 43 were against the Islamic State, signaling
a significant escalation of Syrian attacks against the group, which the
government had for many months steered away from confronting.

karen.deyoung@washpost.com

liz.sly@washpost.com

loveday.morris@washpost.com

William Branigin and Craig Whitlock contributed to this report. Sly reported
from Badriya, Iraq. Morris reported from Baghdad.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


