                             988 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                    September 23, 2014 Tuesday 11:56 AM EST

U.S. expands war against Islamic State with airstrikes in Syria;
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates join the U.S.
effort against Islamic State.

BYLINE: Craig Whitlock

LENGTH: 1465 words


The United States and several Middle East partners pounded Islamic State targets
in Syria Tuesday with waves of warplanes and Tomahawk cruise missiles in an
aggressive and risky operation marking a new phase in the conflict.

A statement issued by the U.S. Central Command early Tuesday said that a "mix of
fighter, bomber, remotely-piloted aircraft and Tomahawk" cruise missiles
destroyed or damaged multiple Islamic State targets in Syria, where a civil war
has been raging for more than three years.

The U.S. statement said "partner nations," including Jordan, Saudi Arabia,
Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, "participated in or supported" the
operation, although it provided no details. The involvement of these regional
allies are key for the legitimacy and logistics of the operation.

The written statement said 14 airstrikes damaged or destroyed Islamic State
training compounds, storage facilities, a finance center, supply trucks and
several armed vehicles.

It said 47 Tomahawk cruise missiles were also launched against the group from
two U.S. carriers operating in international waters. U.S. Air Force, Navy and
Marine Corp fighters were also involved in the strikes, the statement said.

The statement said airstrikes also struck an al-Qaeda group in Syria - the
Khorasan Group - who had established a safe haven around the embattled city of
Aleppo and were planning an attack against the United States and Western
interests.

"The U.S. Central Command conducted eight strikes against Khorasan Group targets
west of Aleppo to include training camps, an explosives and munitions production
facility, a communication building and command and control facilities," the
statement said.

Residents of the northeastern Syrian city of Raqqah - the Islamic State's new
self-declared capital - reported news of large explosions and said repeated
passes from military aircraft were clearly audible.

"There were 18 air strikes in Raqqa," said Abo Jilan, an activist from Raqqa who
runs the group Raqqa is Being Silently Slaughtered. "Seven of them hit the main
headquarters of ISIS (Islamic State), which was hugely damaged."

While U.S. planes have been hitting Islamic State militant targets for more than
a month in Iraq, airstrikes within Syria has considerably expanded the effort.

The United States has worked assiduously to build an international coalition
against the Islamic State and has placed a special emphasis on recruiting Muslim
countries. Until Monday, those countries had been reluctant to join, at least
publicly, fueling doubts about their willingness to attack an Arab neighbor.

By enlisting the five Arab countries to participate in the Syria operation,
however, the Obama administration could now boast of a major diplomatic
achievement. Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the UAE in particular have well-trained
and well-equipped air forces, thanks largely to long-standing military
partnerships with the Pentagon.

President Obama and other U.S. leaders had all but promised in recent days that
they would order airstrikes against Islamic State strongholds in Syria. The
jihadist movement - which the CIA estimates has up to 31,000 fighters at its
disposal - controls much of eastern Syria and has used its bases there as a
springboard for seizing territory in neighboring Iraq.

But in ordering the attacks, Obama also thrust the U.S. military directly into
Syria's devastating civil war, something that he had steadfastly tried to avoid
since the country began breaking apart in 2011.

The U.S.-led military operation in Syria came just hours before Obama was
scheduled to arrive in New York to attend the annual meeting of the United
Nations General Assembly and make a further pitch for other countries to join
the U.S.-led coalition against the Islamic State.

Obama was on the cusp of ordering U.S. military strikes in Syria a year ago to
punish President Bashar al-Assad after strong evidence emerged that the Syrian
government had used chemical weapons against civilians. Obama backed away at the
last minute, however, when Syria agreed to an international plan to destroy its
massive chemical weapons arsenal.

This time, the Americans' target is not Assad, who has managed to cling to his
seat in Damascus, but the Islamic State, a onetime al-Qaeda affiliate that has
exploited the chaos in Syria to attract a huge flow of recruits, weapons and
money.

The Islamic State also represents a mortal threat to Assad and has beaten back
his forces on several fronts. The Obama administration has said repeatedly that
it would not cooperate with Assad in any way, even though the two sides now
share an enemy. As a result, it was unclear how Assad's armed forces would
respond to unauthorized intrusions into Syrian airspace by U.S. warplanes.

The Syrian government has some of the most formidable air defenses in the Middle
East. Obama had publicly warned Syria in advance not to interfere with any U.S.
operations against the Islamic State, saying the Pentagon would respond
forcefully. In the end, U.S. military planners said they expected Assad would
stand down and allow them to attack Islamic State targets freely.

The Pentagon did not say which military bases it relied upon to conduct the
airstrikes. It has several major air bases in the Persian Gulf, including in the
UAE, Qatar and Kuwait. The U.S. Navy, whose ships launched the Tomahawk missiles
into Syria, keeps its 5th Fleet headquarters in Bahrain.

Those bases have played a crucial role in the U.S. military campaign in Iraq.
Since Aug. 8, U.S. warplanes and drones have conducted 190 airstrikes against
Islamic State targets in Iraq, but the U.S. military has only a handful of
reconnaissance aircraft in the country.

The Pentagon has sent 1,600 advisers and other troops to Iraq to help Iraqi
government forces and Kurdish fighters combat the Islamic State. But air power
has been the crux of the U.S. military involvement in the region.

To reach eastern Syria from the Persian Gulf, the U.S. military and its allies
almost certainly would have had to rely on long-range tanker aircraft to refuel
their warplanes.

The Pentagon also has a large number of aircraft stationed at Incirlik Air Base
in Turkey, a NATO installation. But with the exception of unarmed U.S.
surveillance drones based there, Turkish authorities have said they won't allow
the U.S. military to conduct airstrikes against the Islamic State from their
territory.

Earlier Monday, Obama and other senior administration officials informed
congressional leaders about plans to target the Islamic State in Syria.

Obama spoke Monday evening by telephone with House Speaker John A. Boehner
(R-Ohio) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), telling them of
plans to begin an expanded military campaign into Syria, according to senior
congressional aides.

Vice President Biden phoned Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Dianne
Feinstein (D-Calif.) and her GOP counterpart, Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.),
aides said.  And House Armed Services Committee Chairman Howard P. "Buck" McKeon
(R-Calif.) was informed by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel, according to an aide
to the lawmaker.

Arab participation in the operation began to solidify in recent days.

Secretary of State John F. Kerry met with the Arab states involved last week.
All had told the administration weeks ago that their air forces would
participate in Syria strikes if the United States provided a viable plan and
convinced them that it would follow through.

Although France has agreed to join in airstrikes in Iraq, and last week
conducted a bombing raid there, French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said
Monday that his government did not believe it had the legal basis to join the
Syria operations.

Since the Iraq strikes began during the summer, the U.S.-backed Syrian
Opposition Coalition has pleaded for similar action in Syria, along with the
Obama administration's agreement, approved last week by Congress, to sharply
increase weapons shipments and authorize the U.S. military to provide training
on the ground in the region.

In remarks Monday to reporters at the United Nations, coalition President Hadi
al-Bahra reiterated his plea for "immediate" U.S. and coalition strikes in
Syria. "Time is of the essence," Bahra said. "Hitting them in Iraq alone will
not work if they can continue to operate, regroup, train and plan inside Syria."

Senior opposition leaders were first told Sunday about the pending strikes, said
one, speaking on condition of anonymity about the secret conversations. The
official said the coalition was coordinating with the United States on
"targeting, sequencing and next steps in the military campaign."

Craig.Whitlock@washpost.com

Ed O'Keefe and Karen DeYoung contributed to this report from Washington, Rebecca
Collard from Beirut, and Daniela Deane from Rome.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


