                             987 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 15, 2014 Monday 10:23 AM EST

Heavy fighting between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian rebels over the weekend;

Hundreds of cease-fire violations have been reported as well as drones over the
territory.

BYLINE: Anthony Faiola;Daniela Deane

LENGTH: 529 words


KIEV, Ukraine - Heavy fighting between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian
separatists was reported over the weekend, with the Ukrainians claiming hundreds
of cease-fire violations, including an assault by more than 200 rebels near
Donetsk airport.

The situation in eastern Ukraine remains tense," the Ukraine Crisis Center
reported in Kiev. "Terrorists continue to provoke military action."

They said rebels had broken the shaky cease-fire 249 times and had shelled
Ukrainian military positions 49 times. It said two drones were spotted over the
weekend, one traveling towards the strategic port city of Mariupol, where heavy
fighting had recently been reported.

The United States is concerned about renewed fighting in eastern Ukraine since
the cease-fire went into effect Sept. 5 and has no details about the content of
a Russian convoy that entered and left Ukraine over the weekend, a State
Department official said.

The recent heavy fighting has claimed several civilian casualties, according to
spokesmen from the break-away Donetsk People's Republic, the British
Broadcasting Corporation reported Monday. Almost 3,000 people have died in the
brutal five-month-old conflict.

Russia still has about 25,000 troops along its long border with Ukraine, and
more than 3,000 soldiers inside the country, according to the Ukrainian
government. Russia denies sending troops.

The U.S. and other NATO countries are starting military exercises in Ukraine
today. Ukraine has recently sought to join the NATO alliance, a move Russia has
condemned.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry is due to meet Russian Foreign Minister
Sergei Lavrov at a conference on Iraq taking place in Paris Monday. Russian
President Vladimir Putin has denied supporting the rebels in eastern Ukraine,
something the West insists is fomenting the crisis.

Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, or OSCE, are discussing deploying more monitoring
specialists to Ukraine to observe the fragile cease-fire, the Crisis Center
reported.

The OSCE said a monitoring team was on patrol in an area of Donetsk Sunday when
mortar shells exploded close to the team, which was then forced to immediately
leave the area.

The Ukrainian prime minister accused Russia Saturday of planning to destroy his
country and said that only NATO membership would enable Ukraine to defend itself
from this external aggression.

The U.S. and the E.U. have imposed heavy sanctions on Russia, including fresh
ones last week, because of its involvement in the confict. Russian Prime
Minister Dmitry Medvedev told members of the country's ruling party Monday that
Russia is being tested by the sanctions, but that it must respond calmly.

"When a series of our partners, if they can be called that, test Russia's
strength through sanctions and all kinds of threats, it is important not to
succumb to the temptation of so-called easy solutions and to preserve and
continue the development of democratic processes in our society, our state,"
Medvedev said in a televised speech.

Russia quickly annexed the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea at the beginning of the
conflict.

Daniela Deane reported from Rome.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


