                             984 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     September 4, 2014 Thursday 3:08 PM EST

White House names Google's Megan Smith the next Chief Technology Officer of the
United States;
Former Twitter lawyer Alex Macgillivray will serve as deputy U.S. CTO. Alex
Macgillivray

BYLINE: Nancy Scola

LENGTH: 838 words


The White House announced Thursday that it has named its next Chief Technology
Officer. She is Megan Smith, a Google executive with decades of experience in
Silicon Valley. The Obama administration named as deputy U.S. CTO, Alexander
Macgillivray, a former Twitter lawyer known as a staunch defender of the free
flow of information online.

With the announcement, President Obama gets a pair of widely-respected
technology world figures, both steeped in the workings of some of Silicon
Valley's biggest and highest-profile companies, but with different expertise --
one an engineer with a record of executing upon ambitious, even fantastical
ideas, the other a lawyer who has navigated some of the Internet's trickiest
policy questions.

Obama will likely need the help, as the country attempts to stay on top of
technological innovation while addressing the complications raised by an
increasingly connected world. The U.S. CTO spot was conceived by Obama when he
was a candidate. But its mission has been fuzzy at times. Under out-going U.S.
CTO Todd Park, the job became in part a hands-on one, as he helped salvage the
troubled HealthCare.gov project.

But under Smith the position is expected to re-focus on being agenda-setting and
forward-looking -- something of the technological equivalent of the President's
Science Advisor.

Said the president in a statement, "Megan has spent her career leading talented
teams and taking cutting-edge technology and innovation initiatives from concept
to design to deployment. I am confident that in her new role as America's Chief
Technology Officer, she will put her long record of leadership and exceptional
skills to work on behalf of the American people. I am grateful for her
commitment to serve, and I look forward to working with her and with our new
Deputy U.S. CTO, Alexander Macgillivray, in the weeks and months ahead."

Smith, the new U.S. CTO, is an MIT-trained mechanical engineer and entrepreneur
with deep roots in the California tech world. She currently serves as a vice
president at Google[x], the company's lab for ambitious next-generation
projects, like its delivery-by-drone Project Wing and its balloon-borne Internet
connectivity program Project Loon. For nine years, Smith led Google's team
responsible for developing new business, where she led the acquisitions that
would become Google Earth and Google Maps. And she's familiar to Washington's
burgeoning "civic tech" community through her work with the Google Crisis
Response project.

Smith also has a record of focusing on digital inclusiveness. Before Google, she
was the CEO of the online LGBT community PlanetOut. And she has worked to bring
more women in the engineering and technology fields, including through the
company's WomenTechmakers program. Smith also has an adventurous streak; she was
once part of a student team that raced a solar car across Australia's outback.

"As U.S. CTO," presidential science advisor John Holdren writes on the White
House blog, "Smith will guide the Administration's information-technology policy
and initiatives, continuing the work of her predecessors to accelerate
attainment of the benefits of advanced information and communications
technologies across every sector of the economy and aspect of human well-being."

Macgillivray -- known as both Alex and, perhaps even more so, "amac" -- is a
graduate of both Princeton University and Harvard Law School. The White House
said that his focus will be on policy matters, from so-called intellectual
property to where big data and privacy intersect.

Macgillivray served as Twitter's general counsel from 2009 until August of 2013,
where he was widely credited with establishing what former U.S. Deputy CTO
Andrew McLaughlin has called the platform's "free speech, pro-news bias." Before
joining Twitter, Macgillivray was for six years deputy general counsel at
Google, where he was deeply involved with the company's legal wranglings over
its Google Books search feature. Before Google, he was a litigator at the
Silicon Valley law firm Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, representing clients
like the copyright group Creative Commons and the Internet Archive. MacGillivray
is an affiliate of Harvard's Berkman Center, an think-and-d0 tank focused on the
creation of Internet norms.

Macgillivray, though, also does a bit of engineering of his own. After leaving
Twitter, he hand-coded a script for resurfacing old Gmail messages to which he
hadn't yet replied.

Smith will be the country's third-ever Chief Technology Officer. Obama named
former Virginia Secretary of Technology Aneesh Chopra to the new position in the
spring of 2009, and he served until the winter of 2012. Chopra was replaced by
health-care entrepreneur and former Department of Health and Human Services CTO
Todd Park, who announced in late August that he was leaving the post.

Park is returning to Silicon Valley, where he'll stay on in the White House to
help recruit technologists to federal service -- a path that is growing ever
more well-trodden by the day.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


