                             998 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs
                                 The Early Lead

                      October 27, 2014 Monday 10:32 PM EST

CSKA Sofia's soccer coach denies taking a dive after 'snowball attack' in
Bulgaria;
It wasn't a drone this time that interrupted a European soccer match, but a
snowball. Seriously.

BYLINE: Marissa Payne

LENGTH: 272 words


It took a drone carrying a nationalistic banner to disrupt a soccer match in
Belgrade, Serbia, earlier this month. This weekend, it took a snowball in Sofia,
Bulgaria. Yes, one of these things is sillier than the other.

Dubbed "Snowball-gate" by NBC Sports, a Saturday match between Bulgarian rivals
Levski and CSKA Sofia went wrong seven minutes in when Levski fans, who had
began pelting the opposition with with snowballs, took aim at CSKA's coach,
Stoycho Mladenov. Chaos ensued on the sideline when players saw Mladenov, who
claims to have lost consciousness, on the ground.

But as is a thing that happens in soccer, the side that threw the wayward snow
spheres has argued Mladenov took a dive. They think he feigned the fall!

"Children play with snowballs, but I haven't heard of anyone who has collapsed,"
the head of Levski's national fan club, Vladimir Vladimirov, told the BBC on
Monday. "It was disgusting to watch. His over-acting was so poor."

Mladenov, meanwhile, says he has "medical proof" that corroborates his version
of events and that he's prepared to use it if necessary - which it actually
might be, The Guardian reports. Snowball-gate has caused such a stir that the
Bulgarian Football Union, the country's leading governing body on the sport,is
set to meet on Tuesday to discuss the situation.

CSKA went on to win the match, 3-0, after which 100 police were called to the
scene to keep rioters, who had broken through a fence, from storming the pitch -

 an act Levski fans have denied.

"It was a spontaneous act," Vladimirov told The Guardian. "Believe me, if we
wanted to invade the pitch, no one could've stopped us."

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


