                             990 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 1, 2014 Wednesday 9:07 PM EST

PM Update: Some late night fog, and a terrific Thursday; Hurricane Edouard from
a drone

BYLINE: Ian Livingston

LENGTH: 289 words


Clouds seemed to be in no hurry to get out of the area today, and that meant
skies were generally more gray than blue until recently. With temperatures
capped a bit by that cloud cover, highs mostly reached the near 70 to mid-70s
zone, or pretty close to normal this time of year. More in the way of clear
skies should try to make themselves known through tomorrow.

Through Tonight: Fully clearing out may be a tricky endeavor overnight. But,
plan on seeing stars intermixed at the least. With light winds and temperatures
nearing the dew point late tonight, fog is likely to develop in spots. It should
mostly be patchy, but it's not impossible it takes over a good part of the area
either.

Tomorrow (Thursday): Fog and partly to mostly cloudy skies during the early
morning give way to partly to mostly sunny conditions by the afternoon. We may
even head fully clear before sunset! As you might expect, this all leads to a
fairly nice day with highs rising mainly toward the mid-70s. Winds are light
from the east.

See Dan Stillman's forecast through the weekend. And if you haven't already,
join us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter . For related traffic news, check
out Dr. Gridlock.

Pollen update: Mold spores are moderate/high. Tree, grass, and weed pollen is
all low.

Drone footage: When it spun itself up last month, Hurricane Edouard was the
strongest hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean since Hurricane Sandy back in 2012.
Fortunately, the storm never came close to land. NASA's Global Hawk was sent out
on a mission to examine the hurricane, and footage of it flying over the storm
has been released. You can watch that below, and see more from Live Science.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


