                             993 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                             Washington Post Blogs

                     October 8, 2014 Wednesday 12:16 PM EST

The culture wars are back, and this time, everyone can win

BYLINE: Alyssa Rosenberg

LENGTH: 3564 words


The last culture war, often pitting movement conservatives figures against
artists, was fought over whether culture was or should be decent. Concerns about
decency could be broadly defined, but they often cropped up in reference to
culture that reflected changing norms of family and sexual life.

In 1989, American Family Association founder Rev. Donald Wildmon, who had
condemned shows like "Three's Company," threatened a boycott of Pepsi over a
commercial the soft drink company cut with Madonna after the release of her
"Like A Prayer" album, which Wildmon criticized as immoral and anti-Christian.
The year after that, Vice President Dan Quayle famously took a swipe at Candice
Bergen's Murphy Brown, star of the eponymous CBS show, for becoming a single
mother. Quayle suggested that the mass media was contributing to a decline of
family values that he credited with a role in the 1992 Los Angeles riots,
sparked by the acquittal of the Los Angeles police officers charged with beating
Rodney King.

Even Bart Simpson was a target. Schools banned t-shirts emblazoned with his
snotty catchphrases, and he was seen as a worrisome beacon of disrespect for
authority and academic achievement, condemned by a figure as powerful as
then-Secretary of Education William Bennett.

Culture warriors concerned by decency were anxious that culture was changing too
fast, and introducing too many new ideas, voices and means of expression to a
population vulnerable to the power of suggestion. (These concerns also marked
debates about whether the classics were being unfairly devalued in favor of
multicultural and feminist literature.)

This position might have been rhetorically powerful in certain political
settings. But the war for decency ended in failure. The message was radically
misaligned with the entertainment industry's basic incentives for testing
certain boundaries, particularly those around sexuality and violence. Artists
like Madonna and networks like MTV thrived even with, and often because of, the
disapproval of decency groups. The rise of the fight over marriage equality
diverted decency crusaders' resources and attention from cultural campaigns to
bruising state-by-state legislative and legal battles. And new distribution
models gave decency-oriented consumers more options if they wanted to opt out of
mainstream secular culture entirely.

The 2004 Super Bowl, when Justin Timberlake ripped off part of Janet Jackson's
costume during the halftime show, revealing her nipple and prompting Congress to
boost broadcast indecency fines, now seems like an end point to this epoch in
the culture wars. The settlement between the two sides meant that the federal
government would levy fines, and not small ones, for extreme incidents, but the
culture industry would factor those costs and viewers' disapproval into its
business model and forge ahead. Today, decency-oriented groups may be able to
muster large volumes of complaints when Miley Cyrus twerks on a teddy bear, but
they have little impact on her bottom line or creative decisions once the news
cycle moves on.

Now we are in the midst of a new culture war, in which fans and creators battle
each other and sometimes themselves. It is being waged over whether or not
culture is political, and if so, what its politics ought to be and how they
might be expressed. That conflict has also diffused beyond the academic,
religious and political institutions who were major players in earlier
convulsions. Today it is wildly fragmented in a way that suggests vigorous and
ongoing debates rather than an easy resolution.

The fierce arguments of today often center on whether culture is changing fast
enough, and whether change means chucking out old ideas, storytelling tropes and
character types.

Among the questions at issue: Are enough women, people of color and LGBT people
represented on the page and screen and working behind the cameras and monitoring
where pop culture gets produced? How much should sports leagues police the
private behavior of athletes and team owners? What responsibility do
storytellers have when they depict extreme violence? How does fiction influence
our perception of American military and intelligence operations? And what is the
relationship (if there is one) between the quality of a work's politics and the
quality of its art?

Many of the flash points in the new culture wars are the same issues of identity
politics that roiled universities in earlier decades. But rather than slugging
it out in academic presses through works like Martin Bernal's "Black Athena,"
which situated classical civilization's roots in Africa, or polemics like Allan
Bloom's "The Closing of the American Mind," the battlefields are low culture and
the combatants are consumers, mass media critics and creators.

One medium where the earth has been most deeply scorched is video gaming, which
has been riven by painful arguments over the representation of women, whether as
the objects of rescue and extreme violence, or as playable characters. These are
ongoing issues, of course, but they flared up in 2012, when the critic Anita
Sarkeesian launched a Kickstarter campaign to fund a series that would cover
common tropes involving women that appear in video games. She was subject to a
persistent campaign of violent harassment that continues to this day; the
Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating some of the threats that have
been made against her.

More recently, game developer Zoe Quinn became the target of a ex-boyfriend who
accused her of trading sexual favors for positive coverage of her game
"Depression Quest," an allegation that is not substantiated. The attacks on
Quinn were more sophisticated than the campaign against Sarkeesian, commingling
salacious accounts of Quinn's personal life with expressions of concern about
the way video game journalists conduct themselves.

The ability of gaming coverage (as with many kinds of entertainment reporting)
to be independent of the influence of individual developers and big gaming
companies is certainly a significant issue. But the argument that Quinn was
being targeted simply because of clear ethical issues also gave respectable
cover to some people who saw figures like Sarkeesian and Quinn as interlopers
purely on the grounds of their gender.

The combination of these constituencies, one focused on ethics, the other on
feminism, united under the title #GamerGate, has been a powerful one. Computing
giant Intel suspended its advertising with Gamasutra after hearing from
consumers who were infuriated about a piece the site had run critiquing gamers'
responses to feminist commentary and female game developers.

Racial representation in popular media, which has long lagged behind the
changing demographics of the American population, is also the subject of
innumerable skirmishes. When Lena Dunham's HBO dramedy "Girls" premiered in
2012, it launched perhaps as many thinkpieces about the whiteness of the show's
stars and writers room as the show had viewers. Dunham responded in subsequent
seasons by creating more characters of color, to mixed results. And the reaction
to "Girls" helped bring into the mainstream a conversation that has been taking
place for years through groups like Racebending, founded in response to the
casting of white actors as characters of color in the live-action adaptation of
the cartoon series "Avatar: The Last Airbender."

In the years since, debates about race and media have become routine. Dan Snyder
has come under increasing pressure to change the Washington professional
football team's name not just from activists and media outlets (including this
one) but also the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, which cancelled six
trademarks on the team name earlier this year. (An appeal is pending.) The
Federal Communications Commission is considering making on-air utterance of the
name a fineable offense.

After sending an out-of-context tweet that referenced an on-air sketch using
tropes of anti-Asian racism to mock Dan Snyder's attempts to rehabilitate the
name, Comedy Central's Stephen Colbert found himself the target of a hashtag
campaign that called for his removal from the airwaves.

And debates over identity politics in culture often dovetail with questions
about how mass culture represents public policy. Fox's popular terrorism
franchise "24  came under criticism both for its depiction of Muslims and for
its repeated implication that torture is an effective intelligence-gathering
device. "Homeland," the war-on-terror drama about a mentally ill CIA agent and a
war hero turned sleeper agent (co-created by Howard Gordon, a "24  veteran) has
become a similar target.

The fights over these shows have sharpened the tactics of Muslim and Arab
advocates concerned about how Hollywood depicts them. Earlier this year, the
Council on American-Islamic Relations rallied protests against a planned ABC
Family show called "Alice in Arabia," which would have told the story of a girl
transplanted from the U.S. to live with her Arab relatives. The network
cancelled "Alice in Arabia" before it went into production. Consultants from the

 Muslim Public Affairs Council and the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy,
among other organizations, are working on Gordon's most recent show "Tyrant," a
drama about the dictatorial ruling family of a fictional Middle Eastern country.

And even when advocates do not spring into action, mass culture has responded to
America's conduct of its wars. Kathryn Bigelow's "Zero Dark Thirty," about the
CIA analysts who tracked down Osama bin Laden, was a sharp, grubby rebuke to the
glamorization of torture and America's detainee program (though not sharp enough

 for some viewers). Action movies, including the most recent installment of the
"Star Trek" franchise, the "Iron Man" movies, "Man of Steel" and "Captain
America: The Winter Soldier" have all tried to grapple with the implications of
America's drone program; the forthcoming drama "Good Kill," starring Ethan Hawke
as a troubled drone operator, comes closest to rejecting it entirely.

As these examples should make clear, as the new culture war has widened, it has
also fragmented, turning less into a clash of great powers than into a series of
intractable guerrilla conflicts, marked by shifting alliances and the rapid
emergence of new players.

Some of this dynamic is driven by the simple fragmentation of American mass
culture. Variety reported earlier this year that since 1999, the number of
scripted television series being produced for cable networks alone has risen
more than 1000 percent. The number of video game titles arriving on shelves
every year has grown dramatically since the early days of the medium. After New
York Times movie critic Manohla Dargis looked at the number of movies arriving
in theaters (not to mention going straight to video on demand or outlets like
Netflix) earlier this year, she pleaded with distributors to slow down because
"there are, bluntly, too many lackluster, forgettable and just plain bad movies
pouring into theaters, distracting the entertainment media and, more important,
overwhelming the audience."

This bounty means that more people than ever before have opportunities to see
themselves represented on screen, or to consume only culture that neatly meets
our specific tastes, whether we yearn for sexy vampires or flinty lady
detectives. But it also means that more shows, games, books and movies are
competing for a still-finite number of honors like the Emmys and Academy Awards
and for cultural prestige. The existence of more great culture means more
opportunities for your favorite story or performance to get snubbed.

The profusion of passionate cultural fandoms, where fans feel about their
enthusiasms the same way they might about political party registration, also
means that clashes over what counts as great and what other people ought to love
and champion are more frequent and more intense. A show like "Parks and
Recreation" may have a tiny fraction of the audience that a massive hit of an
earlier era used to draw. But if every single one of those fans is intensely
passionate, when other viewers tune in to other shows, it may feel less like a
statement of mere preference and more a pledge of allegiance to a competing
tribe.

Both fans and self-interested creators sometimes turn to politics to defend the
values of their favorite programming and to try to leverage distributors.
Netflix's prison drama "Orange Is The New Black" is exceptionally funny and
well-acted, and showrunner Jenji Kohan deftly balances a huge cast of
characters, but one of the reasons it has become a social media phenomenon is a
sense that its portrayal of women in the prison system, and especially
transgender women, is groundbreaking.

Rallying support for expressions of marginalized perspectives is a practice
hardly limited to the left. Conservative provocateur Dinesh D'Souza successfully
pressured both Costco and Google to give his most recent book better play after
complaining that he had been sabotaged on the grounds of his politics.

And the creation of new opportunities to tell new stories is not an end point,
but the beginning of a potential revolution. Shonda Rhimes's success as a
television creator and showrunner does not slake the appetite for black voices
on primetime, but instead prompts questions about why there are not more of
them. The mainstreaming of gay characters in film, television and literature
leads to searching conversations about why those characters are so often white,
male and affluent, and then to a debate about the representation of transgender
people. When doors get wedged open, even a little, the sliver of light that
comes through fuels the ambition of everyone who ever dreamed of kicking down
the door altogether.

Just as culture itself is wildly diverse and fragmentary, the drive to examine
culture through a political lens comes from a huge number of different
constituencies, each with its own set of interests, priorities and internal
debates.

Some critics and fans have taken up these debates as facets in their larger
discussions of pop culture, motivated in varying combinations by political
conviction and a simple hunger for variety.

For some mainstream television critics, annoyance about the predominance of
troubled, middle-aged white men as the main characters on cable television is
animated both by frustration with the idea that the experience of such men is
the most important question of our time, and the sense that after hundreds of
hours with Tony Soprano, Walter White and Don Draper, there cannot be much else
to say about them. For conservative critics at sites like Big Hollywood and the
Washington Free Beacon, the monotony manifests in an absence of conservative or
religious characters, or the constant treatment of fathers as useless lummoxes.

More traditional interest groups like CAIR and GLAAD see a political critique of
culture as an opportunity to exert leverage by shutting down depictions they
find offensive, creating opportunities for the entertainment industry to hire
them as consultants, or pushing for more jobs for their constituents both behind
and in front of the camera and monitor. Research organizations, including the
Media, Diversity and Social Change Initiative at the University of Southern
California and the Geena Davis Institute on Gender and Media, which collaborate
on censuses of female characters and creatives in the U.S. and abroad, do so in
part in service of the idea that media may not directly inspire people to act,
but that it shapes our sense of what is possible.

Within the entertainment industry, appearing politically engaged and responsive
is an emergent marketing strategy.  Singing about issues like date rape and
sexual orientation has become something of a strategy for up-and-coming country
singers hoping to distinguish themselves as the genre as a whole tacks away from
politics. Fourth-place broadcast network ABC has revived the strategy that Fox
and Showtime used to build themselves into major players in the 1990s and early
2000s, putting forward an exceptionally diverse slate of shows to cater to
underserved audiences, like the African-American viewers who have helped make
ABC's "Scandal" a hit and asked for more of the same commitment to broader
racial representation.

Critics who are broadly aligned under political labels may have hugely differing
interpretations of the same piece of culture and offer very different solutions
to the problems they have identified. On the left, to take one example, a
vigorous 2012 debate over jokes about rape and sexual assault brought out
arguments including, but not limited to: calls for a ban on rape as subject
material; arguments that rape jokes can be effective if the comedian targets
perpetrators rather than victims; suggestions that if a joke is funny enough it
can be targeted anywhere; and defenses of comedians' rights to workshop
absolutely any material at any time. This is not even the full spectrum of the
conversation, but just a partial representation of the positions taken by
self-described feminists of both genders.

The ongoing convulsions in the video gaming community have provoked two very
different responses on what might broadly be termed the right. Some, including
Milo Yiannapolis of Brietbart London, see the clash as one between a largely
apolitical video game fandom and a group of interlopers. "The war in the gaming
industry isn't about right versus left, or tolerance versus bigotry," he wrote.
"It's between those who leverage video games to fight proxy wars about other
things, introducing unwanted and unwarranted tension and misery, and those who
simply want to enjoy themselves."

And the fight against feminist analyses of video gaming has attracted gestures
of support from movement conservatives who are eager to weaponize discussions of
mass media in an entirely different direction-and to reassert their relevance in
the new culture wars in the process.

Where decency-oriented conservatives past might have positioned themselves as
appalled by the violence and graphic sexuality in some popular video games,
anti-feminist provocateur and American Enterprise Institute analyst Christina
Hoff Sommers recently recorded a video suggesting that outside agitators with an
agenda-"gender activists and hipsters with degrees in cultural studies," in a
recycling of old-school swipes at the academy-are trying to undermine a
distinctly "male video game culture," a claim that defenders of the political
neutrality of gaming might be hesitant to make themselves.

However these debates play out across the political spectrum, they are really
about fundamental questions. Do politics or craft determine culture's worth? How
do values and aesthetics work together? And how can they work on each other to
take our political debates beyond where the language of campaigns and public
officials can carry them?

For all these debates can be wearying, the new culture wars have been a
tremendously exciting time. And I think it is no mistake that they come at a
time of incredible growth and technical and creative innovation in pop culture.

Culture warriors on both sides of the aisle who want to wipe out the things that
they find offensive seem poised to be as badly disappointed as the decency
crusaders before them. And partisans across the political spectrum may just
create new opportunities for artists to test boundaries. Just as decency
crusaders did not deter Madonna before her, left-leaning critics of the racial
politics of Miley Cyrus' recent videos did not exactly convince her to shake up
her tour arrangements.

But for those who are fighting for a culture in which all stories have a chance
to be told, though, the prospects are decidedly sweeter.

The diffusion of television audiences into a profusion of new programming means
a low-rated and much-loved political show like "Parks and Recreation" can
survive along a massive hit like CBS's "NCIS" franchise. An insurgent company
like Netflix, which bases its business in subscribers rather than total eyeballs
for any givens how, can simultaneously bring in viewers with "Orange Is The New
Black" and a four-movie deal with Adam Sandler, that avatar of
politically-neutral, low-brow comedy.

New distribution platforms for movies, including video on demand and streaming
services, could extend the reach of films aimed at politically-oriented or
faith-based customers. Conservative cultural entrepreneurs and entertainment
companies are turning out projects like a three-part adaptation of "Atlas
Shrugged," Dinesh D'Souza's documentaries about President Obama, and a
forthcoming drama about the Supreme Court's Hobby Lobby case from the Rick
Santorum-led EchoLight Studios. And companies like the game store Steam and
Amazon allow independent developers and writers to submit their own work for
sale, creating new opportunities for artists to reach big audiences.

As we consume and discuss everything that is available to us now, we might not
settle our big questions about art and politics and which values are best and
how best to present them. The wonderful thing about this moment of technological
and economic evolution and cultural proliferation is that we do not actually
have to. The present culture war is the rare conflict in which almost everyone
has a chance to win.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


