                              99 of 2956 DOCUMENTS



                               Washingtonpost.com

                      August 30, 2014 Saturday 2:48 AM EST

Google reveals drone ambitions with Project Wing

BYLINE: Hayley Tsukayama

SECTION: A section; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 453 words


Google has been testing a small fleet of drones in the Australian outback,
looking into ways to use the flying robots to deliver goods quickly and
virtually untouched by humans, the tech company announced this week.

The drones - in development by Google's "moonshot" laboratory, Google X - are
referred to as  Project Wing. The company has been looking into developing a
delivery service for two years but only began tests of the self-directed
vehicles in mid-August.

The drones fly 130 to 195 feet in the air - far above houses and the standard
tree line, the company said. So far, the company says it has run more than 30
successful delivery flights, carrying items such as a first-aid kit, a water
bottle and cow vaccine to Australian farmers. One flight was more than a
half-mile, the company said.

"We're now back in California reviewing what we've learned from the tests and
preparing our next set of adventures," the company said in a statement Thursday.

Google said it will take years to fully develop a drone delivery service. It
said in a news release that it foresees drones flying programmed routes loaded
with software that can deal with surprises such as a strong gust of wind.

The company said it sees a lot of potential in drones that can deliver goods
quickly and with little intervention from humans.

"When you can get something near-instantly, it changes how you think about it,"
Google said in a news release. "Think of the mom stuck at home with two sick
kids, the hiker who's met a poisonous snake, or the farmer out in the field with
a sick animal. It could also open up new models for sharing goods rather than
owning them - who needs a power drill for more than eight minutes a year?"

Google is not the only company to study how drones could change the future of
its business. Most notably, Amazon chief executive Jeffrey P. Bezos, who owns
The Washington Post, unveiled a secret drone project last December in an episode
of CBS's "60 Minutes." Facebook has also revealed plans to work with drones to
help provide Internet service to rural areas without the infrastructure for fast
connections. Even Disney has looked into drone use, filing a patent last week
that showed plans for large drone-controlled puppets, though there's no
indication such attractions will appear in theme parks soon.

Any company looking into using drones in the United States faces potential major
hurdles. The Federal Aviation Administration is still working on rules for
commercial drone use, and the agency is expected to miss its September 2015
deadline to outline those rules due  to "technical and regulatory obstacles."

hayley.tsukayama@washpost.com

Excerpted from The Switch, at www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2014

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


Copyright 2014 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a Washington
                                  Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


